SWANTON, OHIO
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-8 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through November 10, 2025
State legislation current through June 26, 2024
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street Suite 310 Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
VILLAGE OF SWANTON
ROSTER OF OFFICIALS
Council
Samantha Disbrow
Derek Kania
Noah Kreuz
Patrick L. Messenger
John Schmidt
Dianne Westhoven
Officials
Neil Toeppe      Mayor
Shannon Shulters Administrator
Holden Benfield  Fiscal Officer
Kent Murphree    Solicitor
John Trejo       Police Chief
Cuyler Kepling   Fire Chief
Zack Holdridge   Public Service Shop Foreman
Eric Vaughan     Public Service Operations Foreman
Ryan Yackee      Superintendent of Water Treatment and Distribution
Joe Tillison     Superintendent of Wastewater Treatment and Collection
                 
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCES
ORDINANCE 2017-02
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE VILLAGE OF SWANTON,
REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN EXISTING GENERAL
ORDINANCES OF THE POLITICAL SUBDIVISION DEALING WITH SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN SUCH
CODE OF ORDINANCES, AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the political
subdivision are inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient in
form and substance for the complete preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality and for the property conduct of
its affairs; and
WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of Ohio empower and authorize
the political subdivision to revise, amend, restate, codify and compile any
existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted or published
and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book form; and
WHEREAS, Article XVIII, Section 3, of the Ohio Constitution requires that
Village law be in conformity with State law in those areas specified therein;
and
WHEREAS, the Legislative Authority of the Political Subdivision has authorized
a general compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances of the
Political Subdivision of a general and permanent nature and publication of such
ordinance in book form; and
WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
at an early date.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY OF THE VILLAGE OF
SWANTON:
Section 1. The general ordinances of the Village of Swanton as revised,
amended, restated, codified, and compiled in book form are hereby adopted as
and shall constitute the “Code of Ordinances of the Village of Swanton.”
Section 2. Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of the
following Titles:
See Exhibit A
Section 3. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such Code
of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of
this ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or in part
in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense committed or
penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of this
ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances levying
taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory, establishing
franchises, or granting special rights to certain persons, authorizing public
improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing of money,
authorizing the purchase, lease, or sale of real or personal property, plat or
dedication of land to public use, vacating or setting the boundaries of streets
or other public places; the grant or creation of a franchise, license, right,
easement, or privilege; nor shall such repeal affect any other ordinance of a
temporary or special nature or pertaining to subjects not contained in or
covered by the Code.
Section 4. Such Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its adoption
and approval by the Village of Swanton and the Fiscal Officer is hereby
authorized and ordered to file a copy of such Code of Ordinances in the Office
of the Clerk,
Section 5. Such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in Section
6, and such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and places of the
ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and regulations therein
contained and of the date of passage, and that the same is properly signed,
attested, recorded, and approved and that any public hearings and notices
thereof as required by law have been given.
Section 6. This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary for
the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety, and general welfare of
the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at the earliest date
provided by law.
Vote on Passage
Moved: Dyzak   Second: Pilliod      YEAS:6    NAYS:0
Date of Passage: January 912017
/S/  
Ann Roth, Mayor
Attest:
I, Karla Sexton, Fiscal Officer of the Village of Swanton, do hereby certify
that this is a true and accurate copy of Ordinance 2017-02, passed on January
9, 2017.
    /S/
   Karla Sexton, Fiscal Officer
ORDINANCE 2018-22
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR
THE VILLAGE OF SWANTON AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio has complete
the 2018 S-1 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the Village of Swanton,
which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and permanent nature
enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the Village of
Swanton; and
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision or
addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or
make reference to sections of the Ohio Revised Code; and
WHEREAS, it is the intent of the Village Council to accept these updated
sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the State of Ohio; and
WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety, and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
at an early date; and
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY OF THE VILLAGE OF
SWANTON:
Section 1.   That the 2018 S-1 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
Village of Swanton as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, Ohio and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by
reference as if set out in its entirety.
Section 2.   Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by Village Council and Fiscal Officer of the Village of
Swanton is hereby authorized and ordered to insert such supplement into the
copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office of the Fiscal
Officer.
Section 4.   That it is found and determined that all formal actions of this
Village Council concerning and relating to the adoption of this ordinance were
adopted in an open meeting of this Village Council, and that all deliberations
of this Village Council and of any of its committees that resulted in such
formal action, were in meetings open to the public in compliance with all legal
requirements including Section 121.22 of the Ohio Revised Code.
Section 5.   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary
for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety, and general
welfare of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at the
earliest date provided by law.
Vote on Passage
Motion to Suspend the Rules and Declare and Emergency
Moved: Kruez      Second: Pilliod      YEAS:6    NAYS:0
Moved: Rochelle   Second: Westhoven      YEAS: 6   NAYS: 0
Date of Passage:
Paul Dzyak /s/
Paul Dzyak, President of Council
Attest:
I, Jennifer Harkey, Fiscal Officer of the Village of Swanton, do hereby certify
that this is a true and accurate copy of Ordinance 2018-22, passed on July 16,
2018.
   Jennifer Harkey /s/
   Jennifer Harkey, Fiscal Officer
ORDINANCE 2019-35
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR
THE VILLAGE OF SWANTON AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio has complete
the 2019 S-2 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the Village of Swanton,
which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and permanent nature
enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the Village of
Swanton; and
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision or
addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or
make reference to sections of the Ohio Revised Code; and
WHEREAS, it is the intent of the Village Council to accept these updated
sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the State of Ohio; and
WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety, and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
at an early date; and
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY OF THE VILLAGE OF
SWANTON:
Section 1.   That the 2019 S-2 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
Village of Swanton as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, Ohio and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by
reference as if set out in its entirety.
Section 2.   Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by Village Council and Fiscal Officer of the Village of
Swanton is hereby authorized and ordered to insert such supplement into the
copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office of the Fiscal
Officer.
Section 4.   That it is found and determined that all formal actions of this
Village Council concerning and relating to the adoption of this ordinance were
adopted in an open meeting of this Village Council, and that all deliberations
of this Village Council and of any of its committees that resulted in such
formal action, were in meetings open to the public in compliance with all legal
requirements including Section 121.22 of the Ohio Revised Code.
Section 5.   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary
for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety, and general
welfare of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at the
earliest date provided by law.
Motion to Suspend the Rules and Declare and Emergency
Moved: Pilliod      Second: Kreuz      YEAS:6    NAYS:0
Vote on Passage
Moved: Dzyak      Second: Westhoven      YEAS: 6   NAYS: 0
Date of Passage: October 28, 2019
Ann Roth /s/
Ann Roth, Mayor
Attest:
I, Jennifer Harkey, Fiscal Officer of the Village of Swanton, do hereby certify
that this is a true and accurate copy of Ordinance 2019-35, passed on October
28, 2019.
 
                                          Jennifer Harkey /s/
                                          Jennifer Harkey, Fiscal Officer
ORDINANCE 2022-02
   AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF    ORDINANCES
FOR THE VILLAGE OF SWANTON AND DECLARING AN    EMERGENCY.
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio has complete
the 2021 S-4 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the Village of Swanton,
which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and permanent nature
enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the Village of
Swanton; and
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision or
addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or
make reference to sections of the Ohio Revised Code; and
WHEREAS, it is the intent of the Village Council to accept these updated
sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the State of Ohio; and
WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety, and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
at an early date; and
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY OF THE VILLAGE OF
SWANTON:
Section 1.   That the 2021 S-4 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
Village of Swanton as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, Ohio and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by
reference as if set out in its entirety.
Section 2.   Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by Village Council and Fiscal Officer of the Village of
Swanton is hereby authorized and ordered to insert such supplement into the
copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office of the Fiscal
Officer.
Section 4.   That it is found and determined that all formal actions of this
Village Council concerning and relating to the adoption of this ordinance were
adopted in an open meeting of this Village Council, and that all deliberations
of this Village Council and of any of its committees that resulted in such
formal action, were in meetings open to the public in compliance with all legal
requirements including Section 121.22 of the Ohio Revised Code.
Section 5.   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary
for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety, and general
welfare of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at the
earliest date provided by law.
Motion to Suspend the Rules and Declare and Emergency
Moved: Pilliod      Second: Kania      YEAS:6   NAYS:0
Vote on Passage
Moved: Pilliod      Second: Westhoven      YEAS: 6   NAYS: 0
Date of Passage: January 24, 2022
Neil Toeppe /s/
Neil Toeppe, Mayor
Attest:
I, Jennifer Harkey, Fiscal Officer of the Village of Swanton, do hereby certify
that this is a true and accurate copy of Ordinance 2022-02, passed on January
24, 2022.
   Jennifer Harkey /s/
   Jennifer Harkey, Fiscal Officer
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
11.   OFFICIAL STANDARDS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Rules of interpretation
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Reference to other sections
   
10.09   Reference to offices
   
10.10   Errors and omissions
   
10.11   Official time
   
10.12   Reasonable time
   
10.13   Ordinances repealed
   
10.14   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.15   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.16   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.17   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification of ordinances by and for the Village of Swanton shall be
designated as the Code of Swanton, and may be so cited.
(Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
(Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provision of Title I compatible with future legislation, shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplement this code unless otherwise
specifically provided.
(Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
(Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A) General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This municipal code as
modified by amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or
sections.
      COUNTY. Fulton and Lucas Counties, Ohio.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission or department of this municipality unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee or receiver. Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to
any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as
applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE. The State of Ohio.
      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading
in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words letters, or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      VILLAGE, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, MUNICIPALITY or CITY. The Village of
Swanton, Ohio.
      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed; equivalent to the
words YEAR OF OUR LORD.
(Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 10.06 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   The construction of all ordinances of this municipality shall be by the
following rules, unless such construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of
the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance.
   (A)   And or or. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or”, if the sense requires it.
    (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be
done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, such
requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of such act by an authorized
agent or deputy.
   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
   (D)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms
is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
(Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
(Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, such
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
materially altered by the amendment or revision.
(Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 10.09 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of this municipality exercising the powers, duties
or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.10 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express such intent, such spelling shall be corrected and such word
or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
such error.
(Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 10.11 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws, shall be
the official time within this municipality for the transaction of all municipal
business.
(Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 10.12 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of such act or the giving of such notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
be Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of the code.
(Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
(Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 10.15 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in anywise be effected, released or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision
shall by itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly provided
(Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 10.16 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A) If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of such chapter or section. In addition to such
indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a
caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
(Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 10.17 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and the most recent amending ordinances, if
any, are listed following the text of the code section. Example:
(Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 15 passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980;
Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference” following
the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer to that
statute for further information. Example:
      § 30.08 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
         Unless otherwise exempted by state law, all public records shall be
promptly prepared and made available for inspection to any person.
      Statutory reference:
         Public records, see R.C. § 149.43
(Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Whenever, in this municipal code or in any ordinance of the
municipality, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an
offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever the doing of any act is required or the
failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is
otherwise provided, whoever violates any such provision shall be punished by a
fine not exceeding $500, a term of imprisonment not exceeding six months, or
both. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which
a violation continues or occurs.
   (B)   The failure of any officer or employee of the municipality to perform
any official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or
employee to the penalty imposed for a violation unless a penalty is
specifically provided for the failure.
(Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
CHAPTER 11: OFFICIAL STANDARDS
Section
   
11.01   Standard base of elevations
   
11.02   Building address numbers
 
   
11.99   Penalty
§ 11.01 STANDARD BASE OF ELEVATIONS.
   The standard base for all levels and elevations hereafter used in the
improvement or construction of streets, sewers, sidewalks and other public work
shall be United States Geological Survey (U.S.G.S.). Levels hereafter made use
of by the village shall be referred to the above described level plane as a
base.
(1964 Code, § 103.01) (Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 195, passed 6-17-
2001)
§ 11.02 BUILDING ADDRESS NUMBERS.
   (A)   As provided for under R.C. § 715.26, all residences, apartments,
commercial or industrial buildings shall have displayed in conspicuous place on
the front of the building, visible from the street, the proper street address
number which has been assigned to the building by the Village Administrator.
All numbers shall be displayed in Arabic numerals only and the cost of the
numbers shall be borne by the property owner. Address numbers shall be a
minimum of four inches in height.
   (B)   Address numbers shall be conspicuously placed immediately above or at
the side of the main entrance of each residence, apartment, commercial or
industrial building or unit. Whenever any building is situated more than 50
feet from the street line, address numbers shall be minimum of six inches in
height on the building. Address numbers a minimum of four inches in height may
also be placed near a sidewalk, on both sides of a mailbox, at a driveway, at a
common building entrance, upon a gate post, fence post, tree or other
appropriate place so as to be easily discernable from the street.
   (C)   All owners of buildings upon which an address number has not been
placed shall be required to cause the same to be placed upon such building as
required by this section within 60 days from the passage of this section.
   (D)   For multi-family dwellings having only one main entrance shall be
assigned only one address number and separate dwelling units in the building
will carry a letter designation such as A, B, C and the like.
   (E)   For buildings containing two or more dwelling, commercial or
industrial units containing more than one entrance, each serving a separate
occupant, then each unit shall be assigned a separate number provided, that
there shall be enough address numbers assigned to the lot in which the building
is located to provide a number for each unit. In the event there are not
sufficient address numbers assigned to the lot to serve each separate unit,
each unit shall carry the principle address number plus a letter designation
such as A, B, C and the like.
(Ord. 2013-13, passed 7-15-2013) Penalty, see §
11.99
§ 11.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Whoever violates any provision of §
11.02 shall be fined not to exceed $100 for each violation. Each day of
noncompliance shall constitute a separate violation.
(Ord. 2013-13, passed 7-15-2013)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   VILLAGE OFFICIALS
      
31.   VILLAGE COUNCIL
      
32.   POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS
      
33.   BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
      
34.   PERSONNEL POLICIES
      
35.   INCOME TAX
      
36.   VILLAGE POLICY
      
37.   ENTERPRISE ZONE
CHAPTER 30: VILLAGE OFFICIALS
Section
   
30.01   Bonding of village officials and employees
   
30.02   Village Administrator
   
30.03   Mayor
   
30.04   Fiscal Officer
   
30.05   Village Solicitor
   
30.06   Establishment of other positions
§ 30.01 BONDING OF VILLAGE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES.
   (A) Officials and employees of the village shall be bonded in accordance
with the following schedule:
 
Fiscal Officer    $200,000
Mayor and Council $1,000
 
   (B)   Other employees who handle cash or negotiable paper will be bonded in
an amount determined by the Village Administrator.
(Ord. 81-25, passed 12-14-1981; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 2016-35,
passed 7-11-2016)
§ 30.02 VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   In accordance with R.C. § 735.271 there is hereby created the position
of Village Administrator.
   (B)   The Village Administrator shall have those powers, duties and
functions as provided by the general laws of the state, and, in addition
thereto, by law, shall have the following powers, duties and functions:
      (1)   Manage and supervise the water and sewage systems of the village,
including the making of by-laws and regulations, to the extent not repugnant to
municipal ordinances and resolutions, deemed necessary by him or her for the
safe, economical and efficient management and protection of such water and
sewage systems;
      (2)   Manage and supervise the improvement and repair of streets, alleys,
public lands, bridges, sidewalks, sewers, water lines, drains, ditches,
culverts and watercourses within the village, including the lighting,
sprinkling and cleaning of all streets, alleys and public buildings and places;
      (3)   Appoint employees provided such employees are authorized by
legislative authority of the village; but such appointment shall be subject to
approval by the Mayor with the consent of Council. The salaries, wages and
other compensation to be paid employees shall be established by Council;
      (4)   Act as purchasing agent for all village offices, departments,
divisions, boards and commissions and shall make contracts, purchase supplies
and materials and provide labor for any work under his or her supervision, all
in accordance with the provision of R.C. § 731.141 and other applicable
statutory provisions, and incidental to said powers, duties and functions, to
the extent not repugnant to the ordinances of the village, shall promulgate
written rules and procedures to be followed by all village officers and
employees relative to the requisitioning of supplies, materials and work for
their respective offices, departments, divisions, boards or commissions;
      (5)   Supervise and coordinate all offices and departments of the
village;
      (6)   Perform the functions of Village Zoning Administrator pursuant to
Chapter 150 of the codified ordinances; and
      (7)   Perform or cause to be performed such special tasks as may from
time to time be assigned by the Council of the village.
   (C)   After the effective date of this section, the appointment of the
Village Administrator by the Mayor, and his or her confirmation by the Council,
the Board of Trustees of Public Affairs, shall be abolished in accordance with
the provisions of R.C. § 735.272. If the Mayor fails to appoint within 90 days,
the authority to appoint is given to the Village Council.
   (D)   It is hereby established as a qualification for appointment as the
Village Administrator that such person appointed shall be of excellent moral
character and reputation, speak effectively before large and small groups,
write well and have a good command of both written and spoken English, be a
good manager and leader capable of carrying out the duties and responsibilities
of the office and have a bachelor’s degree in public administration or
equivalent or experience at least equal to same; and shall not be an elected
official of the village at the time of his or her appointment nor during his or
her tenure in office.
   (E)   The compensation of the Village Administrator shall be established by
annual ordinance.
(Ord. 77-2, passed 3-14-1977; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 93-18, passed
12-13-1993, effective 1-1-1994)
§ 30.03 MAYOR.
   The compensation of the Mayor shall be $9,600 per year, payable in monthly
installments on the first regular payday of the following month; together with
an expense account of $400 per year, payable $100 quarterly. Service club fees
shall be paid for membership in one club.
(Ord. 81-25, passed 12-14-1981; Ord. 89-37, passed 12-18-1989; Ord. 90-34,
passed 12-17-1990; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 2004-6, passed 2-23-2004;
Ord. 2023-13, passed 8-14-2023)
§ 30.04 FISCAL OFFICER.
   (A)   The qualifications for the position of Fiscal Officer shall be
determined by Village Council.
   (B)   The Fiscal Officer appointed shall exercise the powers and perform the
duties and functions now or hereafter given to Fiscal Officers, Clerks and
Treasurers under the general laws of the state. The Fiscal Officer shall have
other powers, duties and functions as set forth in ordinances or resolutions of
the Council. The Fiscal Officer shall:
      (1)   Keep the financial records of the village, establish the accounting
system, payroll, data processing, claims and disbursements, receipts and bill
payments, investments of municipal funds, debt management, issuance of
insurance programs, and financial records;
      (2)   Supervise personnel assigned to the Fiscal Officer;
      (3)   Prepare reports used by the offices, departments, divisions,
bureaus, boards and commissions of the village;
      (4)   Assist the Mayor and Village Administrator in the preparation and
submission of appropriation measures, estimates, budgets, capital programs and
other financial matters;
      (5)   Provide full and complete information concerning the financial
affairs and status of the village as requested by the Mayor, Council and
Village Administrator; and
      (6)   Provide full and complete information and assistance concerning the
finances or accounting systems or records of any office, department, division,
bureau, board or commission of the village as requested by the Mayor, Council
and Village Administrator.
   (C)   The Fiscal Officer need not be an elector of the village or reside in
the village.
   (D)   The Fiscal Officer shall be appointed and removed in accordance with
procedures set forth in the state statutes.
(Ord. 2016-35, passed 7-11-2016)
§ 30.05 VILLAGE SOLICITOR.
   (A)   The compensation of the Village Solicitor shall be determined annually
or biannually by ordinance at the discretion of Council.
   (B)   Retained services are defined to include:
      (1)   Attendance at all regularly scheduled Council meetings;
      (2)   Drafting and/or review of routine ordinances; and
      (3)   Office and/or telephone conferences with village officials.
   (C)   (1)   The compensation payable to said Village Solicitors for all
services other than retained services performed shall be determined annually or
biannually by ordinance at the discretion of Council and will be payable upon
presentation to and approval by Council of monthly itemized statements.
      (2)   Non-retained services are defined to include:
         (a)   Attendance at any special meeting of Council or committee
meeting by request;
         (b)   Services relating to the representation of the village in
pending or threatened litigation where the village is a party in all courts
except Fulton County Court, Eastern Division;
         (c)   Services relating to the researching, drafting and/or filing of
real estate instruments;
         (d)   Services relating to the research and drafting of legal opinions
upon request;
         (e)   Services relating to the preparation and/or review of contracts,
leases or other legal documents; and
         (f)   Services relating to research and preparation of extraordinary
legislation, i.e., special assessments, eminent domain, annexations or Charter.
(Ord. 81-25, passed 12-14-1981; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 2010-31,
passed 12-13-2010; Ord. 2011-26, passed 12-12-2011; Ord. 2012-28, passed 11-26-
2012; Ord. 2013-28, passed 12-9-2013; Ord. 2014-33, passed 12-8-2014; Ord.
2015-43, passed 12-14-2015; Ord. 2020-25, passed 11-23-2020; Ord. 2021-31,
passed 11-8-2021)
§ 30.06 ESTABLISHMENT OF OTHER POSITIONS.
   For the establishment of all other salaried/management positions, hourly
positions and special positions, see the personnel policies of the village
which are on file in the office of the Fiscal Officer and are available for
public viewing and inspection during normal business hours.
(Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
CHAPTER 31: VILLAGE COUNCIL
Section
   
31.01   Regular and special meetings
   
31.02   Compensation
   
31.03   Method to determine time and place of all regular and special meetings
§ 31.01 REGULAR AND SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   (A)   Council shall, except as otherwise provided in this section, meet in
regular session at the Council Chambers a 6:00 p.m. on the second and fourth
Mondays of each month, except for the months of July when Council will meet on
the third Monday and in December when Council shall not meet the fourth Monday.
Should any holiday fall upon the date for a regular meeting, Council shall
appoint another date within the same month in lieu thereof.
   (B)   The Mayor or any three members may call special meetings upon at least
12 hours’ notice to each member, served personally or left at his or her usual
place of residence.
(R.C. § 731.46) (1964 Code, § 121.01) (Ord. 73-11, passed 6-25-1973; Ord. 92-
20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 2000-35, passed 10-9-2000; Ord. 2023-01, passed 1-9-
2023)
§ 31.02 COMPENSATION.
   (A)   Council.
      (1)   The compensation of each member of Council shall be $400 per month.
      (2)   Compensation shall be payable in monthly installments on the last
regular payday of the month.
   (B)   President of Council’s compensation.
      (1)   The compensation of the President of Council shall be $410 per
month.
      (2)   Compensation shall be payable in monthly installments on the last
regular payday of the month.
(Ord. 81-25, passed 12-14-1981; Ord. 89-37, passed 12-18-1989; Ord. 90-34,
passed 12-17-1990; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 2004-6, passed 2-23-2004;
Ord. 2013-31, passed 1-13-2014; Ord. 2023-13, passed 8-14-2023)
§ 31.03 METHOD TO DETERMINE TIME AND PLACE OF ALL REGULAR AND SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   (A)    Village Council shall publish and post in the Village Municipal
Building within the first business day of each new year a schedule of all
regularly scheduled Council and Planning Commission meetings for the ensuing
calendar year.
   (B)   Notice of special meetings, except in the event of an emergency, shall
be posted in the Village Municipal Building and actual notice given to the
local newspaper at least 24 hours in advance.
   (C)   Any person may receive advance notice and an agenda of all meetings at
least 24 hours in advance, except in the event of an emergency, by visiting the
Village of Swanton website or in person.
   (D)   Village offices shall be open for telephone inquiries regarding
meetings from 7:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, at 419-826-9515 or
via email admin@villageofswantonohio.us.
(Ord. 93-4, passed 4-26-1993; Ord. 2023-02, passed 1-9-2023)
CHAPTER 32: POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS
Section
Police Department General Provisions
   
32.01   Chief of Police
   
32.02   Sergeant of Police
   
32.03   Police Officer
   
32.04   Police - part time
   
32.05   Clerk-Dispatcher
   
32.06   Crossing guard
Rules and Regulations for the Police Department
   
32.10   Definitions
   
32.11   Patrol duty
   
32.12   Motor vehicles
   
32.13   Uniforms and insignia
   
32.14   Days off, AWOL and vacation
   
32.15   Use of firearms
   
32.16   General rules
   
32.17   Disciplinary action
   
32.18   Rate of pay for village police officers requested for duty at special
events
Fire Department General Provisions
   
32.45   Records of fires
   
32.46   Monthly practice drills
   
32.47   Deputy Fire Chief and firefighters
   
32.48   Loss of membership
   
32.49   Volunteer Firefighters’ Dependents Fund Board
Volunteer Fire Department Rescue Unit
   
32.60   Creation
   
32.61   Volunteer Fire Chief
   
32.62   Deputy Fire Chief (Rescue Chief)
   
32.63   Application for appointment; appointment
   
32.64   By-laws, uniforms and the like
   
32.65   Compensation
   
32.66   Contracts with other municipalities and townships
   
32.67   Police enforcement of municipal property outside village limits
   
32.68   Operational protocol for the Village Rescue Unit
   
32.69   Reserved
   
32.70   Fees
   
Appendix A: Proprietary Cost Schedule for Fire Department Incidents
   
Appendix B: Proprietary Cost Schedule for Law Enforcement Incidents
POLICE DEPARTMENT GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 32.01 CHIEF OF POLICE.
   (A)   The office of Chief of Police is hereby created in the Police
Department pursuant to this section and as further set forth in the Ohio
Revised Code.
   (B)   The compensation of the Chief of Police shall be established by annual
ordinance.
(Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 32.02 SERGEANT OF POLICE.
   (A)   The office of Sergeant of Police is hereby in the Police Department.
    (B)   In addition to the duties assigned by the Chief of Police, the
Sergeant of Police shall perform the duties of Chief of Police in the event of
illness, disability or temporary absence of the Chief of Police. In the event
of the death of the Chief of Police, he or she shall perform such duties until
the successor Chief is appointed and qualified.
   (C)   The Sergeant of Police shall be a full-time officer of the Police
Department, shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the majority
of Council and shall continue until removed by a majority vote of Council.
   (D)   The compensation of Sergeant of Police shall be established by annual
ordinance.
(Ord. 74-4, passed 6-12-1972; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 32.03 POLICE OFFICER.
   (A)   The position of police officer is hereby created in the Police
Department pursuant to this section and as further set forth in the Ohio
Revised Code.
   (B)   The compensation of the position of police officer shall be
established by annual ordinance.
(Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 32.04 POLICE - PART TIME.
   (A)   The position of part-time police officer is hereby created in the
Police Department pursuant to this section and as further set forth in the Ohio
Revised Code.
   (B)   The compensation of the position of part-time police officer shall be
established by annual ordinance.
(Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 32.05 CLERK-DISPATCHER.
   (A)   The position of Clerk-Dispatcher is hereby created in the Police
Department pursuant to this section and shall be subject to the supervision and
direction of the Police Chief.
   (B)   The compensation of the position of Clerk-Dispatcher shall be
established by annual ordinance.
(Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 32.06 CROSSING GUARD.
   (A)   The position of crossing guard is hereby created in the Police
Department pursuant to this section and shall be subject to the supervision and
direction of the Police Chief.
   (B)   The compensation of the crossing guard shall be as established by
annual ordinance.
(Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR THE POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 32.10 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DEPARTMENT. The Village of Swanton Police Department.
   MEMBER. Any person employed by the Village of Swanton Police Department,
whether this person is on duty or off duty.
(Ord. 83-31, passed 9-26-1983; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 2001-28,
passed 6-25-2001)
§ 32.11 PATROL DUTY.
   (A)   Members of the Department shall report for duty physically and
mentally fit for their assigned duties, wearing the prescribed uniforms and
insignia. They shall have in their possession and carry regulation police
equipment. Failure to take notice of information given to them, with respect to
police orientated matters, shall be considered neglect of duty.
   (B)   (1)   Every member of the Department shall faithfully, diligently and
continually patrol every part of the village. He or she shall not conspicuously
follow any certain route with regularity. He or she shall, at night and during
the time when business places are closed, frequently examine and try accessible
doors, windows and means of entrance to business and public buildings.
      (2)   In cases where a member is in doubt as to the proper action to be
taken in any police matter, he or she shall notify the Chief and seek advice.
   (C)   Members shall not absent themselves from their assigned patrol area
without permission from the Police Chief or the Chief’s Superior, except when
performing urgent or necessary police business, and then they shall notify the
Chief on a written report covering the incident causing their absence. They
shall be absent no longer than is required to transact the business.
   (D)   Members shall furnish assistance to persons who are injured, sick or
lost. When requested, they shall give their name and badge number in respectful
manner.
    (E)   Members shall report in writing any street or street traffic signs
that have been removed or damaged.
   (F)   Members shall pay particular attention to motor vehicles, observing
their numbers and constantly check to determine if they have been reported
stolen, involved in any crime, or driven by persons wanted for violation of
law, and that they are properly licensed, equipped, operated and parked.
   (G)   Members are required to settle a variety of complaints that are not
criminal in character, or that involve minor infraction of law. When the
situation cannot be corrected immediately, and there has been a law violation,
but due to existing circumstances an arrest cannot be made, the situation shall
be reported in writing.
   (H)   Members shall make preliminary investigations and reports of all
crimes coming to their attention and shall be responsible for calling for
assistance as the case requires.
   (I)   Members at the scene of a motor vehicle accident shall give aid to the
injured, arrest or issue a citation where required, and restore an orderly flow
of traffic.
(Ord. 83-31, passed 9-26-1983; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 32.12 MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person other than members of the Department shall ride in any
police vehicle, except where necessary in the performance of Department
business or when given permission to do so by the Chief of Police.
   (B)   Members shall, prior to entering on each tour of duty, examine the
vehicle thoroughly for mechanical or other damage. Each member at the end of
his or her tour of duty shall be responsible for any improper use of said
vehicle.
   (C)   Members shall test the serviceability of radio equipment when starting
their tour of duty.
   (D)   When responding to an emergency call, members shall exercise judgment
and care with due regard to the safety of life and property.
   (E)   Whenever it necessitates a member to leave his or her patrol car
unattended, he or she shall be sure the vehicle is locked and keys are in his
or her possession. Patrol vehicles will not be left running and unattended.
   (F)   Members shall record mileage of the patrol car at the beginning of
each tour of duty, and shall record mileage at the end of tour. The miles
accumulated at the end of tour shall be totaled and turned in for inspection by
the Chief.
(Ord. 83-31, passed 9-26-1983; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 32.13 UNIFORMS AND INSIGNIA.
   (A)   Regulations and specification concerning the standard uniform and
insignia for the Department shall be prepared by the Chief of Police, subject
to approval by his or her superiors.
   (B)   Uniform coats and shirts shall be properly buttoned at all times.
Appearing in partial uniform is forbidden. Changes in the style or type of
uniform necessitated by weather conditions shall be made only upon the order of
the Chief of Police.
   (C)   The selling, loaning or giving away of all or any part of a police
uniform or equipment to anyone other than another member of the Department is
forbidden except with the permission of the Chief of Police.
   (D)   Any member of the Department who leaves the service by dismissal or
resignation, shall return to the Chief of Police all equipment issued to him or
her, or shall pay for any and all items which have been lost, and such loss
shall be explained in writing to the satisfaction of the Chief of Police.
   (E)   All members while in uniform shall wear said uniform in cleaned,
pressed and orderly condition. Shoes will be highly shined. Members may be
subject to inspection at any time by command officer or Chief of Police.
   (F)   All members, while in uniform, shall report for duty clean shaven, no
full beards or goatees will be worn, sideburns will not extend below base of
ear lobe. A mustache may be worn, it may not extend to lower lip. It will be
kept neat and trimmed. Hair will be kept neat and trimmed.
(Ord. 83-31, passed 9-26-1983; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 32.14 DAYS OFF, AWOL AND VACATION.
   (A)   Members of the Department will have regular hours assigned to them for
active duty each day, and when not so employed, shall be considered off active
duty. They shall be considered on duty for the purpose of discipline in
deportment and conduct. When off duty and in public, they may have in their
possession and carry their badge, ID card, revolver and cartridge.
   (B)   The assignment of days off and vacations shall be made in the manner
and at the time designated by the Chief of Police.
   (C)   Members of the Department absent from duty without leave (AWOL) shall
be subject to disciplinary action in addition to forfeiture of pay for the time
absent without leave.
   (D)   In the event of any sudden public emergency all vacations, days off
and leaves of absences may be suspended by the Chief.
   (E)   If a member is sick during an assigned vacation period, the member
will not be entitled to a vacation at another time during the same year, except
when a member is injured in the line of duty.
   (F)   Members who are sick and are unable to report for duty shall notify
the Department not less than two hours prior to the time they are to go on
duty. If a member is out sick for three or more working days, upon returning to
duty, the member must have a certificate from a registered physician.
(Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) (Ord. 83-31, passed 9-26-1983)
§ 32.15 USE OF FIREARMS.
   (A)   All members shall become familiar with firearms that are used in
performance of duty.
   (B)   Every member shall qualify with his or her sidearms at least yearly.
If a member fails to qualify, he or she will be relieved of duty until able to
do so.
   (C)   All members will also have to show their ability in handling off duty
firearms.
   (D)   The reason a firearm is issued to a member is to extend fatal force
beyond one’s reach, and this can only be used when the situation is thoroughly
justified.
   (E)   All members shall carry, handle and transport firearms in a manner so
as not to endanger any innocent people.
   (F)   An officer will use discretion when the use of a firearm becomes
unavoidable. Under no circumstances will warning shots be used, as this is a
potential hazard to innocent people.
   (G)   Where the police officer has probable cause to believe that the
suspect poses a threat of serious physical harm, either to the officer or to
others, it is not constitutionally unreasonable to prevent escape by using
deadly force. If the suspect threatens the officer with a weapon or there is
probable cause to believe that he or she has committed a crime involving the
infliction or threatened infliction of serious physical harm, deadly force may
be used if necessary to prevent escape, and if, when feasible, some warning has
been given.
   (H)   A member may buy and choose his or her own sidearm. This will not
exceed a nine millimeter handgun, and for all practical purposes, will not
contain anything but nine millimeter cartridges for on or off duty purposes,
and authorized by the Chief of Police.
   (I)   All member shall take special care of their firearms, making sure that
they are in good working order and cleaned on a regular basis.
(Ord. 83-31, passed 9-26-1983; Ord. 85-43, passed 10-28-1985; Ord. 90-27,
passed 9-10-1990; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 2001-28, passed 6-25-2001)
§ 32.16 GENERAL RULES.
   (A)   Every member of the Department shall be a citizen of the United
States. Every member shall be resident of the State of Ohio unless the Village
Council chooses to waive this requirement in particular ordinance form for a
particular case.
   (B)   It is the duty of every member of the Department to preserve the
peace, protect persons and property, read, obey and enforce all ordinances of
the village, and all criminal laws of the State of Ohio and the United States.
   (C)   It is the duty of every member of the Department to keep up to date on
all of the sections of these rules and regulations.
   (D)   Members shall accept all assignments given to them by their respective
superior officers.
   (E)   Any member of the Department may be designated to execute a warrant of
arrest, search, subpoena or writ. Any member failing to make a sincere effort
to execute such process shall be held accountable for such neglect of duty.
   (F)   Members shall perform their duties with discretion. They shall not use
violent, profane or insolent language while performing their duties or when
dealing with the public.
   (G)   All Department records will be accurate. No records shall be removed
from the Department files without proper authority.
   (H)   Members will not address any public gathering, representing the
Department, unless authorized by the Chief of Police.
   (I)   No member shall aid any criminal with the view of permitting the
criminal to escape the penalty of the law.
   (J)   Members shall report all violations by any member of the Department to
the Chief of Police.
   (K)   Members of the Department shall avoid making arrests in their own
families, especially in trivial matters.
   (L)   When a member of the Department makes an arrest and the prisoner is
not confined to a cell, the arrested person is the responsibility of the
officer. If a prisoner escapes or injures another person because of negligence,
it will be considered gross neglect of duty.
   (M)   No member shall accept outside employment that is incompatible with
that of a police officer or without the consent or the Chief of Police.
    (N)   A member may give information to the news media providing information
is routine in nature. A member will not give out information to the news media
if the information is of such nature that it will hamper an investigation. Any
detailed news released will be made by the Chief of Police.
   (O)   A member shall support himself or herself and family and pay his or
her just debts.
   (P)   A member shall not drink any kind of alcoholic beverages while in
uniform, and shall not report for, or return to duty under the influence of
alcohol or while he or she may show obvious signs of drinking.
   (Q)   Any member who loses any issued equipment, because of negligence,
shall be held responsible for said equipment, and shall pay for such loss.
(Ord. 83-31, passed 9-26-1983; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 32.17 DISCIPLINARY ACTION.
   (A)   (1)   Every member of the Department shall be subject to disciplinary
action, up to and including dismissal, for violation of any Department rules
and regulations or any directives set down by the Chief of Police.
      (2)   The following is a list of the disciplinary action which shall be
taken:
         (a)   Informal reprimand. A verbal reprimand which is not recorded but
may be noted in the member’s file;
         (b)   Formal reprimand. A written reprimand which will be recorded in
the member’s file; and
         (c)   Suspension. A member who has received three or more formal
reprimands may be suspended. In addition, a member may be suspended at any time
for conduct unbecoming a police officer or dereliction of duty.
   (B)   The Chief of Police shall have the primary responsibility for the
discipline of the Police Department.
   (C)   Charges brought against any member of the Department shall be reviewed
by the Chief of Police. The charges will be forwarded to the Mayor.
   (D)   Any member of the Department who demonstrates he or she is incapable
of performing his or her assigned duties may be subject to disciplinary action.
   (E)   Upon the suspension of a member, he or she shall be entitled to a
hearing. Said hearing shall be held by the Mayor, Police Committee of the
Village Council, Chief of Police and with the suspended member present. Upon
completion of the hearing a disposition will be rendered.
    (F)   Any member may waive his or her right to a formal hearing. When a
member has waived his or her right to a formal hearing, the Chief of Police
shall take necessary disciplinary action, which may include demotion,
suspension, reprimand or dismissal.
   (G)   An entry shall be made upon the official service record for all
disciplinary actions.
   (H)   The Chief of Police will handle all complaints from citizens,
concerning the conduct of members of the Department.
   (I)   Any member who is absent illegally for three days or more shall be
deemed and held as a resignation.
(Ord. 83-31, passed 9-26-1983; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 32.18 RATE OF PAY FOR VILLAGE POLICE OFFICERS REQUESTED FOR DUTY AT SPECIAL
EVENTS.
   (A)   The Village Administrator is hereby authorized and empowered to enter
into an agreement with public and private organizations requesting additional
police protection and services for their special community events held within
the village.
   (B)    The village shall bill the public or private organization directly
for these additional police services based on the amount time provided by each
officer requested or scheduled at the special event. The rate of pay for each
officer provided at a special event shall be billed out at $35 per hour. The
rate will automatically increase by $1 per year effective January 1, with the
first increase on January 1, 2024. All police officers paid hourly will be paid
at one and one-half times their current hourly rate of pay for serving at
special events.
(Ord. 2014-31, passed 11-24-2014; Ord. 2022-17, passed 6-27-2022)
FIRE DEPARTMENT GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 32.45 RECORDS OF FIRES.
   The Fire Chief shall keep in convenient form a complete record of all fires.
Such record shall include the time of the alarm, location of fire, cause of
fire, if known, type of building, name of owner and tenant, purpose for which
occupied, value of building and contents, members of the Department responding
to the alarm, and such other information as he or she may deem advisable or as
may be required from time to time by Council.
(1964 Code, § 141.01) (Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 32.46 MONTHLY PRACTICE DRILLS.
   The Fire Chief shall hold monthly practice drills of at least one hour’s
duration for the Fire Department when the weather permits, and give the
firefighters instructions in approved methods of firefighting and fire
prevention.
(1964 Code, § 141.02) (Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 32.47 DEPUTY FIRE CHIEF AND FIREFIGHTERS.
   (A)   The Deputy Fire Chief shall, in the absence or disability of the
Chief, perform all the functions and exercise all of the authority of the
Chief.
(1964 Code, § 141.03)
    (B)   The Deputy Fire Chief and firefighters shall be not less than 18
years of age and able-bodied. They shall pass a satisfactory mental and
physical examination and shall become members of the Fire Department only after
a six months’ probationary period.
(1964 Code, § 141.04) (Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
Statutory reference:
   Qualifications of firefighters, see R.C. § 737.22
§ 32.48 LOSS OF MEMBERSHIP.
   Firefighters absent for three consecutive drills or fire calls shall forfeit
membership in the Fire Department.
(1964 Code, § 141.05) (Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 32.49 VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTERS’ DEPENDENTS FUND BOARD.
   Pursuant to the provisions of R.C. § 146.02(A), there is hereby established
a Volunteer Firefighters’ Dependents Fund Board which shall be composed and
governed by the provisions of the general laws of the state.
(1964 Code, § 141.06) (Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT RESCUE UNIT
§ 32.60 CREATION.
   There is hereby created within the provisions of R.C. § 737.21, a rescue
unit which shall be known as the Volunteer Fire Department Rescue Unit,
hereafter designated Volunteer Rescue Unit.
(Ord. 74-4, passed 1-14-1974; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 32.61 VOLUNTEER FIRE CHIEF.
   (A)   The position of Volunteer Fire Chief is hereby established pursuant to
this section.
   (B)   Compensation shall be as established by annual ordinance.
(Ord. 74-4, passed 1-14-1974; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 32.62 DEPUTY FIRE CHIEF (RESCUE CHIEF).
   (A)   The chief officer of the Volunteer Rescue Unit shall be a Deputy Fire
Chief in charge of Rescue, hereafter designated Rescue Chief, and shall be
appointed upon the recommendation of the Volunteer Fire Chief by the Mayor with
the advice and consent of Council.
   (B)   The compensation of the Deputy Fire Chief in charge of rescue shall be
established by annual ordinance.
(Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 32.63 APPLICATION FOR APPOINTMENT; APPOINTMENT.
   (A)   All applicants for appointment to the Volunteer Rescue Unit shall
enroll in the emergency victim care course of training and instruction as
prescribed by the Division of Vocational Education of the Ohio State Department
of Education and shall thereupon be appointed by the Mayor, upon the
recommendation of the Rescue Chief, as a probationary member of the Volunteer
Rescue Unit. Probationary status shall terminate at the expiration of nine
months from the date of appointment thereto, except that for good cause shown,
the Mayor may extend the term for a period not to exceed an additional three-
month period.
   (B)   Upon the satisfactory completion of the prescribed emergency victim
care training program and certification of a licensed physician showing that
the applicant within 60 days of appointment has passed a physical examination
and meets the physical requirements necessary to perform the duties of a member
of the Volunteer Rescue Unit, the applicant, upon the recommendation of the
Rescue Chief, shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of
the Council, to full membership on the Volunteer Rescue Unit.
(Ord. 74-4, passed 1-14-1974; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
Statutory reference:
   Qualifications of firefighters, see R.C. § 737.22
§ 32.64 BY-LAWS, UNIFORMS AND THE LIKE.
   The Volunteer Rescue Unit may adopt by-laws consistent with the state and
the ordinances of the village, uniforms, badges or other identifying insignia,
after submission for recommendation to the Safety Committee and approval by
ordinance of Council.
(Ord. 74-4, passed 1-14-1974; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 96-33, passed
12-9-1996)
§ 32.65 COMPENSATION.
   The members of the Volunteer Rescue Unit, both probationary and full, as
long as they are in good standing and not under suspension, shall be paid the
same compensation and shall be entitled to and enjoy the same rights, benefits,
privileges and immunities as are or may hereafter be accorded to the members of
the Volunteer Fire Department.
(Ord. 74-4, passed 1-14-1974; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 32.66 CONTRACTS WITH OTHER MUNICIPALITIES AND TOWNSHIPS.
   Upon such terms as set forth in contracts by and between the village and
other municipal corporations and townships, to furnish rescue service to other
municipal corporations and townships, in or out of Fulton County and outside
the village, under the authority of R.C. § 505.44, the Volunteer Rescue Unit
shall furnish rescue service to such contracting municipal corporations and
townships.
(Ord. 74-4, passed 1-14-1974; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 32.67 POLICE ENFORCEMENT OF MUNICIPAL PROPERTY OUTSIDE VILLAGE LIMITS.
   (A)   Village police have the authority to enforce the provisions of the
Ohio Revised Code upon property owned by the village and located outside of
village limits. Specific properties include the Swanton Village Reservoir, in
Swanton Township, and the former village dump in Swancreek Township.
   (B)   Additional properties may be added by motion and approval of Council.
(Res. 94-3, passed 2-28-1994)
§ 32.68 OPERATIONAL PROTOCOL FOR THE VILLAGE RESCUE UNIT.
   (A)   All organizations require structure and direction to function
efficiently. The Village Rescue Unit with its constitutional mission of
community service is no different. This protocol is to provide that structure
and direction which is required, in addition to the Constitution and by-laws,
for efficient normal daily operation: it consists of the following series of
written directives governing the operation of the unit and the conduct of its
members while on duty, or on station, which have been reviewed by the Advisory
Board and signed by the Chief. These directives are to give guidance to, and
provide accountability for, all members of the unit.
   (B)   While most elements of day to day operation are addressed by this
document, it is always possible that a situation could arise which is not
specifically spoken to hereinafter. Should this occur, it is hoped that common
sense would prevail. When in doubt as to a course of action, the prudent member
would contact his or her Squad Leader or, failing that, the next available Line
Officer.
   (C)   Operational protocol is not to be confused with medical protocol which
is written by the Fulton County Medical Director and serves an entirely
different function. Although no conflicts are anticipated, should this occur,
medical protocol shall supersede operational protocol.
(Ord. 32.68, passed 12-9-1996)
§ 32.69 RESERVED.
§ 32.70 FEES.
   (A)   The Police, Fire and Rescue Departments shall charge a fee of $5 to
copy reports for the general public. All fees shall be deposited with the
Director of Finance for crediting to the proper fund.
   (B)   (1)   The Village of Swanton shall establish a service fee system for
the Swanton Village Fire and Police Departments for the delivery of fire and
police services, personnel, supplies and equipment to the scene of motor
vehicle accidents. The rate of the service fees shall be the usual, customary,
and reasonable costs, which includes any services, personnel, supplies and
equipment and may vary based on the actual costs of the individual accident.
The user fees for Swanton Village Police and Fire Services are listed in the
Appendices A and B following this chapter and are incorporated herein.
      (2)   The service fees shall be charged to the responsible or “at-fault”
driver, initially filed with motor vehicle insurance, representing an added on
cost of the claim for negligent driving damages to vehicles, properly and/or
injuries. The claim shall be filed to the insurance company, the owner of a
vehicle, owner of the property or other responsible parties. Residents of the
Village of Swanton or any political subdivision or portion of any political
subdivision with which the Village of Swanton has a fire and rescue services
contract are exempt from any billing or charges not covered by their insurance.
      (3)   The Village Administrator, with the approval of the Swanton Village
Council, may make rules and regulations necessary and expedient in respect to
the billing and collection of service fees. The Village Administrator is hereby
authorized to enter into an agreement, which replaces the previous agreement,
with Cost Recovery Corporation (CRC), 6450 Poe Avenue, Suite 401, Dayton, Ohio
to act as the Village’s agent for the collection and recovery of police and
fire service fees levied by the Village of Swanton.
      (4)   All amounts collected as a result of this division (B) shall be
placed into separate fire and police funds established by the Village of
Swanton to be used exclusively for personnel, supplies, and equipment for the
Police and Fire Departments.
(Ord. 97-34, passed 12-8-1997; Ord. 2017-05, passed 2-27-2017)
Appendix A: Proprietary Cost Schedule for Fire Department Incidents
On Scene Time         15 min 30 min 45 min 60 min 75 min 90 min
Engine companies      $734   $748   $761   $775   $788   $803
Rescue Vehicles       $721   $723   $724   $725   $726   $728
EMS Vehicle/Non Trans $724   $726   $730   $734   $739   $743
Ladder Towers         $748   $775   $801   $828   $855   $881
HazMat                $734   $754   $775   $795   $815   $835
Firefighters          $13    $25    $38    $50    $63    $75
Shift Supervisors     $18    $35    $53    $70    $88    $105
LTs/Asst Chief        $20    $40    $60    $80    $100   $120
Chief                 $25    $50    $75    $100   $125   $150
 
(Ord. 2017-05, passed 2-27-2017)
Appendix B: Proprietary Cost Schedule for Law Enforcement Incidents
 
On Scene Time  30 min 45 min 60 min 60 min 75 min 90 min
Vehicles       $721   $723   $724   $725   $726   $728
Officers       $724   $726   $730   $734   $739   $743
Reconstruction $748   $775   $801   $828   $855   $881
 
   Note: Fee schedule subject to change when time on scene exceeds 8 hours.
   COURT TIME AND WITNESS INTERVIEW @ $80/Hour
(Ord. 2017-05, passed 2-27-2017)
CHAPTER 33: BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
33.01   Creation
   
33.02   Members; compensation; terms
   
33.03   Organization
   
33.04   Meetings, quorum; open to public, when
   
33.05   Duties
   
33.06   Vacancies
Specific Boards and Commissions
   
33.20   Planning Commission
   
33.21   Records Commission
   
33.22   Tree Commission
   
33.23   Downtown Design Review Board
   
33.24   Fire Advisory Board
   
33.25   Income Tax Board of Review
   
33.26   Board of Zoning Appeals
   
33.27   Economic Development Commission (EDC)
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 33.01 CREATION.
   The administrative service of the village shall include the commissions
hereby created: Planning, Records, Tree; the boards hereby created: Downtown
Design Review Board, Fire Advisory Board, Income Tax Board of Review, and
Zoning Board of Appeals; and other commissions and boards as Council may deem
necessary.
(Ord. 2022-14, passed 6-13-2022)
§ 33.02 MEMBERS; COMPENSATION; TERMS.
   Except as otherwise provided, all members of village boards and commissions
shall be residents of the village with an appropriate variety of backgrounds
and points of view. Except as otherwise provided, they shall be appointed by
the Mayor, confirmed by Council, unless otherwise stated by ordinance, be
removed for cause by the Mayor, and shall serve without compensation. Except as
otherwise provided, terms of members of the village's boards and commissions
shall be limited to two successive terms or ten years of successive service,
whichever is longer. Once a member has served a board or commission for the
maximum successive time permitted herein, a discontinuance of service for at
least one year shall be required before the former member may be appointed to
begin a new term on the same board or commission.
(Ord. 2022-14, passed 6-13-2022)
§ 33.03 ORGANIZATION.
   Every village board and commission, except the Planning Commission, shall
organize annually to elect a chairperson, vice-chairperson, and secretary, and
other officers as convenient. The Planning Commission shall organize annually
to elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson, and other officers as convenient,
except that the secretary to the Planning Commission shall be the Village
Administrator/Zoning Inspector. Each village board and commission shall adopt
rules for the transaction of business and keep a journal of its proceedings.
(Ord. 2022-14, passed 6-13-2022)
§ 33.04 MEETINGS, QUORUM; OPEN TO PUBLIC, WHEN.
   (A)   Meetings of all village boards and commissions shall be called as
needed by the chairperson, the Mayor, or three members thereof. A majority of
the members of a village board or commission shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business.
   (B)   Meetings of all boards and commissions at which any final action is to
be taken or decision rendered shall be open to the public and any action taken
or decision rendered at a meeting from which members of the public are
excluded, except for misconduct, shall be void.
   (C)   A majority vote of the members present at any duly constituted board
or commission meeting is sufficient for the adoption of a motion. When there is
a tie vote the motion fails. All members present will vote "yea" or "nay" on
all motions unless the member or members disqualify themselves for a conflict
of interest on the business before the board or commission. Voting abstentions
on a motion are not permitted unless a conflict of interest exists.
(Ord. 2022-14, passed 6-13-2022)
§ 33.05 DUTIES.
   (A)   All village boards and commissions, within their areas of
responsibility, shall identify needs and problems, recommend programs,
projects, and legislation; plan, develop, or assist with management plans and
assist to develop and review policy and specifications; promote public
understanding; cooperate with local citizens' groups, and governmental bodies;
participate in conferences and workshops; and perform those specific duties
delegated by Council.
   (B)   All village boards and commissions will notify the Village
Administrator of meetings no later than the first scheduled meeting of Village
Council prior to the board or commission's scheduled meeting. This notification
will include an agenda for the next meeting, if possible.
   (C)   All village boards and commissions will have an agenda item for lobby
visitation. Additional agenda items are at the discretion of the board or
commission chairperson.
   (D)   Minutes from board and commission meetings will be forwarded to the
Village Administrator within 12 working days after the board or commission
meeting. The Village Administrator will distribute these minutes to the Mayor
and Village Council. Minutes will be formally adopted in accordance with board
or commission by-laws.
   (E)   Special meetings are exempt from the requirements of division (B).
However, the Village Administrator's office, or designated representative, will
notify the Mayor and Village Council of the special board or commission
meeting.
(Ord. 2022-14, passed 6-13-2022)
§ 33.06 VACANCIES.
   Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the
original appointment was made.
(Ord. 2022-14, passed 6-13-2022)
SPECIFIC BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
§ 33.20 PLANNING COMMISSION.
   Per R.C. § 713.01, the legislative authority of each village may establish a
commission of five members, consisting of the Mayor, one member of the
legislative authority to be elected thereby for the remainder of the
individual's term as such member of the legislative authority, two citizens of
the village, and one public member to be appointed by the Mayor for terms of
six years each, except that the term of one of the members of the first
commission shall be for four years and one for two years. All members shall
serve without compensation.
(Ord. 2022-14, passed 6-13-2022)
§ 33.21 RECORDS COMMISSIONS.
   (A)   The functions of the Records Commission are to provide rules for
retention and disposal of records of the municipal corporation, and to review
applications for one-time disposal of obsolete records and schedules of records
retention and disposition submitted by municipal offices. The Commission may
dispose of records pursuant to the procedure outlined in R.C. § 149.381. The
Records Commission, at any time, may review any schedule it has previously
approved and, for good cause shown, may revise that schedule under the
procedure outlined in that section.
   (B)   The Village of Swanton's Records Commission is composed of the chief
executive or the chief executive's appointed representative, as chairperson,
and the chief fiscal officer, the chief legal officer, and a citizen appointed
by the chief executive. The Records Commission has an appointed secretary, who
may or may not be a member of the Commission and who shall serve at the
pleasure of the Commission. The Commission may employ an archivist or records
manager to serve under its direction. The Commission shall meet at least once
every six months and upon the call of the chairperson.
(Ord. 2022-14, passed 6-13-2022)
§ 33.22 TREE COMMISSION.
   (A)   The Tree Commission shall promote the planting, evaluation, and care
of trees and shrubs throughout the village with particular responsibility for
ensuring safe, quality tree canopy on village property and shall educate and
inform residents about the selection, planting and maintenance of trees within
the corporate limits, whether the same be on private or public property.
   (B)   The Tree Commission shall hold a minimum of eight regular meetings
annually and special meetings as needed at which the subject of trees insofar
as it relates to the municipality may be discussed by the members of the
Commission, officers, personnel, and Council committees of the municipality and
all others interested in the tree program. Annual activity shall include
implementing a public Arbor Day observance and writing and presenting a State
of the Urban Forest report for Village Council.
   (C)   The Tree Commission shall consist of five or seven voting members;
voting members do not need to be Village of Swanton residents. One member of
Council appointed by the Mayor, one representative from Public Service, and the
Village Administrator shall act as advisory, non-voting members of the
Commission.
   (D)   The Mayor may appoint non-voting, volunteer auxiliary members to
assist in special events, projects, and programming.
   (E)   Appointments to the Commission shall be for three-year terms, provided
that the term for one of the members appointed to the first Commission shall be
for one year and one of the members appointed to the first Commission shall be
for two years. Because of the long-term nature of tree programming and
management, the Tree Commission shall be exempt from the two-year term limit.
(Ord. 2022-14, passed 6-13-2022)
Cross-reference:
   Trees, see
Ch. 98
§ 33.23 DOWNTOWN DESIGN REVIEW BOARD.
   (A)   The role of the Downtown Design Review Board is to review design
related aspects of downtown revitalization through the Facade Enhancement
Program by using the United States Secretary of Interior established standards
for rehabilitation and revitalization.
   (B)   The Village Administrator is authorized to appoint five members of the
Downtown Design Review Board with the concurrence of the Mayor.
   (C)   The Director of the Fulton County Economic Development Commission will
be a voting member.
   (D)   The Village Administrator and the Mayor shall act as ex officio non-
voting members.
   (E)   Appointments to the Board shall be for three-year terms, provided that
the term of one member appointed to the first Commission shall be for two
years.
(Ord. 2022-14, passed 6-13-2022)
§ 33.24 FIRE ADVISORY BOARD.
   (A)   Generally, the role of the Advisory Board is to enhance the services
and resources provided to and by firefighters. Review and make recommendations
in financial planning. Review and make recommendations on the effective use of
existing and future fire related facilities, services, manpower, and apparatus
within the framework of the overall SFD fire service.
   (B)   The Village of Swanton Fire Division Advisory Board is composed of
four volunteer members consisting of the following voting representatives:
Mayor of Swanton, one Village Council Member, one Fulton Township Member, and
one Swancreek Township Member.
   (C)   The Advisory Board may name ex officio members as deemed appropriate.
An ex officio board member is one who becomes a member of a board not through
the regular election process but by virtue of another position that he/she
holds. Ex officio members of the Fire Advisory Board are non-voting members.
   (D)   Members will serve a two-year term.
(Ord. 2022-14, passed 6-13-2022)
§ 33.25 INCOME TAX BOARD OF REVIEW.
   The Income Tax Board of Review shall consist of members as outlined in R.C.
§ 718.11.
(Ord. 2022-14, passed 6-13-2022)
Cross-reference:
   Income tax, see
Ch. 35
§ 33.26 BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS.
   Reserved.
(Ord. 2022-14, passed 6-13-2022)
§ 33.27 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION (EDC).
   (A)   Creation. There is hereby created an Economic Development Commission
for the Village of Swanton for the purpose of: (i) providing input from all
aspects of the Swanton business community; (ii) acting as a resource for
elected officials and staff to explore new economic development ideas and
changes to village policies; and (iii) considering and introducing new economic
development ideas for consideration to elected officials and staff. The word
"Commission", when used in this division, shall mean the Economic Development
Commission for the village.
   (B)   Membership. The Mayor shall appoint three members of the Commission.
The Mayor shall be ex-officio a voting member of this Commission. The
Commission shall consist of up to five members. Each member shall be appointed
for a three-year term, except for the initial members whose terms shall be
staggered at one-year intervals. The three persons appointed to the Commission
shall be persons whose business, occupational or professional activities are
carried on in a substantial degree within the village or have an interest in
the economic success of the Village of Swanton. Additional members may be
appointed by the Mayor in an ad hoc basis depending on the various needs of the
EDC. These members' terms shall be limited to specific needs of the EDC. The
Mayor may appoint a member of Council for a one-year term. Council members may
not serve consecutive terms.
   (C)   Vacancies. The Mayor is authorized to fill any vacancy on the
Commission which may arise for any unexpired term.
   (D)   Chair and Vice Chair. The Mayor shall appoint one of the members of
the Commission to serve as Chair and one to serve as Vice Chair, each for a
term of one year and until such person's successor is appointed and shall take
office.
   (E)   Term of members. The term of office of each member of the Commission
shall be for three years and until such member's successor shall be appointed
and shall qualify.
   (F)   Attendance at meetings. Any member of the Commission who during any
six-month period is not present for 50% or more of the regularly scheduled
meetings shall be presumed to have resigned from the Commission. This
presumption shall be absolute, irrespective of the reasons for the lack of
attendance. However, the Mayor may, in the Mayor's discretion, refrain from
nominating a replacement for a period of 60 days and may reappoint such
resigned member.
   (G)   Meeting schedule. Commission meetings shall be scheduled and held
every 60 days. The Chairman may schedule and hold meetings on a more frequent
basis, if he or she believes it is warranted.
   (H)   Quorum. A quorum of the Commission shall consist of a simple majority
of the members.
   (I)   Compensation of members. The members of the Commission shall serve
without compensation.
   (J)   Payment of expenses. Expenses for the operation and conduct of the
affairs of the Commission shall be paid from funds provided for that purpose in
the annual appropriation ordinance and budget for the village.
   (K)   Annual report. The Commission, through its Chair or other designated
member, shall report in writing, during the village's annual budget process, to
the Mayor and Village Council. The report shall cover the activities of the
Board for the preceding year.
   (L)   Duties. It shall be the duty of the Commission to:
      (1)   Make recommendations on matters to the improvement of sound
economic growth and business development.
      (2)   Examine opportunities for fostering an attractive climate for
business within the village with respect to both existing and potential new
business establishments.
      (3)   Recommend additional steps and measures to promote economic growth
by retaining businesses and attracting new commerce and industry.
      (4)   Cooperate with village elected officials and staff to realize
appropriate goals and objectives relating to sound business practices and
better employment opportunities.
(Ord. 2022-21, passed 9-12-2022)
CHAPTER 34: PERSONNEL POLICIES
Section
General Provisions
   
34.01   Administration
   
34.02   Definitions
Compensation and Benefits
   
34.15   Village Personnel Handbook adopted by reference
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 34.01 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The Village Administrator shall be responsible for the implementation
of personnel policy as set forth in the Village Personnel Handbook as adopted.
Such policies and procedures as set forth in the Village Personnel Handbook,
not repugnant to municipal ordinance or state and federal law, shall have the
same validity and effect as municipal ordinance. The Village Administrator is
authorized to make changes in said personnel handbook upon approval of Council
by motion to amend the same.
   (B)   Each employee shall be provided with a copy of the Village Personnel
Handbook, and by delivery thereof, shall be deemed to have notice of the
policies and procedures outlined therein.
(Ord. 81-25, passed 12-14-1981; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 2003-23,
passed 6-23-2003)
§ 34.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FULL-TIME EMPLOYMENT. The scheduling of work periods that, on a calendar-
year basis, would result in the employment of a worker for a minimum of 40
hours, not including overtime.
   PART-TIME EMPLOYMENT. The scheduling of work periods that, on a calendar
basis, would result in the employment of a worker for less than 40 hours, not
including overtime. Part-time employees
are not eligible for any benefits under this chapter other than P.E.R.S.
(Ord. 93-16, passed 12-13-1993)
COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS
§ 34.15 VILLAGE PERSONNEL HANDBOOK ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The Village Employee Handbook, approved by Council on June 23, 2003, copies
of which are on file in the office of the Fiscal Officer, is adopted and
incorporated as part of this code of ordinances as fully as if set out at
length herein.
(Ord. 2003-23, passed 6-23-2003; Ord. passed 4-8-2013)
CHAPTER 35: INCOME TAX
Section
   
35.01   Authority to levy tax; purpose of tax
   
35.02   Definitions
   
35.03   Imposition of tax
   
35.04   Collection at source
   
35.05   Annual return; filing
   
35.06   Credit for tax paid to other municipalities
   
35.07   Estimated taxes
   
35.08   Rounding of amounts
   
35.09   Requests for refunds
   
35.10   Second municipality imposing tax after time period allowed for refund
   
35.11   Amended returns
   
35.12   Limitations
   
35.13   Audits
   
35.14   Service of assessment
   
35.15   Administration of claims
   
35.16   Tax information confidential
   
35.17   Fraud
   
35.18   Interest and penalties
   
35.19   Authority of Tax Administrator; verification of information
   
35.20   Request for opinion of the Tax Administrator
   
35.21   Board of Tax Review
   
35.22   Authority to create rules and regulations
   
35.23   Savings clause
   
35.24   Collection of tax after termination of ordinance
   
35.25   Adoption of RITA rules and regulations
   
35.26   Election to be subject to R.C. 718.80 to 718.95
 
   
35.99   Penalty
§ 35.01 AUTHORITY TO LEVY TAX; PURPOSE OF TAX.
   (A)   To provide funds for the purposes of debt retirement, general
municipal operations, maintenance, new equipment, extension and enlargement of
municipal services and facilities including recreation and capital improvements
of the Village, there shall be, and is hereby levied an annual municipal income
tax on income, qualifying wages, commissions, lottery and raffle winnings and
other compensation, and on net profits as hereinafter provided.
   (B)   (1)   The annual tax is levied at a rate of 1.50% (one and one half of
one percent). The tax is levied at a uniform rate on all persons residing in or
earning or receiving income in the Village of Swanton. The tax is levied on
income, qualifying wages, commissions and other compensation, and on net
profits as hereinafter provided in §
35.03 and other sections as they may apply.
      (2)   A sum equal to 100% of the balance of funds collected each year
under the provisions of this chapter remaining after payment of costs referred
hereto, to the General Fund for general operating expenses.
   (C)   The tax on income and the withholding tax established by this chapter/
Ord. 2025-19 are authorized by Article XVIII, Section 3 of the Ohio
Constitution. The tax is levied in accordance with, and is intended to be
consistent with, the provisions and limitations of R.C. § 718 and applies to
municipal taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2016. Ord. 2025-19
does not repeal the existing sections of
Chapter 35 for any taxable year beginning on or before December 31, 2015, but
rather amends
Chapter 35 effective January 1, 2024. For municipal taxable years beginning on
or before December 31, 2015, the Village of Swanton shall continue to
administer, audit, and enforce the income tax of the Village under R.C. § 718
and the ordinances and resolutions of the Village as
Chapter 35 and those ordinances and resolutions existed before January 1, 2016.
(Ord. 2015-29, passed 11-9-2015; Ord. 2017-03, passed 1-23-2017; Ord. 2017-38,
passed 12-11-2017; Ord. 2023-21, passed 12-11-2023; Ord. 2025-18, passed 9-8-
2025; Ord. 2025-19, passed 10-27-2025)
§ 35.02 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Any term used in this chapter/ordinance that is not otherwise defined
in this chapter has the same meaning as when used in a comparable context in
laws of the United States relating to federal income taxation or in R.C. Title
LVII, unless a different meaning is clearly required. If a term used in this
chapter that is not otherwise defined in this chapter is used in a comparable
context in both the laws of the United States relating to federal income tax
and in R.C. Title LVII and the use is not consistent, then the use of the term
in the laws of the United States relating to federal income tax shall control
over the use of the term in R.C. Title LVII.
   (B)   The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include
the feminine and the gender-neutral.
   (C)   As used in this chapter:
      (1)   ADJUSTED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME. For a person required to file as a
C corporation, or for a person that has elected to be taxed as a C corporation
under (C)(24)(d) below, means a C corporation's federal taxable income before
net operating losses and special deductions as determined under the Internal
Revenue Code, adjusted as follows:
         (a)   Deduct intangible income to the extent included in federal
taxable income. The deduction shall be allowed regardless of whether the
intangible income relates to assets used in a trade or business or assets held
for the production of income.
         (b)   Add an amount equal to 5% of intangible income deducted under
division (C)(1)(a) above, but excluding that portion of intangible income
directly related to the sale, exchange, or other disposition of property
described in § 1221 of the Internal Revenue Code;
         (c)   Add any losses allowed as a deduction in the computation of
federal taxable income if the losses directly relate to the sale, exchange, or
other disposition of an asset described in § 1221 or 1231 of the Internal
Revenue Code;
         (d)   1.   Except as provided in (C)(1)(d)2. below, deduct income and
gain included in federal taxable income to the extent the income and gain
directly relate to the sale, exchange, or other disposition of an asset
described in §§ 1221 or 1231 of the Internal Revenue Code;
            2.   Division (C)(1)(d)1. above does not apply to the extent the
income or gain is income or gain described in §§ 1245 or 1250 of the Internal
Revenue Code.
         (e)   Add taxes on or measured by net income allowed as a deduction in
the computation of federal taxable income;
         (f)   In the case of a real estate investment trust or regulated
investment company, add all amounts with respect to dividends to, distributions
to, or amounts set aside for or credited to the benefit of investors and
allowed as a deduction in the computation of federal taxable income;
         (g)   Deduct, to the extent not otherwise deducted or excluded in
computing federal taxable income, any income derived from a transfer agreement
or from the enterprise transferred under that agreement under R.C. 4313.02;
         (h)   1.   Except as limited by divisions (C)(1)(h)2., 3., and 4.
below, deduct any net operating loss incurred by the person in a taxable year
beginning on or after January 1, 2017. The amount of such net operating loss
shall be deducted from net profit that is reduced by exempt income to the
extent necessary to reduce municipal taxable income to zero, with any remaining
unused portion of the net operating loss carried forward to not more than five
consecutive taxable years following the taxable year in which the loss was
incurred, but in no case for more years than necessary for the deduction to be
fully utilized.
            2.   No person shall use the deduction allowed by this division (C)
(1)(h) to offset qualifying wages.
            3.   a.   For taxable years beginning in 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021, or
2022 a person may not deduct more than 50% of the amount of the deduction
otherwise allowed by division (C)(1)(h)1. above.
               b.   For taxable years beginning in 2023 or thereafter, a person
may deduct the full amount allowed by division (C)(1)(h)1. above.
            4.   Any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward deduction that is
available must be utilized before a taxpayer may deduct any amount pursuant to
this division (C)(1)(h).
            5.   Nothing in division (C)(1)(h)3.a. above precludes a person
from carrying forward, use with respect to any return filed for a taxable year
beginning after 2018, any amount of net operating loss that was not fully
utilized by operation of division (C)(1)(h)3.a. above. To the extent that an
amount of net operating loss that was not fully utilized in one or more taxable
years by operation of division (C)(1)(h)3.a. above is carried forward for use
with respect to a return filed for a taxable year beginning in 2019, 2020,
2021, or 2022, the limitation described in division (C)(1)(h)3.a. above shall
apply to the amount carried forward.
         (i)   Deduct any net profit of a pass-through entity owned directly or
indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer's federal taxable
income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that net profit in
the group's federal taxable income in accordance with §
35.05(O)(5)(c)2.
         (j)   1.   Add any loss incurred by a pass-through entity owned
directly or indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer's federal
taxable income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that loss in
the group's federal taxable income in accordance with d§
35.05(O)(5)(c)2..
            2.   If the taxpayer is not a C corporation, is not a disregarded
entity that has made an election described in division (C)(48)(b) below, is not
a publicly traded partnership that has made the election described in division
(C)(24)(d) below, and is not an individual, the taxpayer shall compute adjusted
federal taxable income under this section as if the taxpayer were a C
corporation, except guaranteed payments and other similar amounts paid or
accrued to a partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member,
or former member shall not be allowed as a deductible expense unless such
payments are in consideration for the use of capital and treated as payment of
interest under § 469 of the Internal Revenue Code or United States Treasury
regulations.
            3.   Amounts paid or accrued to a qualified self-employed
retirement plan with respect to a partner, former partner, shareholder, former
shareholder, member, or former member of the taxpayer, amounts paid or accrued
to or for health insurance for a partner, former partner, shareholder, former
shareholder, member, or former member, and amounts paid or accrued to or for
life insurance for a partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder,
member, or former member shall not be allowed as a deduction.
            4.   Nothing in this division (C)(1) shall be construed as allowing
the taxpayer to add or deduct any amount more than once or shall be construed
as allowing any taxpayer to deduct any amount paid to or accrued for purposes
of federal self-employment tax.
      (2)   (a)   ASSESSMENT. A written finding by the Tax Administrator that a
person has underpaid municipal income tax, or owes penalty and interest, or any
combination of tax, penalty, or interest, to the municipal corporation that
commences the person's time limitation for making an appeal to the Board of Tax
Review pursuant to §
35.21, and has "ASSESSMENT" written in all capital letters at the top of such
finding.
         (b)   ASSESSMENT does not include a notice denying a request for
refund issued under §
35.09(C)(3), a billing statement notifying a taxpayer of current or past-due
balances owed to the municipal corporation, a Tax Administrator's request for
additional information, a notification to the taxpayer of mathematical errors,
or a Tax Administrator's other written correspondence to a person or taxpayer
that does not meet the criteria prescribed by division (C)(2)(a) above.
      (3)   AUDIT. The examination of a person or the inspection of the books,
records, memoranda, or accounts of a person, ordered to appear before the Tax
Administrator, for the purpose of determining liability for a municipal income
tax.
      (4)   BOARD OF TAX REVIEW, BOARD OF REVIEW, BOARD OF TAX APPEALS, or
OTHER NAMED LOCAL BOARD CONSTITUTED TO HEAR APPEALS OF MUNICIPAL INCOME TAX
MATTERS. The entity created under §
35.21.
      (5)   CALENDAR QUARTER. The three-month period ending on the last day of
March, June, September, or December.
      (6)   CASINO OPERATOR and CASINO FACILITY. Have the same meanings as in
R.C. § 3772.01.
      (7)   CERTIFIED MAIL, EXPRESS MAIL, UNITED STATES MAIL, POSTAL SERVICE,
and SIMILAR TERMS. Include any delivery service authorized pursuant to R.C. §
5703.056.
      (8)   DISREGARDED ENTITY. A single member limited liability company, a
qualifying subchapter S subsidiary, or another entity if the company,
subsidiary, or entity is a disregarded entity for federal income tax purposes.
      (9)   DOMICILE. The true, fixed, and permanent home of a taxpayer and to
which, whenever absent, the taxpayer intends to return. A taxpayer may have
more than one residence but not more than one domicile.
      (10)   EMPLOYEE. An individual who is an employee for federal income tax
purposes.
      (11)   EMPLOYER. A person that is an employer for federal income tax
purposes.
      (12)   EXEMPT INCOME. All of the following:
         (a)   The military pay or allowances of members of the armed forces of
the United States or members of their reserve components, including the
national guard of any state.
         (b)   Intangible income.
         (c)   Social security benefits, railroad retirement benefits,
unemployment compensation, pensions, retirement benefit payments, payments from
annuities, and similar payments made to an employee or to the beneficiary of an
employee under a retirement program or plan, disability payments received from
private industry or local, state, or federal governments or from charitable,
religious or educational organizations, and the proceeds of sickness, accident,
or liability insurance policies. As used in this division (C)(12)(c),
"unemployment compensation" does not include supplemental unemployment
compensation described in § 3402(o)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code.
         (d)   The income of religious, fraternal, charitable, scientific,
literary, or educational institutions to the extent such income is derived from
tax-exempt real estate, tax-exempt tangible or intangible property, or tax-
exempt activities.
         (e)   Compensation paid under R.C. §§ 3501.28 or 3501.36 to a person
serving as a precinct election official to the extent that such compensation
does not exceed $1,000 for the taxable year. Such compensation in excess of
$1,000 for the taxable year may be subject to taxation by a municipal
corporation. A municipal corporation shall not require the payer of such
compensation to withhold any tax from that compensation.
         (f)   Dues, contributions, and similar payments received by
charitable, religious, educational, or literary organizations or labor unions,
lodges, and similar organizations;
         (g)   Alimony and child support received.
         (h)   Compensation for personal injuries or for damages to property
from insurance proceeds or otherwise, excluding compensation paid for lost
salaries or wages or compensation from punitive damages.
         (i)   Income of a public utility when that public utility is subject
to the tax levied under R.C. §§ 5727.24 or 5727.30. This division (C)(12)(i)
does not apply for purposes of R.C. Chapter 5745.
         (j)   Gains from involuntary conversions, interest on federal
obligations, items of income subject to a tax levied by the state and that a
municipal corporation is specifically prohibited by law from taxing, and income
of a decedent's estate during the period of administration except such income
from the operation of a trade or business.
         (k)   Compensation or allowances excluded from federal gross income
under § 107 of the Internal Revenue Code.
         (l)   Employee compensation that is not qualifying wages as defined in
division (C)(35) below.
         (m)   Compensation paid to a person employed within the boundaries of
a United States Air Force base under the jurisdiction of the United States Air
Force that is used for the housing of members of the United States Air Force
and is a center for Air Force operations, unless the person is subject to
taxation because of residence or domicile. If the compensation is subject to
taxation because of residence or domicile, tax on such income shall be payable
only to the municipal corporation of residence or domicile.
         (n)   An S corporation shareholder's share of net profits of the S
corporation, other than any part of the share of net profits that represents
wages as defined in § 3121(a) of the Internal Revenue Code or net earnings from
self-employment as defined in § 1402(a) of the Internal Revenue Code.
         (o)   All of the income of individuals under 18 years of age.
         (p)   1.   Except as provided in divisions (C)(12)(p)2., 3., and 4.
below, qualifying wages described in § 35.04(B)(2) or (B)(5) to the extent the
qualifying wages are not subject to withholding for the Village of Swanton
under either of those divisions.
            2.   The exemption provided in division (C)(12)(p)1. above does not
apply with respect to the municipal corporation in which the employee resided
at the time the employee earned the qualifying wages.
            3.   The exemption provided in division (C)(12)(p)1. above does not
apply to qualifying wages that an employer elects to withhold under §
35.04(B)(4)(b).
            4.   The exemption provided in division (C)(12)(p)1. above does not
apply to qualifying wages if both of the following conditions apply:
               a.   For qualifying wages described in §
35.04(B)(2), the employee's employer withholds and remits tax on the qualifying
wages to the municipal corporation in which the employee's principal place of
work is situated, or, for qualifying wages described in §
35.04(B)(5), the employee's employer withholds and remits tax on the qualifying
wages to the municipal corporation in which the employer's fixed location is
located;
               b.   The employee receives a refund of the tax described in
division (C)(12)(p)4.a. above on the basis of the employee not performing
services in that municipal corporation.
         (q)   1.   Except as provided in division (C)(12)(q)2. or 3. below,
compensation that is not qualifying wages paid to a nonresident individual for
personal services performed in the Village on not more than 20 days in a
taxable year.
            2.   The exemption provided in division (C)(12)(q)1. above does not
apply under either of the following circumstances:
               a.   The individual's base of operation is located in the
municipal corporation.
               b.   The individual is a professional athlete, professional
entertainer, or public figure, and the compensation is paid for the performance
of services in the individual's capacity as a professional athlete,
professional entertainer, or public figure. For purposes of this division (C)
(12)(q)2.b., "professional athlete," "professional entertainer," and "public
figure" have the same meanings as in §
35.04(B).
            3.   Compensation to which this division (C)(12)(q) applies shall
be treated as earned or received at the individual's base of operation. If the
individual does not have a base of operation, the compensation shall be treated
as earned or received where the individual is domiciled.
            4.   For purposes of this division (C)(12)(q), "base of operation"
means the location where an individual owns or rents an office, storefront, or
similar facility to which the individual regularly reports and at which the
individual regularly performs personal services for compensation.
         (r)   Compensation paid to a person for personal services performed
for a political subdivision on property owned by the political subdivision,
regardless of whether the compensation is received by an employee of the
subdivision or another person performing services for the subdivision under a
contract with the subdivision, if the property on which services are performed
is annexed to a municipal corporation pursuant to R.C. § 709.023 on or after
March 27, 2013, unless the person is subject to such taxation because of
residence. If the compensation is subject to taxation because of residence,
municipal income tax shall be payable only to the municipal corporation of
residence.
         (s)   1.   Income the taxation of which is prohibited by the
constitution or laws of the United States.
            2.   Any item of income that is exempt income of a pass-through
entity under this division (C) is exempt income of each owner of the pass-
through entity to the extent of that owner's distributive or proportionate
share of that item of the entity's income.
      (13)   FORM 2106. Internal Revenue Service Form 2106 filed by a taxpayer
pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      (14)   GENERIC FORM. An electronic or paper form that is not prescribed
by a particular municipal corporation and that is designed for reporting taxes
withheld by an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer, estimated
municipal income taxes, or annual municipal income tax liability or for filing
a refund claim.
      (15)   GROSS RECEIPTS. The total revenue derived from sales, work done,
or service rendered.
      (16)   INCOME. The following:
         (a)   1.   For residents, all income, salaries, qualifying wages,
commissions, and other compensation from whatever source earned or received by
the resident, including the resident's distributive share of the net profit of
pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly by the resident and any net
profit of the resident, except as provided in (C)(24)(d) below.
            2.   For the purposes of division (C)(16)(a)1. above:
               a.   Any net operating loss of the resident incurred in the
taxable year and the resident's distributive share of any net operating loss
generated in the same taxable year and attributable to the resident's ownership
interest in a pass-through entity shall be allowed as a deduction, for that
taxable year and the following five taxable years, against any other net profit
of the resident or the resident's distributive share of any net profit
attributable to the resident's ownership interest in a pass-through entity
until fully utilized, subject to division (C)(16)(a)4. below;
               b.   The resident's distributive share of the net profit of each
pass-through entity owned directly or indirectly by the resident shall be
calculated without regard to any net operating loss that is carried forward by
that entity from a prior taxable year and applied to reduce the entity's net
profit for the current taxable year.
            3.   Division (C)(16)(a)2. above does not apply with respect to any
net profit or net operating loss attributable to an ownership interest in an S
corporation unless shareholders' shares of net profits from S corporations are
subject to tax in the municipal corporation as provided in division(C)(12)(n)
above.
            4.   Any amount of a net operating loss used to reduce a taxpayer's
net profit for a taxable year shall reduce the amount of net operating loss
that may be carried forward to any subsequent year for use by that taxpayer. In
no event shall the cumulative deductions for all taxable years with respect to
a taxpayer's net operating loss exceed the original amount of that net
operating loss available to that taxpayer.
         (b)   In the case of nonresidents, all income, salaries, qualifying
wages, commissions, and other compensation from whatever source earned or
received by the nonresident for work done, services performed or rendered, or
activities conducted in the municipal corporation, including any net profit of
the nonresident, but excluding the nonresident's distributive share of the net
profit or loss of only pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly by
the nonresident.
         (c)   For taxpayers that are not individuals, net profit of the
taxpayer;
         (d)   Lottery, sweepstakes, gambling and sports winnings, winnings
from games of chance, and prizes and awards. If the taxpayer is a professional
gambler for federal income tax purposes, the taxpayer may deduct related
wagering losses and expenses to the extent authorized under the Internal
Revenue Code and claimed against such winnings.
      (17)   INTANGIBLE INCOME. Income of any of the following types: income
yield, interest, capital gains, dividends, or other income arising from the
ownership, sale, exchange, or other disposition of intangible property
including, but not limited to, investments, deposits, money, or credits as
those terms are defined in R.C. § 5701, and patents, copyrights, trademarks,
tradenames, investments in real estate investment trusts, investments in
regulated investment companies, and appreciation on deferred compensation.
INTANGIBLE INCOME does not include prizes, awards, or other income associated
with any lottery winnings, gambling winnings, or other similar games of chance.
      (18)   INTERNAL REVENUE CODE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5747.01.
      (19)   LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY. A limited liability company formed
under R.C. § 1705 or under the laws of another state.
      (20)   MUNICIPAL CORPORATION. Includes a joint economic development
district or joint economic development zone that levies an income tax under
R.C. §§ 715.691, 715.70, 715.71, or 715.74.
      (21)   (a)   MUNICIPAL TAXABLE INCOME. The following:
            1.   For a person other than an individual, income reduced by
exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income and then, as
applicable, apportioned or sitused to the Village of Swanton under §
35.03, and further reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward
available to the person for the Village.
            2.   a.   For an individual who is a resident of the Village of
Swanton, income reduced by exempt income to the extent otherwise included in
income, then reduced as provided in division (C)(21)(b) below, and further
reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward available to the
individual for the municipal corporation.
               b.   For an individual who is a nonresident of the Village,
income reduced by exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income and
then, as applicable, apportioned or sitused to the municipal corporation under
§
35.03, then reduced as provided in division (C)(21)(b) below, and further
reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward available to the
individual for the Village.
         (b)   In computing the municipal taxable income of a taxpayer who is
an individual, the taxpayer may subtract, as provided in division (C)(21)
(a)2.a. or (C)(21)2.b. above, the amount of the individual's employee business
expenses reported on the individual's Form 2106 that the individual deducted
for federal income tax purposes for the taxable year, subject to the limitation
imposed by § 67 of the Internal Revenue Code. For the municipal corporation in
which the taxpayer is a resident, the taxpayer may deduct all such expenses
allowed for federal income tax purposes, but only to the extent the expenses do
not relate to exempt income. For a municipal corporation in which the taxpayer
is not a resident, the taxpayer may deduct such expenses only to the extent the
expenses are related to the taxpayer's performance of personal services in that
nonresident municipal corporation and are not related to exempt income.
      (22)   MUNICIPALITY. The same as the Village of Swanton. If the terms are
capitalized in this chapter they are referring to Village of Swanton. If not
capitalized they refer to a municipal corporation other than the Village of
Swanton.
      (23)   NET OPERATING LOSS. A loss incurred by a person in the operation
of a trade or business. NET OPERATING LOSS does not include unutilized losses
resulting from basis limitations, at-risk limitations, or passive activity loss
limitations.
      (24)   NET PROFIT.
         (a)   For a person other than an individual means adjusted federal
taxable income.
         (b)   For a person who is an individual means the individual's net
profit required to be reported on Schedule C, Schedule E, or Schedule F reduced
by any net operating loss carried forward. For the purposes of this division
(C)(24)(b), the net operating loss carried forward shall be calculated and
deducted in the same manner as provided in division (C)(1)(h) above.
         (c)   For the purposes of this chapter, and notwithstanding division
(C)(24)(a) above, net profit of a disregarded entity shall not be taxable as
against that disregarded entity, but shall instead be included in the net
profit of the owner of the disregarded entity.
         (d)   A publicly traded partnership that is treated as a partnership
for federal income tax purposes, and that is subject to tax on its net profits
by the Village, may elect to be treated as a C corporation for the Village of
Swanton. The election shall be made on the annual return for the Village. The
Village of Swanton will treat the publicly traded partnership as a C
corporation if the election is so made.
      (25)   NONRESIDENT. An individual that is not a resident.
      (26)   OHIO BUSINESS GATEWAY. The online computer network system, created
under R.C. § 125.30, that allows persons to electronically file business reply
forms with state agencies and includes any successor electronic filing and
payment system.
      (27)   OTHER PAYER. Any person, other than an individual's employer or
the employer's agent, that pays an individual any amount included in the
federal gross income of the individual. OTHER PAYER includes casino operators
and video lottery terminal sales agents.
      (28)   PASS-THROUGH ENTITY. A partnership not treated as an association
taxable as a C corporation for federal income tax purposes, a limited liability
company not treated as an association taxable as a C corporation for federal
income tax purposes, an S corporation, or any other class of entity from which
the income or profits of the entity are given pass-through treatment for
federal income tax purposes. PASS-THROUGH ENTITY does not include a trust,
estate, grantor of a grantor trust, or disregarded entity.
      (29)   PENSION. Any amount paid to an employee or former employee that is
reported to the recipient on an IRS Form 1099-R, or successor form. PENSION
does not include deferred compensation, or amounts attributable to nonqualified
deferred compensation plans, reported as FICA/Medicare wages on an IRS form W-
2, Wage and Tax Statement, or successor form.
      (30)   PERSON. Includes individuals, firms, companies, joint stock
companies, business trusts, estates, trusts, partnerships, limited liability
partnerships, limited liability companies, associations, C corporations, S
corporations, governmental entities, and any other entity.
      (31)   POSTAL SERVICE. The United States postal service.
      (32)   POSTMARK DATE, DATE OF POSTMARK, and SIMILAR TERMS. Include the
date recorded and marked in the manner described in R.C. § 5703.056(B)(3).
      (33)   (a)   PRE-2017 NET OPERATING LOSS CARRYFORWARD. Any net operating
loss incurred in a taxable year beginning before January 1, 2017, to the extent
such loss was permitted, by a resolution or ordinance of the Village of Swanton
that was adopted by the Village of Swanton before January 1, 2016, to be
carried forward and utilized to offset income or net profit generated in the
Village of Swanton in future taxable years.
         (b)   For the purpose of calculating municipal taxable income, any
PRE-2017 NET OPERATING LOSS CARRYFORWARD may be carried forward to any taxable
year, including taxable years beginning in 2017 or thereafter, for the number
of taxable years provided in the resolution or ordinance or until fully
utilized, whichever is earlier.
      (34)   PUBLICLY TRADED PARTNERSHIP. Any partnership, an interest in which
is regularly traded on an established securities market. A PUBLICLY TRADED
PARTNERSHIP may have any number of partners.
      (35)   QUALIFYING WAGES. Wages, as defined in § 3121(a) of the Internal
Revenue Code, without regard to any wage limitations, adjusted as follows:
         (a)   Deduct the following amounts:
            1.   Any amount included in wages if the amount constitutes
compensation attributable to a plan or program described in § 125 of the
Internal Revenue Code.
            2.   Any amount included in wages if the amount constitutes payment
on account of a disability related to sickness or an accident paid by a party
unrelated to the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer.
            3.   Any amount included in wages that is exempt income.
         (b)   Add the following amounts:
            1.   Any amount not included in wages solely because the employee
was employed by the employer before April 1, 1986.
            2.   Any amount not included in wages because the amount arises
from the sale, exchange, or other disposition of a stock option, the exercise
of a stock option, or the sale, exchange, or other disposition of stock
purchased under a stock option. This division (C)(35)(b)2. applies only to
those amounts constituting ordinary income.
            3.   Any amount not included in wages if the amount is an amount
described in §§ 401(k), 403(b), or 457 of the Internal Revenue Code. This
division (C)(35)(b)3. applies only to employee contributions and employee
deferrals.
            4.   Any amount that is supplemental unemployment compensation
benefits described in § 3402(o)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code and not
included in wages.
            5.   Any amount received that is treated as self-employment income
for federal tax purposes in accordance with § 1402(a)(8) of the Internal
Revenue Code.
            6.   Any amount not included in wages if all of the following
apply:
               a.   For the taxable year the amount is employee compensation
that is earned outside the United States and that either is included in the
taxpayer's gross income for federal income tax purposes or would have been
included in the taxpayer's gross income for such purposes if the taxpayer did
not elect to exclude the income under § 911 of the Internal Revenue Code;
               b.   For no preceding taxable year did the amount constitute
wages as defined in § 312l(a) of the Internal Revenue Code;
               c.   For no succeeding taxable year will the amount constitute
wages; and
               d.   For any taxable year the amount has not otherwise been
added to wages pursuant to either this division (C)(35)(b) or R.C. § 718.03, as
that section existed before the effective date of H.B. 5 of the 130th General
Assembly, March 23, 2015.
      (36)   RELATED ENTITY. Any of the following:
         (a)   An individual stockholder, or a member of the stockholder's
family enumerated in § 318 of the Internal Revenue Code, if the stockholder and
the members of the stockholder's family own directly, indirectly, beneficially,
or constructively, in the aggregate, at least 50% of the value of the
taxpayer's outstanding stock;
         (b)   A stockholder, or a stockholder's partnership, estate, trust, or
corporation, if the stockholder and the stockholder's partnerships, estates,
trusts, or corporations own directly, indirectly, beneficially, or
constructively, in the aggregate, at least 50% of the value of the taxpayer's
outstanding stock;
         (c)   A corporation, or a party related to the corporation in a manner
that would require an attribution of stock from the corporation to the party or
from the party to the corporation under division (C)(36)(d) below, provided the
taxpayer owns directly, indirectly, beneficially, or constructively, at least
50% of the value of the corporation's outstanding stock;
         (d)   The attribution rules described in § 318 of the Internal Revenue
Code apply for the purpose of determining whether the ownership requirements in
divisions (C)(36)(a) to (c) above have been met.
      (37)   RELATED MEMBER. A person that, with respect to the taxpayer during
all or any portion of the taxable year, is either a related entity, a component
member as defined in § 1563(b) of the Internal Revenue Code, or a person to or
from whom there is attribution of stock ownership in accordance with § 1563(e)
of the Internal Revenue Code except, for purposes of determining whether a
person is a related member under this division, "20%" shall be substituted for
"5%" wherever "5%" appears in § 1563(e) of the Internal Revenue Code.
      (38)   RESIDENT. An individual who is domiciled in the municipal
corporation as determined under § 35.03(C).
      (39)   S CORPORATION. A person that has made an election under subchapter
S of Chapter 1 of Subtitle A of the Internal Revenue Code for its taxable year.
      (40)   SCHEDULE C. Internal Revenue Service Schedule C (Form 1040) filed
by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      (41)   SCHEDULE E. Internal Revenue Service Schedule E (Form 1040) filed
by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      (42)   SCHEDULE F. Internal Revenue Service Schedule F (Form 1040) filed
by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      (43)   SINGLE MEMBER LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY. A limited liability
company that has one direct member.
      (44)   SMALL EMPLOYER. Any employer that had total revenue of less than
$500,000 during the preceding taxable year. For purposes of this division,
"total revenue" means receipts of any type or kind, including, but not limited
to, sales receipts; payments; rents; profits; gains, dividends, and other
investment income; compensation; commissions; premiums; money; property;
grants; contributions; donations; gifts; program service revenue; patient
service revenue; premiums; fees, including premium fees and service fees;
tuition payments; unrelated business revenue; reimbursements; any type of
payment from a governmental unit, including grants and other allocations; and
any other similar receipts reported for federal income tax purposes or under
generally accepted accounting principles. SMALL EMPLOYER does not include the
federal government; any state government, including any state agency or
instrumentality; any political subdivision; or any entity treated as a
government for financial accounting and reporting purposes.
      (45)   TAX ADMINISTRATOR. The individual charged with direct
responsibility for administration of an income tax levied by the Village of
Swanton in accordance with this chapter.
      (46)   TAX RETURN PREPARER. Any individual described in § 7701(a)(36) of
the Internal Revenue Code and 26 C.F.R. 301.7701-15.
      (47)   TAXABLE YEAR. The corresponding tax reporting period as prescribed
for the taxpayer under the Internal Revenue Code.
      (48)   (a)   TAXPAYER. A person subject to a tax levied on income by a
municipal corporation in accordance with this chapter. TAXPAYER does not
include a grantor trust or, except as provided in division (C)(48)(b)1. below,
a disregarded entity.
         (b)   1.   A single member limited liability company that is a
disregarded entity for federal tax purposes may be a separate taxpayer from its
single member in all Ohio municipal corporations in which it either filed as a
separate taxpayer or did not file for its taxable year ending in 2003, if all
of the following conditions are met:
               a.   The limited liability company's single member is also a
limited liability company.
               b.   The limited liability company and its single member were
formed and doing business in one or more Ohio municipal corporations for at
least five years before January 1, 2004.
               c.   Not later than December 31, 2004, the limited liability
company and its single member each made an election to be treated as a separate
taxpayer under R.C. § 718.01(L) as that section existed on December 31, 2004.
               d.   The limited liability company was not formed for the
purpose of evading or reducing Ohio municipal corporation income tax liability
of the limited liability company or its single member.
               e.   The Ohio municipal corporation that was the primary place
of business of the sole member of the limited liability company consented to
the election.
            2.   For purposes of division (C)(48)(b)1.e. above, a municipal
corporation was the primary place of business of a limited liability company
if, for the limited liability company's taxable year ending in 2003, its income
tax liability was greater in that municipal corporation than in any other
municipal corporation in Ohio, and that tax liability to that municipal
corporation for its taxable year ending in 2003 was at least $400,000.
      (49)   TAXPAYERS' RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES. The rights provided to
taxpayers in §§
35.09,
35.12,
35.13,
35.19(B),
35.20,
35.21, and R.C. §§ 5717.011 and 5717.03, and the responsibilities of taxpayers
to file, report, withhold, remit, and pay municipal income tax and otherwise
comply with R.C. Chapter 718 and resolutions, ordinances, and rules and
regulations adopted by Village of Swanton for the imposition and administration
of a municipal income tax.
      (50)   VIDEO LOTTERY TERMINAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3770.21.
      (51)   VIDEO LOTTERY TERMINAL SALES AGENT. A lottery sales agent licensed
under R.C. Chapter 3770 to conduct video lottery terminals on behalf of the
state pursuant to R.C. § 3770.21.
(Ord. 2015-29, passed 11-9-2015; Ord. 2023-21, passed 12-11-2023; Ord. 2025-18,
passed 9-8-2025; Ord. 2025-19, passed 10-27-2025)
§ 35.03 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   The income tax levied by the Village of Swanton at a rate of 1.50% is levied
on the municipal taxable income of every person residing in and/or earning and/
or receiving income in the Village.
   (A)   Individuals.
      (1)   For residents of the Village of Swanton, the income tax levied
herein shall be on all income, salaries, qualifying wages, commissions, and
other compensation from whatever source earned or received by the resident,
including the resident's distributive share of the net profit of pass-through
entities owned directly or indirectly by the resident and any net profit of the
resident. This is further detailed in the definition of income (§
35.02(C)(16)).
      (2)   For nonresidents, all income, salaries, qualifying wages,
commissions, and other compensation from whatever source earned or received by
the nonresident for work done, services performed or rendered, or activities
conducted in the municipal corporation, including any net profit of the
nonresident, but excluding the nonresident's distributive share of the net
profit or loss of only pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly by
the nonresident.
      (3)   For residents and nonresidents, income can be reduced to "municipal
taxable income" as defined in §
35.02(C)(21). Exemptions which may apply are specified in §
35.02(C)(12).
   (B)   Refundable credit for nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
      (1)   As used in this division:
         (a)   NONQUALIFIED DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLAN. A compensation plan
described in § 3121(v)(2)(C) of the Internal Revenue Code.
         (b)   QUALIFYING LOSS. The amount of compensation attributable to a
taxpayer's nonqualified deferred compensation plan, less the receipt of money
and property attributable to distributions from the nonqualified deferred
compensation plan. Full loss is sustained if no distribution of money and
property is made by the nonqualified deferred compensation plan. The taxpayer
sustains a QUALIFYING LOSS only in the taxable year in which the taxpayer
receives the final distribution of money and property pursuant to that
nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
         (c)   1.   QUALIFYING TAX RATE. The applicable tax rate for the
taxable year for the which the taxpayer paid income tax to the Village of
Swanton with respect to any portion of the total amount of compensation the
payment of which is deferred pursuant to a nonqualified deferred compensation
plan.
            2.   If different tax rates applied for different taxable years,
then the QUALIFYING TAX RATE is a weighted average of those different tax
rates. The weighted average shall be based upon the tax paid to the Village of
Swanton each year with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
         (d)   REFUNDABLE CREDIT. The amount of the Village of Swanton income
tax that was paid on the non-distributed portion, if any, of a nonqualified
deferred compensation plan.
      (2)   If, in addition to the Village of Swanton, a taxpayer has paid tax
to other municipal corporations with respect to the nonqualified deferred
compensation plan, the amount of the credit that a taxpayer may claim from each
municipal corporation shall be calculated on the basis of each municipal
corporation's proportionate share of the total municipal corporation income tax
paid by the taxpayer to all municipal corporations with respect to the
nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
      (3)   In no case shall the amount of the credit allowed under this
section exceed the cumulative income tax that a taxpayer has paid to the
Village of Swanton for all taxable years with respect to the nonqualified
deferred compensation plan.
      (4)   The credit allowed under this division is allowed only to the
extent the taxpayer's qualifying loss is attributable to:
         (a)   The insolvency or bankruptcy of the employer who had established
the nonqualified deferred compensation plan; or
         (b)   The employee's failure or inability to satisfy all of the
employer's terms and conditions necessary to receive the nonqualified deferred
compensation.
   (C)   Domicile.
      (1)   (a)   An individual is presumed to be domiciled in the Village of
Swanton for all or part of a taxable year if the individual was domiciled in
Village of Swanton on the last day of the immediately preceding taxable year or
if the Tax Administrator reasonably concludes that the individual is domiciled
in the Village of Swanton for all or part of the taxable year.
         (b)   An individual may rebut the presumption of domicile described in
division (C)(1)(a) above if the individual establishes by a preponderance of
the evidence that the individual was not domiciled in the Village of Swanton
for all or part of the taxable year.
      (2)   For the purpose of determining whether an individual is domiciled
in the Village of Swanton for all or part of a taxable year, factors that may
be considered include, but are not limited to, the following:
         (a)   The individual's domicile in other taxable years;
         (b)   The location at which the individual is registered to vote;
         (c)   The address on the individual's driver's license;
         (d)   The location of real estate for which the individual claimed a
property tax exemption or reduction allowed on the basis of the individual's
residence or domicile;
         (e)   The location and value of abodes owned or leased by the
individual;
         (f)   Declarations, written or oral, made by the individual regarding
the individual's residency;
         (g)   The primary location at which the individual is employed.
         (h)   The location of educational institutions attended by the
individual's dependents as defined in § 152 of the Internal Revenue Code, to
the extent that tuition paid to such educational institution is based on the
residency of the individual or the individual's spouse in the municipal
corporation where the educational institution is located;
         (i)   The number of contact periods the individual has with the
Village of Swanton. For the purposes of this division, an individual has one
"contact period" with Village if the individual is away overnight from the
individual's abode located outside of the Village and while away overnight from
that abode spends at least some portion, however minimal, of each of two
consecutive days in the Village.
      (3)   All additional applicable factors are provided in the rules and
regulations.
   (D)   Businesses.
      (1)   This division applies to any taxpayer engaged in a business or
profession in the Village of Swanton, unless the taxpayer is an individual who
resides in the Village or the taxpayer is an electric company, combined
company, or telephone company that is subject to and required to file reports
under R.C. Chapter 5745.
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (D)(1)(d) and (D)(2)
below, net profit from a business or profession conducted both within and
without the boundaries of the Village of Swanton shall be considered as having
a taxable situs in the Village for purposes of municipal income taxation in the
same proportion as the average ratio of the following:
            1.   a.   The average original cost of the real property and
tangible personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or
profession in the Village of Swanton during the taxable period to the average
original cost of all of the real and tangible personal property owned or used
by the taxpayer in the business or profession during the same period, wherever
situated.
               b.   As used in division (D)(1)(a)1.a. above, tangible personal
or real property shall include property rented or leased by the taxpayer and
the value of such property shall be determined by multiplying the annual rental
thereon by eight;
            2.   Wages, salaries, and other compensation paid during the
taxable period to individuals employed in the business or profession for
services performed in the Village of Swanton to wages, salaries, and other
compensation paid during the same period to individuals employed in the
business or profession, wherever the individual's services are performed,
excluding compensation from which taxes are not required to be withheld under §
35.04(B);
            3.   Total gross receipts of the business or profession from sales
and rentals made and services performed during the taxable period in the
Village of Swanton to total gross receipts of the business or profession during
the same period from sales, rentals, and services, wherever made or performed.
         (b)   1.   If the apportionment factors described in division (D)(1)
(a) above do not fairly represent the extent of a taxpayer's business activity
in the Village of Swanton, the taxpayer may request, or the Tax Administrator
of the Village may require, that the taxpayer use, with respect to all or any
portion of the income of the taxpayer, an alternative apportionment method
involving one or more of the following:
               a.   Separate accounting;
               b.   The exclusion of one or more of the factors;
               c.   The inclusion of one or more additional factors that would
provide for a more fair apportionment of the income of the taxpayer to the
municipal corporation;
               d.   A modification of one or more of the factors.
            2.   A taxpayer request to use an alternative apportionment method
shall be in writing and shall accompany a tax return, timely filed appeal of an
assessment, or timely filed amended tax return. The taxpayer may use the
requested alternative method unless the Tax Administrator denies the request in
an assessment issued within the period prescribed by §
35.12(A).
            3.   The Tax Administrator may require a taxpayer to use an
alternative apportionment method as described in division (D)(1)(b)1. above,
but only by issuing an assessment to the taxpayer within the period prescribed
by §
35.12(A).
            4.   Nothing in this division (D)(1)(b) nullifies or otherwise
affects any alternative apportionment arrangement approved by the Tax
Administrator or otherwise agreed upon by both the Tax Administrator and
taxpayer before January 1, 2016.
         (c)   As used in division (D)(1)(a)2. above, "wages, salaries, and
other compensation" includes only wages, salaries, or other compensation paid
to an employee for services performed at any of the following locations:
            1.   A location that is owned, controlled, or used by, rented to,
or under the possession of one of the following:
               a.   The employer;
               b.   A vendor, customer, client, or patient of the employer, or
a related member of such a vendor, customer, client, or patient;
               c.   A vendor, customer, client, or patient of a person
described in (D)(1)(c)1.b. above, or a related member of such a vendor,
customer, client, or patient.
            2.   Any location at which a trial, appeal, hearing, investigation,
inquiry, review, courtmartial, or similar administrative, judicial, or
legislative matter or proceeding is being conducted, provided that the
compensation is paid for services performed for, or on behalf of, the employer
or that the employee's presence at the location directly or indirectly benefits
the employer;
            3.   Any other location, if the Tax Administrator determines that
the employer directed the employee to perform the services at the other
location in lieu of a location described in division (D)(1)(c)1. or 2. above
solely in order to avoid or reduce the employer's municipal income tax
liability. If the Tax Administrator makes such a determination, the employer
may dispute the determination by establishing, by a preponderance of the
evidence, that the Tax Administrator's determination was unreasonable.
         (d)   For the purposes of division (D)(1)(a)3. above, and except as
provided in division (D)(2) below, receipts from sales and rentals made and
services performed shall be sitused to a municipal corporation as follows:
            1.   Gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property
shall be sitused to the municipal corporation in which the sale originated. For
the purposes of this division, a sale of property originates in the Village of
Swanton if, regardless of where title passes, the property meets any of the
following criteria:
               a.   The property is shipped to or delivered within the Village
of Swanton from a stock of goods located within the Village of Swanton.
               b.   The property is delivered within the Village of Swanton
from a location outside the Village of Swanton, provided the taxpayer is
regularly engaged through its own employees in the solicitation or promotion of
sales within the Village of Swanton and the sales result from such solicitation
or promotion.
               c.   The property is shipped from a place within the Village of
Swanton to purchasers outside the Village of Swanton, provided that the
taxpayer is not, through its own employees, regularly engaged in the
solicitation or promotion of sales at the place where delivery is made.
            2.   Gross receipts from the sale of services shall be sitused to
the Village of Swanton to the extent that such services are performed in the
Village of Swanton.
            3.   To the extent included in income, gross receipts from the sale
of real property located in the Village of Swanton shall be sitused to the
Village of Swanton.
            4.   To the extent included in income, gross receipts from rents
and royalties from real property located in the Village of Swanton shall be
sitused to the Village.
            5.   Gross receipts from rents and royalties from tangible personal
property shall be sitused to the Village of Swanton based upon the extent to
which the tangible personal property is used in the Village.
         (e)   The net profit received by an individual taxpayer from the
rental of real estate owned directly by the individual, or by a disregarded
entity owned by the individual, shall be subject to the Village's tax only if
the property generating the net profit is located in the Village of Swanton or
if the individual taxpayer that receives the net profit is a resident of the
Village. The Village of Swanton shall allow such taxpayers to elect to use
separate accounting for the purpose of calculating net profit sitused under
this division to the municipal corporation in which the property is located.
         (f)   1.   Commissions received by a real estate agent or broker
relating to the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate shall be sitused to the
municipal corporation in which the real estate is located. Net profit reported
by the real estate agent or broker shall be allocated to the Village of
Swanton, if applicable, based upon the ratio of the commissions the agent or
broker received from the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate located in the
Village to the commissions received from the sale, purchase, or lease of real
estate everywhere in the taxable year.
            2.   An individual who is a resident of the Village of Swanton
shall report the individual's net profit from all real estate activity on the
individual's annual tax return for the Village of Swanton. The individual may
claim a credit for taxes the individual paid on such net profit to another
municipal corporation to the extent that such a credit is allowed under the
Village's income tax ordinance.
         (g)   When calculating the ratios described in division (D)(1)(a)
above for the purposes of that division or division (D)(1)(b) above, the owner
of a disregarded entity shall include in the owner's ratios the property,
payroll, and gross receipts of such disregarded entity.
      (2)   (a)   For the purpose of this division, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
            1.   QUALIFYING REMOTE EMPLOYEE OR OWNER. An individual who is an
employee of a taxpayer or who is a partner or member holding an ownership
interest in a taxpayer that is treated as a partnership for federal income tax
purposes, provided that the individual meets both of the following criteria:
               a.   The taxpayer has assigned the individual to a qualifying
reporting location.
               b.   The individual is permitted or required to perform services
for the taxpayer at a qualifying remote work location.
            2.   QUALIFYING REMOTE WORK LOCATION. A permanent or temporary
location at which an employee or owner chooses or is required to perform
services for the taxpayer, other than a reporting location of the taxpayer or
any other location owned or controlled by a customer or client of the taxpayer.
QUALIFYING REMOTE WORK LOCATION may include the residence of an employee or
owner and may be located outside of a municipal corporation that imposes an
income tax in accordance with this chapter. An employee or owner may have more
than one QUALIFYING REMOTE WORK LOCATION during a taxable year.
            3.   REPORTING LOCATION. Either of the following:
               a.   A permanent or temporary place of doing business, such as
an office, warehouse, storefront, construction site, or similar location, that
is owned or controlled directly or indirectly by the taxpayer;
               b.   Any location in this state owned or controlled by a
customer or client of the taxpayer, provided that the taxpayer is required to
withhold taxes under § 35.04, on qualifying wages paid to an employee for the
performance of personal services at that location.
            4.   QUALIFYING REPORTING LOCATION. One of the following:
               a.   The reporting location in this state at which an employee
or owner performs services for the taxpayer on a regular or periodic basis
during the taxable year;
               b.   If no reporting location exists in this state for an
employee or owner under division (D)(2)(a)4.a. above, the reporting location in
this state at which the employee's or owner's supervisor regularly or
periodically reports during the taxable year;
               c.   If no reporting location exists in this state for an
employee or owner under division (D)(2)(a)4.a. or b. above, the location that
the taxpayer otherwise assigns as the employee's or owner's qualifying
reporting location, provided the assignment is made in good faith and is
recorded and maintained in the taxpayer's business records. A taxpayer may
change the qualifying reporting location designated for an employee or owner
under this division at any time.
         (b)   1.   For tax years ending on or after December 31, 2023, a
taxpayer may elect to apply the provisions of this division to the
apportionment of its net profit from a business or profession. For taxpayers
that make this election, the provisions of division (D)(1) above apply to such
apportionment except as otherwise provided in this division.
            2.   A taxpayer shall make the election allowed under this division
in writing on or with the taxpayer's net profit return or, if applicable, a
timely filed amended net profit return or a timely filed appeal of an
assessment. The election applies to the taxable year for which that return or
appeal is filed and for all subsequent taxable years, until the taxpayer
revokes the election.
            3.   The taxpayer shall make the initial election with the tax
administrator of each municipal corporation with which, after applying the
apportionment provisions authorized in this division, the taxpayer is required
to file a net profit tax return for that taxable year. A taxpayer shall not be
required to notify the tax administrator of a municipal corporation in which a
qualifying remote employee's or owner's qualifying remote work location is
located, unless the taxpayer is otherwise required to file a net profit return
with that municipal corporation due to business operations that are unrelated
to the employee's or owner's activity at the qualifying remote work location.
            4.   After the taxpayer makes the initial election, the election
applies to every municipal corporation in which the taxpayer conducts business.
The taxpayer shall not be required to file a net profit return with a municipal
corporation solely because a qualifying remote employee's or owner's qualifying
remote work location is located in such municipal corporation.
            5.   Nothing in this division prohibits a taxpayer from making a
new election under this division after properly revoking a prior election.
         (c)   For the purpose of calculating the ratios described in division
(D)(1)(a) above, all of the following apply to a taxpayer that has made the
election described in division (D)(2)(b):
            1.   For the purpose of division (D)(1)(a)1. above, the average
original cost of any tangible personal property used by a qualifying remote
employee or owner at that individual's qualifying remote work location shall be
sitused to that individual's qualifying reporting location.
            2.   For the purpose of division (D)(1)(a)2. above, any wages,
salaries, and other compensation paid during the taxable period to a qualifying
remote employee or owner for services performed at that individual's qualifying
remote work location shall be sitused to that individual's qualifying reporting
location.
            3.   For the purpose of division (D)(1)(a)3. above, and
notwithstanding division (D)(1)(d) above, any gross receipts of the business or
profession from services performed during the taxable period by a qualifying
remote employee or owner for services performed at that individual's qualifying
remote work location shall be sitused to that individual's qualifying reporting
location.
         (d)   Nothing in this division prevents a taxpayer from requesting, or
a Tax Administrator from requiring, that the taxpayer use, with respect to all
or a portion of the income of the taxpayer, an alternative apportionment method
as described in division (D)(1)(b) above. However, a Tax Administrator shall
not require an alternative apportionment method in such a manner that it would
require a taxpayer to file a net profit return with a municipal corporation
solely because a qualifying remote employee's or owner's qualifying remote work
location is located in that municipal corporation.
         (e)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, nothing in this
division is intended to affect the withholding of taxes on qualifying wages
pursuant to §
35.04.
(Ord. 2015-29, passed 11-9-2015; Ord. 2017-38, passed 12-11-2017; Ord. 2023-21,
passed 12-11-2023; Ord. 2025-18, passed 9-8-2025; Ord. 2025-19, passed 10-27-
2025)
§ 35.04 COLLECTION AT SOURCE.
   (A)   Withholding provisions.
      (1)   Each employer, agent of an employer, or other payer located or
doing business in the Village of Swanton shall withhold an income tax from the
qualifying wages earned and/or received by each employee in the Village. Except
for qualifying wages for which withholding is not required under §
35.03 or division (A)(2)(d) or (A)(2)(f) below, the tax shall be withheld at
the rate, specified in §
35.03, of 1.50%. An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer shall deduct
and withhold the tax from qualifying wages on the date that the employer,
agent, or other payer directly, indirectly, or constructively pays the
qualifying wages to, or credits the qualifying wages to the benefit of, the
employee.
      (2)   (a)   Except as provided in division (A)(2)(b) below, an employer,
agent of an employer, or other payer shall remit to the Tax Administrator of
the Village the greater of the income taxes deducted and withheld or the income
taxes required to be deducted and withheld by the employer, agent, or other
payer according to the following schedule:
            1.   a.   Taxes required to be deducted and withheld shall be
remitted monthly to the Tax Administrator if the total taxes deducted and
withheld or required to be deducted and withheld by the employer, agent, or
other payer on behalf of the Village of Swanton in the preceding calendar year
exceeded $2,399, or if the total amount of taxes deducted and withheld or
required to be deducted and withheld on behalf of the Village in any month of
the preceding calendar quarter exceeded $200.
               b.   Payment under division (A)(2)(a)1.a. above shall be made so
that the payment is received by the Tax Administrator not later than 15 days
after the last day of each month for which the tax was withheld.
            2.   Any employer, agent of an employer, or other payer not
required to make payments under division (A)(2)(a)1. above of taxes required to
be deducted and withheld shall make quarterly payments to the Tax Administrator
not later than the fifteenth day of the month following the end of each
calendar quarter.
         (b)   If the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer is
required to make payments electronically for the purpose of paying federal
taxes withheld on payments to employees under § 6302 of the Internal Revenue
Code, 26 C.F.R. 31.6302-1, or any other federal statute or regulation, the
payment shall be made by electronic funds transfer to the Tax Administrator of
all taxes deducted and withheld on behalf of the Village of Swanton. The
payment of tax by electronic funds transfer under this division does not affect
an employer's, agent's, or other payer's obligation to file any return as
required under this section.
         (c)   An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer shall make and
file a return showing the amount of tax withheld by the employer, agent, or
other payer from the qualifying wages of each employee and remitted to the Tax
Administrator. A return filed by an employer, agent, or other payer under this
division shall be accepted by Tax Administrator and the Village of Swanton as
the return required of an non-resident employee whose sole income subject to
the tax under this chapter is the qualifying wages reported by the employee's
employer, agent of an employer, or other payer.
         (d)   An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer is not
required to withhold the Village of Swanton income tax with respect to an
individual's disqualifying disposition of an incentive stock option if, at the
time of the disqualifying disposition, the individual is not an employee of
either the corporation with respect to whose stock the option has been issued
or of such corporation's successor entity.
         (e)   1.   An employee is not relieved from liability for a tax by the
failure of the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer to withhold the
tax as required under this chapter or by the employer's, agent's, or other
payer's exemption from the requirement to withhold the tax.
            2.   The failure of an employer, agent of an employer, or other
payer to remit to the Village of Swanton the tax withheld relieves the employee
from liability for that tax unless the employee colluded with the employer,
agent, or other payer in connection with the failure to remit the tax withheld.
         (f)   Compensation deferred before June 26, 2003, is not subject to
the Village of Swanton income tax or income tax withholding requirement to the
extent the deferred compensation does not constitute qualifying wages at the
time the deferred compensation is paid or distributed.
         (g)   Each employer, agent of an employer, or other payer required to
withhold taxes is liable for the payment of that amount required to be
withheld, whether or not such taxes have been withheld, and such amount shall
be deemed to be held in trust for the Village of Swanton until such time as the
withheld amount is remitted to the Tax Administrator.
         (h)   On or before the last day of February of each year, an employer
shall file a withholding reconciliation return with the Tax Administrator
listing:
            1.   The names, addresses, and social security numbers of all
employees from whose qualifying wages tax was withheld or should have been
withheld for the Village of Swanton during the preceding calendar year;
            2.   The amount of tax withheld, if any, from each such employee,
the total amount of qualifying wages paid to such employee during the preceding
calendar year;
            3.   The name of every other municipal corporation for which tax
was withheld or should have been withheld from such employee during the
preceding calendar year;
            4.   Any other information required for federal income tax
reporting purposes on Internal Revenue Service Form W-2 or its equivalent form
with respect to such employee;
            5.   Other information as may be required by the Tax Administrator.
         (i)   The officer or the employee of the employer, agent of an
employer, or other payer with control or direct supervision of or charged with
the responsibility for withholding the tax or filing the reports and making
payments as required by this section, shall be personally liable for a failure
to file a report or pay the tax due as required by this section. The
dissolution of an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer does not
discharge the officer's or employee's liability for a failure of the employer,
agent of an employer, or other payer to file returns or pay any tax due.
         (j)   An employer is required to deduct and withhold the Village of
Swanton income tax on tips and gratuities received by the employer's employees
and constituting qualifying wages, but only to the extent that the tips and
gratuities are under the employer's control. For the purposes of this division,
a tip or gratuity is under the employer's control if the tip or gratuity is
paid by the customer to the employer for subsequent remittance to the employee,
or if the customer pays the tip or gratuity by credit card, debit card, or
other electronic means.
         (k)   The Tax Administrator shall consider any tax withheld by an
employer at the request of an employee, when such tax is not otherwise required
to be withheld by this chapter, to be tax required to be withheld and remitted
for the purposes of this section
   (B)   Occasional entrant - withholding.
      (1)   For the purpose of this division, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         (a)   EMPLOYER. Includes a person that is a related member to or of an
employer.
         (b)   FIXED LOCATION. A permanent place of doing business in this
state, such as an office, warehouse, storefront, or similar location owned or
controlled by an employer.
         (c)   1.   PRINCIPAL PLACE OF WORK. The fixed location to which an
employee is required to report for employment duties on a regular and ordinary
basis. If the employee is not required to report for employment duties on a
regular and ordinary basis to a fixed location, PRINCIPAL PLACE OF WORK means
the worksite location in this state to which the employee is required to report
for employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis. If the employee is not
required to report for employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis to a
fixed location or worksite location, PRINCIPAL PLACE OF WORK means the location
in this state at which the employee spends the greatest number of days in a
calendar year performing services for or on behalf of the employee's employer.
            2.   If there is not a single municipal corporation in which the
employee spent the "greatest number of days in a calendar year" performing
services for or on behalf of the employer, but instead there are two or more
municipal corporations in which the employee spent an identical number of days
that is greater than the number of days the employee spent in any other
municipal corporation, the employer shall allocate any of the employee's
qualifying wages subject to division (B)(1)(b)1.a below among those two or more
municipal corporations. The allocation shall be made using any fair and
reasonable method, including, but not limited to, an equal allocation among
such municipal corporations or an allocation based upon the time spent or sales
made by the employee in each such municipal corporation. A municipal
corporation to which qualifying wages are allocated under this division shall
be the employee's PRINCIPAL PLACE OF WORK with respect to those qualifying
wages for the purposes of this section.
            3.   For the purposes of this division, the location at which an
employee spends a particular day shall be determined in accordance with
division (B)(2)(b) below, except that "location" shall be substituted for
"municipal corporation" wherever "municipal corporation" appears in that
division.
         (d)   PROFESSIONAL ATHLETE. An athlete who performs services in a
professional athletic event for wages or other remuneration.
         (e)   PROFESSIONAL ENTERTAINER. A person who performs services in the
professional performing arts for wages or other remuneration on a per-event
basis.
         (f)   PUBLIC FIGURE. A person of prominence who performs services at
discrete events, such as speeches, public appearances, or similar events, for
wages or other remuneration on a per event basis.
         (g)   WORKSITE LOCATION. A construction site or other temporary
worksite in this state at which the employer provides services for more than 20
days during the calendar year. WORKSITE LOCATION does not include the home of
an employee.
      (2)   (a)   Subject to divisions (B)(3), (B)(5), and (B)(6) below, an
employer is not required to withhold the Village of Swanton income tax on
qualifying wages paid to an employee for the performance of personal services
in the Village if the employee performed such services in the Village on 20 or
fewer days in a calendar year, unless one of the following conditions applies:
            1.   The employee's principal place of work is located in the
Village of Swanton.
            2.   The employee performed services at one or more presumed
worksite locations in the Village of Swanton. For the purposes of this
division, PRESUMED WORKSITE LOCATION means a construction site or other
temporary worksite in the Village of Swanton at which the employer provides or
provided services that can reasonably be, or would have been, expected by the
employer to last more than 20 days in a calendar year. Services can "reasonably
be expected by the employer to last more than 20 days" if either of the
following applies at the time the services commence:
               a.   The nature of the services are such that it will require
more than 20 days of the services to complete the services;
               b.   The agreement between the employer and its customer to
perform services at a location requires the employer to perform the services at
the location for more than 20 days.
            3.   The employee is a resident of the Village of Swanton and has
requested that the employer withhold tax from the employee's qualifying wages
as provided in this section.
            4.   The employee is a professional athlete, professional
entertainer, or public figure, and the qualifying wages are paid for the
performance of services in the employee's capacity as a professional athlete,
professional entertainer, or public figure.
         (b)   For the purposes of division (B)(2)(a) above, an employee shall
be considered to have spent a day performing services in the Village of Swanton
only if the employee spent more time performing services for or on behalf of
the employer in the Village than in any other municipal corporation on that
day. For the purposes of determining the amount of time an employee spent in a
particular location, the time spent performing one or more of the following
activities shall be considered to have been spent at the employee's principal
place of work:
            1.   Traveling to the location at which the employee will first
perform services for the employer for the day;
            2.   Traveling from a location at which the employee was performing
services for the employer to any other location;
            3.   Traveling from any location to another location in order to
pick up or load, for the purpose of transportation or delivery, property that
has been purchased, sold, assembled, fabricated, repaired, refurbished,
processed, remanufactured, or improved by the employee's employer;
            4.   Transporting or delivering property described in division (B)
(2)(b)3. above, provided that, upon delivery of the property, the employee does
not temporarily or permanently affix the property to real estate owned, used,
or controlled by a person other than the employee's employer;
            5.   Traveling from the location at which the employee makes the
employee's final delivery or pick-up for the day to either the employee's
principal place of work or a location at which the employee will not perform
services for the employer.
      (3)   If the principal place of work of an employee is located in another
Ohio municipal corporation that imposes an income tax, the exception from
withholding requirements described in division (B)(2)(a) above shall apply only
if, with respect to the employee's qualifying wages described in that division,
the employer withholds and remits tax on such qualifying wages to that
municipal corporation.
      (4)   (a)   Except as provided in division (B)(4)(b) below, if, during a
calendar year, the number of days an employee spends performing personal
services in the Village of Swanton exceeds the 20-day threshold, the employer
shall withhold and remit tax to the Village of Swanton for any subsequent days
in that calendar year on which the employer pays qualifying wages to the
employee for personal services performed in the Village.
         (b)   An employer required to begin withholding tax for the Village of
Swanton under division (B)(4)(a) above may elect to withhold tax for the
Village for the first 20 days on which the employer paid qualifying wages to
the employee for personal services performed in the Village of Swanton.
      (5)   (a)   If an employer's fixed location is in the Village of Swanton
and the employer qualifies as a small employer as defined in §
35.02, the employer shall withhold municipal income tax on all of the
employee's qualifying wages for a taxable year and remit that tax only to the
Village, regardless of the number of days which the employee worked outside the
corporate boundaries of the Village of Swanton.
         (b)   To determine whether an employer qualifies as a small employer
for a taxable year, a the employer will be required to provide the Tax
Administrator with the employer's federal income tax return for the preceding
taxable year.
      (6)   Divisions (B)(2)(a) and (B)(4) above shall not apply to the extent
that a Tax Administrator and an employer enter into an agreement regarding the
manner in which the employer shall comply with the requirements of §
35.04.
(Ord. 2015-29, passed 11-9-2015; Ord. 2017-38, passed 12-11-2017; Ord. 2023-21,
passed 12-11-2023; Ord. 2025-18, passed 9-8-2025; Ord. 2025-19, passed 10-27-
2025)  Penalty, see §
35.99
§ 35.05 ANNUAL RETURN; FILING.
   (A)   An annual Village of Swanton income tax return shall be completed and
filed by every individual taxpayer and any taxpayer that is not an individual
for each taxable year for which the taxpayer is subject to the tax, whether or
not a tax is due thereon.
      (1)   The Tax Administrator may accept on behalf of all nonresident
individual taxpayers a return filed by an employer, agent of an employer, or
other payer under §
35.04 when the nonresident individual taxpayer's sole income subject to the tax
is the qualifying wages reported by the employer, agent of an employer, or
other payer, and no additional tax is due to the Village.
      (2)   Retirees having no municipal taxable income for the Village of
Swanton income tax purposes may file with the Tax Administrator a written
exemption from these filing requirements on a form prescribed by the Tax
Administrator. The written exemption shall indicate the date of retirement and
the entity from which retired. The exemption shall be in effect until such time
as the retiree receives municipal taxable income taxable to the Village, at
which time the retiree shall be required to comply with all applicable
provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   If an individual is deceased, any return or notice required of that
individual shall be completed and filed by that decedent's executor,
administrator, or other person charged with the property of that decedent.
   (C)   If an individual is unable to complete and file a return or notice
required by the Village of Swanton, the return or notice required of that
individual shall be completed and filed by the individual's duly authorized
agent, guardian, conservator, fiduciary, or other person charged with the care
of the person or property of that individual.
   (D)   Returns or notices required of an estate or a trust shall be completed
and filed by the fiduciary of the estate or trust.
   (E)   The Village of Swanton shall permit spouses to file a joint return.
   (F)   (1)   Each return required to be filed under this division shall
contain the signature of the taxpayer or the taxpayer's duly authorized agent
and of the person who prepared the return for the taxpayer. The return shall
include the taxpayer's social security number or taxpayer identification
number. Each return shall be verified by a declaration under penalty of
perjury.
      (2)   The Tax Administrator shall require a taxpayer who is an individual
to include, with each annual return, and amended return, copies of the
following documents: all of the taxpayer's Internal Revenue Service Form W-2,
"Wage and Tax Statements," including all information reported on the taxpayer's
federal W-2, as well as taxable wages reported or withheld for any municipal
corporation; the taxpayer's Internal Revenue Service Form 1040; and, with
respect to an amended tax return, any other documentation necessary to support
the adjustments made in the amended return. An individual taxpayer who files
the annual return required by this section electronically is not required to
provide paper copies of any of the foregoing to the Tax Administrator unless
the Tax Administrator requests such copies after the return has been filed.
      (3)   (a)   The Tax Administrator may require a taxpayer that is not an
individual to include, with each annual net profit return, amended net profit
return, or request for refund required under this section, copies of only the
following documents: the taxpayer's Internal Revenue Service Form 1041, Form
1065, Form 1120, Form 1120-REIT, Form 1120F, or Form 1120S, and, with respect
to an amended tax return or refund request, any other documentation necessary
to support the refund request or the adjustments made in the amended return.
         (b)   A taxpayer that is not an individual and that files an annual
net profit return electronically through the Ohio Business Gateway or in some
other manner shall either mail the documents required under this division to
the Tax Administrator at the time of filing or, if electronic submission is
available, submit the documents electronically through the Ohio Business
Gateway.
      (4)   After a taxpayer files a tax return, the Tax Administrator may
request, and the taxpayer shall provide, any information, statements, or
documents required by the Village of Swanton to determine and verify the
taxpayer's municipal income tax liability. The requirements imposed under this
division (F) apply regardless of whether the taxpayer files on a generic form
or on a form prescribed by the Tax Administrator.
   (G)   (1)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each
individual income tax return required to be filed under this section shall be
completed and filed as required by the Tax Administrator on or before the date
prescribed for the filing of state individual income tax returns under R.C. §
5747.08(G). The taxpayer shall complete and file the return or notice on forms
prescribed by the Tax Administrator or on generic forms, together with
remittance made payable to the Village of Swanton. No remittance is required if
the net amount due is $10 or less.
         (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each annual net
profit return required to be filed under this section by a taxpayer that is not
an individual shall be completed and filed as required by the Tax Administrator
on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month following the end of the
taxpayer's taxable year. The taxpayer shall complete and file the return or
notice on forms prescribed by the Tax Administrator or on generic forms,
together with remittance made payable to the Village of Swanton. No remittance
is required if the net amount due is $10 or less.
      (2)   Any taxpayer that has duly requested an automatic six-month
extension for filing the taxpayer's federal income tax return shall
automatically receive an extension for the filing of the Village's income tax
return. The extended due date of the Village's income tax return shall be the
fifteenth day of the tenth month after the last day of the taxable year to
which the return relates. For tax years ending on or after January 1, 2023, the
extended due date of the Village of Swanton's income tax return for a taxpayer
that is not an individual shall be the fifteenth day of the eleventh month
after the last day of the taxable year to which the return relates. An
extension of time to file under this division is not an extension of the time
to pay any tax due unless the Tax Administrator grants an extension of that
date.
         (a)   A copy of the federal extension request shall be included with
the filing of the Village of Swanton's income tax return.
         (b)   A taxpayer that has not requested or received a six-month
extension for filing the taxpayer's federal income tax return may submit a
written request that the Tax Administrator grant the taxpayer a six-month
extension of the date for filing the taxpayer's Village income tax return. If
the request is received by the Tax Administrator on or before the date the
Village income tax return is due, the Tax Administrator shall grant the
taxpayer's requested extension.
      (3)   If the Tax Commissioner extends for all taxpayers the date for
filing state income tax returns under R.C. § 5747.08(G), a taxpayer shall
automatically receive an extension for the filing of the Village's income tax
return. The extended due date of the Village's income tax return shall be the
same as the extended due date of the state income tax return.
      (4)   If the Tax Administrator considers it necessary in order to ensure
the payment of the tax imposed by the Village of Swanton, the Tax Administrator
may require taxpayers to file returns and make payments otherwise than as
provided in this division, including taxpayers not otherwise required to file
annual returns.
      (5)   (a)   If a taxpayer receives an extension for the filing of a
municipal income tax return under division (G)(2), (3), or (4) above, the Tax
Administrator shall not make any inquiry or send any notice to the taxpayer
with regard to the return on or before the date the taxpayer files the return
or on or before the extended due date to file the return, whichever occurs
first.
         (b)   If a Tax Administrator violates this division (G)(5), the
municipal corporation shall reimburse the taxpayer for any reasonable costs
incurred to respond to such inquiry or notice, up to $150.
         (c)   This division (G)(5) does not apply to an extension received
under division (G)(2) above if the Tax Administrator has actual knowledge that
the taxpayer failed to file for a federal extension as required to receive the
extension under division (G)(2) above or failed to file for an extension under
division (G)(2)(b) above.
      (6)   To the extent that any provision in this division (G) of this
section conflicts with any provision in division (N) below, the provisions in
division (N) prevail.
   (H)   (1)   For taxable years beginning after 2015, the Village of Swanton
shall not require a taxpayer to remit tax with respect to net profits if the
net amount due is $10 or less.
      (2)   Any taxpayer not required to remit tax to the Village of Swanton
for a taxable year pursuant to division (H)(1) above shall file with Village an
annual net profit return under division (F)(3) above.
   (I)   If a payment is required to be made by electronic funds transfer, the
payment is considered to be made when the payment is credited to an account
designated by the Tax Administrator for the receipt of tax payments, except
that, when a payment made by electronic funds transfer is delayed due to
circumstances not under the control of the taxpayer, the payment is considered
to be made when the taxpayer submitted the payment. This division shall not
apply to payments required to be made under §
35.04(A)(2)(d) or provisions for semi-monthly withholding.
   (J)   Taxes withheld for the Village of Swanton by an employer, the agent of
an employer, or other payer as described in §
35.04 shall be allowed to the taxpayer as credits against payment of the tax
imposed on the taxpayer by the Village, unless the amounts withheld were not
remitted to the Village of Swanton and the recipient colluded with the
employer, agent, or other payer m connection with the failure to remit the
amounts withheld.
   (K)   Each return required by the Village of Swanton to be filed in
accordance with this division shall include a box that the taxpayer may check
to authorize another person, including a tax return preparer who prepared the
return, to communicate with the Tax Administrator about matters pertaining to
the return.
   (L)   The Tax Administrator shall accept for filing a generic form of any
income tax return, report, or document required by the Village of Swanton,
provided that the generic form, once completed and filed, contains all of the
information required by ordinance, resolution, or rules and regulations adopted
by Village or the Tax Administrator, and provided that the taxpayer or tax
return preparer filing the generic form otherwise complies with the provisions
of this chapter and of the Village's ordinances, resolutions, or rules and
regulations governing the filing of returns, reports, or documents.
   (M)   Filing via Ohio Business Gateway.
      (1)   Any taxpayer subject to municipal income taxation with respect to
the taxpayer's net profit from a business or profession may file the Village's
income tax return, estimated municipal income tax return, or extension for
filing a municipal income tax return, and may make payment of amounts shown to
be due on such returns, by using the Ohio Business Gateway.
      (2)   Any employer, agent of an employer, or other payer may report the
amount of municipal income tax withheld from qualifying wages, and may make
remittance of such amounts, by using the Ohio Business Gateway.
      (3)   Nothing in this section affects the due dates for filing employer
withholding tax returns.
   (N)   Extension for service in or for the armed forces.
      (1)   Each member of the national guard of any state and each member of a
reserve component of the armed forces of the United States called to active
duty pursuant to an executive order issued by the President of the United
States or an act of the Congress of the United States, and each civilian
serving as support personnel in a combat zone or contingency operation in
support of the armed forces, may apply to the Tax Administrator of the Village
of Swanton for both an extension of time for filing of the return and an
extension of time for payment of taxes required by the Village during the
period of the member's or civilian's duty service, and for 180 days thereafter.
The application shall be filed on or before the one hundred eightieth day after
the member's or civilian's duty terminates. An applicant shall provide such
evidence as the Tax Administrator considers necessary to demonstrate
eligibility for the extension.
      (2)   (a)   If the Tax Administrator ascertains that an applicant is
qualified for an extension under this section, the Tax Administrator shall
enter into a contract with the applicant for the payment of the tax in
installments that begin on the one hundred eighty-first day after the
applicant's active duty or service terminates. The Tax Administrator may
prescribe such contract terms as the Tax Administrator considers appropriate.
However, taxes pursuant to a contract entered into under this division are not
delinquent, and the Tax Administrator shall not require any payments of
penalties or interest in connection with those taxes for the extension period.
         (b)   If the Tax Administrator determines that an applicant is
qualified for an extension under this section, the applicant shall neither be
required to file any return, report, or other tax document nor be required to
pay any tax otherwise due to the municipal corporation before the one hundred
eighty-first day after the applicant's active duty or service terminates.
         (c)   Taxes paid pursuant to a contract entered into under (N)(2)(a)
above are not delinquent. The Tax Administrator shall not require any payments
of penalties or interest in connection with those taxes for the extension
period.
      (3)   (a)   Nothing in this division denies to any person described in
this division the application of divisions (N)(1) and (2) above.
         (b)   1.   A qualifying taxpayer who is eligible for an extension
under the Internal Revenue Code shall receive both an extension of time in
which to file any return, report, or other tax document and an extension of
time in which to make any payment of taxes required by a municipal corporation
in accordance with this chapter. The length of any extension granted under this
division (N)(3)(b)1. shall be equal to the length of the corresponding
extension that the taxpayer receives under the Internal Revenue Code. As used
in this division, QUALIFYING TAXPAYER means a member of the national guard or a
member of a reserve component of the armed forces of the United States called
to active duty pursuant to either an executive order issued by the President of
the United States or an act of the Congress of the United States, or a civilian
serving as support personnel in a combat zone or contingency operation in
support of the armed forces.
            2.   Taxes whose payment is extended in accordance with division
(N)(3)(b)1. above are not delinquent during the extension period. Such taxes
become delinquent on the first day after the expiration of the extension period
if the taxes are not paid prior to that date. The Tax Administrator shall not
require any payment of penalties or interest in connection with those taxes for
the extension period. The Tax Administrator shall not include any period of
extension granted under division (G)(2)(a) above in calculating the penalty or
interest due on any unpaid tax.
      (4)   For each taxable year to which division (N)(1), (2), or (3) above
applies to a taxpayer, the provisions of divisions (N)(2)(b) and (c) above, as
applicable, apply to the spouse of that taxpayer if the filing status of the
spouse and the taxpayer is married filing jointly for that year.
   (O)   Consolidated municipal income tax return.
      (1)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         (a)   AFFILIATED GROUP OF CORPORATIONS. An affiliated group as defined
in § 1504 of the Internal Revenue Code, except that, if such a group includes
at least one incumbent local exchange carrier that is primarily engaged in the
business of providing local exchange telephone service in this state, the
affiliated group shall not include any incumbent local exchange carrier that
would otherwise be included in the group.
         (b)   CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL INCOME TAX RETURN. A consolidated return
filed for federal income tax purposes pursuant to § 1501 of the Internal
Revenue Code.
         (c)   CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME. The consolidated taxable
income of an affiliated group of corporations, as computed for the purposes of
filing a consolidated federal income tax return, before consideration of net
operating losses or special deductions. CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME
does not include income or loss of an incumbent local exchange carrier that is
excluded from the affiliated group under division (O)(1)(a) above.
         (d)   INCUMBENT LOCAL EXCHANGE CARRIER. Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 4927.01.
         (e)   LOCAL EXCHANGE TELEPHONE SERVICE. Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 5727.01.
      (2)   (a)   For taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2016, a
taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations may elect to
file a consolidated municipal income tax return for a taxable year if at least
one member of the affiliated group of corporations is subject to the Village's
income tax in that taxable year, and if the affiliated group of corporations
filed a consolidated federal income tax return with respect to that taxable
year. The election is binding for a five-year period beginning with the first
taxable year of the initial election unless a change in the reporting method is
required under federal law. The election continues to be binding for each
subsequent five-year period unless the taxpayer elects to discontinue filing
consolidated municipal income tax returns under division (O)(2)(b) below or a
taxpayer receives permission from the Tax Administrator. The Tax Administrator
shall approve such a request for good cause shown.
         (b)   An election to discontinue filing consolidated municipal income
tax returns under this section must be made in the first year following the
last year of a five-year consolidated municipal income tax return election
period in effect under division (O)(2)(a) above. The election to discontinue
filing a consolidated municipal income tax return is binding for a five-year
period beginning with the first taxable year of the election.
         (c)   An election made under division (O)(2)(a) or (b) above is
binding on all members of the affiliated group of corporations subject to a
municipal income tax.
      (3)   A taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations
that filed a consolidated federal income tax return for a taxable year shall
file a consolidated Village of Swanton income tax return for that taxable year
if the Tax Administrator determines, by a preponderance of the evidence, that
intercompany transactions have not been conducted at arm's length and that
there has been a distortive shifting of income or expenses with regard to
allocation of net profits to the Village. A taxpayer that is required to file a
consolidated Village of Swanton income tax return for a taxable year shall file
a consolidated Village income tax return for all subsequent taxable years,
unless the taxpayer requests and receives written permission from the Tax
Administrator to file a separate return or a taxpayer has experienced a change
in circumstances.
      (4)   A taxpayer shall prepare a consolidated Village of Swanton income
tax return in the same manner as is required under the United States Department
of Treasury regulations that prescribe procedures for the preparation of the
consolidated federal income tax return required to be filed by the common
parent of the affiliated group of which the taxpayer is a member.
      (5)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (O)(5)(b), (c), and
(d) below, corporations that file a consolidated municipal income tax return
shall compute adjusted federal taxable income, as defined in §
35.02, by substituting "consolidated federal taxable income" for "federal
taxable income" wherever "federal taxable income" appears in that division and
by substituting "an affiliated group of corporation's" for "a C corporation's"
wherever "a C corporation's" appears in that division.
         (b)   No corporation filing a consolidated Village income tax return
shall make any adjustment otherwise required under §
35.02(C)(1) to the extent that the item of income or deduction otherwise
subject to the adjustment has been eliminated or consolidated in the
computation of consolidated federal taxable income.
         (c)   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having at
least 80% of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled, directly
or indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in that
affiliated group's consolidated federal taxable income for a taxable year, the
corporation filing a consolidated Village of Swanton income tax return shall do
one of the following with respect to that pass-through entity's net profit or
loss for that taxable year:
            1.   Exclude the pass-through entity's net profit or loss from the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purpose of making the computations required in divisions (O)(1) through (8) of
this section, exclude the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-
through entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit sitused
to the Village of Swanton. If the entity's net profit or loss is so excluded,
the entity shall be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on the basis of
the entity's net profits that would otherwise be included in the consolidated
federal taxable income of the affiliated group.
            2.   Include the pass-through entity's net profit or loss in the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purpose of making the computations required in divisions (O)(1) through (8) of
this section, include the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the
passthrough entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit
sitused to the Village of Swanton. If the entity's net profit or loss is so
included, the entity shall not be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on
the basis of the entity's net profits that are included in the consolidated
federal taxable income of the affiliated group.
         (d)   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having less
than 80% of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled, directly
or indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in that
affiliated group's consolidated federal taxable income for a taxable year, all
of the following shall apply:
            1.   The corporation filing the consolidated municipal income tax
return shall exclude the pass-through entity's net profit or loss from the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purposes of making the computations required in divisions (O)(1) through (8) of
this section, exclude the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-
through entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit sitused
to the Village of Swanton;
            2.   The pass-through entity shall be subject to the Village of
Swanton income taxation as a separate taxpayer in accordance with this chapter
on the basis of the entity's net profits that would otherwise be included in
the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group.
      (6)   Corporations filing a consolidated Village of Swanton income tax
return shall make the computations required under divisions (O)(1) through (8)
of this section by substituting "consolidated federal taxable income
attributable to" for "net profit from" wherever "net profit from" appears in
that section and by substituting "affiliated group of corporations" for
"taxpayer" wherever "taxpayer" appears in that section.
      (7)   Each corporation filing a consolidated Village of Swanton income
tax return is jointly and severally liable for any tax, interest, penalties,
fines, charges, or other amounts imposed by the Village in accordance with this
chapter on the corporation, an affiliated group of which the corporation is a
member for any portion of the taxable year, or any one or more members of such
an affiliated group.
      (8)   Corporations and their affiliates that made an election or entered
into an agreement with the Village of Swanton before January 1, 2016, to file a
consolidated or combined tax return with the Village may continue to file
consolidated or combined tax returns in accordance with such election or
agreement for taxable years beginning on and after January 1, 2016.
(Ord. 2015-29, passed 11-9-2015; Ord. 2023-21, passed 12-11-2023; Ord. 2025-18,
passed 9-8-2025; Ord. 2025-19, passed 10-27-2025)
§ 35.06 CREDIT FOR TAX PAID TO OTHER MUNICIPALITIES.
   (A)   Every individual taxpayer domiciled in the Village of Swanton who is
required to and does pay, or has acknowledged liability for, a municipal tax to
another municipality on or measured by the same income, qualifying wages,
commissions, net profits or other compensation taxable under this chapter, may
claim a nonrefundable credit against the tax imposed by this chapter upon
satisfactory evidence that tax has been paid to another municipality. Subject
to division (C) of this section, the credit shall not exceed 50% of the amount
obtained by multiplying the income, qualifying wages, commissions, net profits
or other compensation subject to tax in the other municipality by the lower of
the tax rate in such other municipality or the tax rate of 1%.
   (B)   The Village of Swanton shall grant a credit against its tax on income
to a resident of the Village who works in a joint economic development zone
created under R.C. § 715.691 or a joint economic development district created
under R.C. §§ 715.70, 715.71, or 715.72 to the same extent that it grants a
credit against its tax on income to its residents who are employed in another
municipal corporation.
   (C)   If the amount of tax withheld or paid to the other municipality is
less than the amount of tax required to be withheld or paid to the other
municipality, then for purposes of division (A) above, "the income, qualifying
wages, commissions, net profits or other compensation" subject to tax in the
other municipality shall be limited to the amount computed by dividing the tax
withheld or paid to the other municipality by the tax rate for that
municipality.
(Ord. 2015-29, passed 11-9-2015; Ord. 2023-21, passed 12-11-2023; Ord. 2025-18,
passed 9-8-2025; Ord. 2025-19, passed 10-27-2025)
§ 35.07 ESTIMATED TAXES.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   ESTIMATED TAXES. The amount that the taxpayer reasonably estimates
to be the taxpayer's tax liability for the Village's income tax for the current
taxable year.
      (2)   TAX LIABILITY. The total taxes due to the Village of Swanton for
the taxable year, after allowing any credit to which the taxpayer is entitled,
and after applying any estimated tax payment, withholding payment, or credit
from another taxable year.
   (B)   (1)   Every taxpayer shall make a declaration of estimated taxes for
the current taxable year, on the form prescribed by the Tax Administrator, if
the amount payable as estimated taxes is at least $200. For the purposes of
this section:
         (a)   Taxes withheld for the Village of Swanton from qualifying wages
shall be considered as paid to the Village in equal amounts on each payment
date unless the taxpayer establishes the dates on which all amounts were
actually withheld, in which case they shall be considered as paid on the dates
on which the amounts were actually withheld.
         (b)   An overpayment of tax applied as a credit to a subsequent
taxable year is deemed to be paid on the date of the postmark stamped on the
cover in which the payment is mailed or, if the payment is made by electronic
funds transfer, the date the payment is submitted. As used in this division,
DATE OF THE POSTMARK means, in the event there is more than one date on the
cover, the earliest date imprinted on the cover by the postal service.
      (2)   Taxpayers filing joint returns shall file joint declarations of
estimated taxes. A taxpayer may amend a declaration under rules prescribed by
the Tax Administrator. A taxpayer having a taxable year of less than 12 months
shall make a declaration under rules prescribed by the Tax Administrator.
      (3)   The declaration of estimated taxes shall be filed on or before the
date prescribed for the filing of municipal income tax returns under §
35.05(G) or on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the
taxpayer becomes subject to tax for the first time.
      (4)   Taxpayers reporting on a fiscal year basis shall file a declaration
on or before the fifteenth
day of the fourth month after the beginning of each fiscal year or period.
      (5)   The original declaration or any subsequent amendment may be
increased or decreased on or before any subsequent quarterly payment day as
provided in this section.
   (C)   (1)   The required portion of the tax liability for the taxable year
that shall be paid through estimated taxes made payable to the Village of
Swanton, including the application of tax refunds to estimated taxes and
withholding on or before the applicable payment date, shall be as follows:
         (a)   On or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the
beginning of the taxable year, 22.5% of the tax liability for the taxable year;
         (b)   On or before the fifteenth day of the sixth month after the
beginning of the taxable year, 45% of the tax liability for the taxable year;
         (c)   On or before the fifteenth day of the ninth month after the
beginning of the taxable year, 67.5% of the tax liability for the taxable year;
         (d)   On or before the fifteenth day of the twelfth month of the
taxable year, 90% of the tax liability for the taxable year.
      (2)   When an amended declaration has been filed, the unpaid balance
shown due on the amended declaration shall be paid in equal installments on or
before the remaining payment dates.
      (3)   On or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month of the year
following that for which the declaration or amended declaration was filed, an
annual return shall be filed and any balance which may be due shall be paid
with the return in accordance with §
35.05.
   (D)   (1)   In the case of any underpayment of any portion of a tax
liability, penalty and interest may be imposed pursuant to §
35.18 upon the amount of underpayment for the period of underpayment, unless
the underpayment is due to reasonable cause as described in division (E) below.
The amount of the underpayment shall be determined as follows:
         (a)   For the first payment of estimated taxes each year, 22.5% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment;
         (b)   For the second payment of estimated taxes each year, 45% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment;
         (c)   For the third payment of estimated taxes each year, 67.5% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment;
         (d)   For the fourth payment of estimated taxes each year, 90% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment.
      (2)   The period of the underpayment shall run from the day the estimated
payment was required to be made to the date on which the payment is made. For
purposes of this section, a payment of estimated taxes on or before any payment
date shall be considered a payment of any previous underpayment only to the
extent the payment of estimated taxes exceeds the amount of the payment
presently required to be paid to avoid any penalty.
   (E)   An underpayment of any portion of tax liability determined under
division (D) above shall be due to reasonable cause and the penalty imposed by
this section shall not be added to the taxes for the taxable year if any of the
following apply:
      (1)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least 90% of
the tax liability for the current taxable year, determined by annualizing the
income received during the year up to the end of the month immediately
preceding the month in which the payment is due.
      (2)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least 100%
of the tax liability shown on the return of the taxpayer for the preceding
taxable year, provided that the immediately preceding taxable year reflected a
period of 12 months and the taxpayer filed a return with the Village of Swanton
under §
35.05 for that year.
      (3)   The taxpayer is an individual who resides in the Village of Swanton
but was not domiciled there on the first day of January of the calendar year
that includes the first day of the taxable year.
(Ord. 2015-29, passed 11-9-2015; Ord. 2023-21, passed 12-11-2023; Ord. 2025-18,
passed 9-8-2025; Ord. 2025-19, passed 10-27-2025)
§ 35.08 ROUNDING OF AMOUNTS.
   A person may round to the nearest whole dollar all amounts the person is
required to enter on any return, report, voucher, or other document required
under this chapter. Any fractional part of a dollar that equals or exceeds
$0.50 shall be rounded to the next whole dollar, and any fractional part of a
dollar that is less than $0.50 shall be dropped. If a person chooses to round
amounts entered on a document, the person shall round all amounts entered on
the document.
(Ord. 2015-29, passed 11-9-2015; Ord. 2023-21, passed 12-11-2023; Ord. 2025-18,
passed 9-8-2025; Ord. 2025-19, passed 10-27-2025)
§ 35.09 REQUESTS FOR REFUNDS.
   (A)   As used in this section, WITHHOLDING TAX has the same meaning as in §
35.18.
   (B)   Upon receipt of a request for a refund, the Tax Administrator, in
accordance with this section, shall refund to employers, agents of employers,
other payers, or taxpayers, with respect to any income or withholding tax
levied by the municipal corporation:
      (1)   Overpayments of $10 or more;
      (2)   Amounts paid erroneously if the refund requested is $10 or more.
   (C)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, requests for
refund shall be filed with the Tax Administrator, on the form prescribed by the
Tax Administrator within three years after the tax was due or paid, whichever
is later. The Tax Administrator may require the requestor to file with the
request any documentation that substantiates the requestor's claim for a
refund.
      (2)   On filing of the refund request, the Tax Administrator shall
determine the amount of refund due and certify such amount for payment. Except
as provided in division (C)(3) below, the Tax Administrator shall issue an
assessment to any taxpayer whose request for refund is fully or partially
denied. The assessment shall state the amount of the refund that was denied,
the reasons for the denial, and instructions for appealing the assessment.
      (3)   If a Tax Administrator denies in whole or in part a refund request
included within the taxpayer's originally filed annual income tax return, the
Tax Administrator shall notify the taxpayer, in writing, of the amount of the
refund that was denied, the reasons for the denial, and instructions for
requesting an assessment that may be appealed under §
35.21.
   (D)   A request for a refund that is received after the last day for filing
specified in division (C) above shall be considered to have been filed in a
timely manner if any of the following situations exist:
      (1)   The request is delivered by the postal service, and the earliest
postal service postmark on the cover in which the request is enclosed is not
later than the last day for filing the request.
      (2)   The request is delivered by the postal service, the only postmark
on the cover in which the request is enclosed was affixed by a private postal
meter, the date of that postmark is not later than the last day for filing the
request, and the request is received within seven days of such last day.
      (3)   The request is delivered by the postal service, no postmark date
was affixed to the cover in which the request is enclosed or the date of the
postmark so affixed is not legible, and the request is received within seven
days of the last day for making the request.
   (E)   Interest shall be allowed and paid on any overpayment by a taxpayer of
any municipal income tax obligation from the date of the overpayment until the
date of the refund of the overpayment, except that if any overpayment is
refunded within 90 days after the final filing date of the annual return or 90
days after the completed return is filed, whichever is later, no interest shall
be allowed on the refund. For the purpose of computing the payment of interest
on amounts overpaid, no amount of tax for any taxable year shall be considered
to have been paid before the date on which the return on which the tax is
reported is due, without regard to any extension of time for filing that
return. Interest shall be paid at the interest rate described in §
35.18(A)(4).
(Ord. 2015-29, passed 11-9-2015; Ord. 2023-21, passed 12-11-2023; Ord. 2025-18,
passed 9-8-2025; Ord. 2025-19, passed 10-27-2025)
§ 35.10 SECOND MUNICIPALITY IMPOSING TAX AFTER TIME PERIOD ALLOWED FOR REFUND.
   (A)   Income tax that has been deposited with the Village of Swanton, but
should have been deposited with another municipality, is allowable by the
Village as a refund but is subject to the three-year limitation on refunds.
   (B)   Income tax that was deposited with another municipality but should
have been deposited with the Village of Swanton is subject to recovery by
Village. If the Village's tax on that income is imposed after the time period
allowed for a refund of the tax or withholding paid to the other municipality,
the Village shall allow a nonrefundable credit against the tax or withholding
the Village claims is due with respect to such income or wages, equal to the
tax or withholding paid to the first municipality with respect to such income
or wages.
   (C)   If the Village's tax rate is less than the tax rate in the other
municipality, then the nonrefundable credit shall be calculated using the
Village's tax rate. However, the Village's tax rate is greater than the tax
rate in the other municipality, the tax due in excess of the nonrefundable
credit is to be paid to the Village, along with any penalty and interest that
accrued during the period of nonpayment.
   (D)   Nothing in this section permits any credit carryforward.
(Ord. 2015-29, passed 11-9-2015; Ord. 2023-21, passed 12-11-2023; Ord. 2025-18,
passed 9-8-2025; Ord. 2025-19, passed 10-27-2025)
§ 35.11 AMENDED RETURNS.
   (A)   (1)   If a taxpayer's tax liability shown on the annual tax return for
the Village of Swanton changes as a result of an adjustment to the taxpayer's
federal or state income tax return, the taxpayer shall file an amended return
with the Village. The amended return shall be filed on a form required by the
Tax Administrator.
      (2)   If a taxpayer intends to file an amended consolidated municipal
income tax return, or to amend its type of return from a separate return to a
consolidated return, based on the taxpayer's consolidated federal income tax
return, the taxpayer shall notify the Tax Administrator before filing the
amended return.
   (B)   (1)   In the case of an underpayment, the amended return shall be
accompanied by payment of any combined additional tax due, together with any
penalty and interest thereon. If the combined tax shown to be due is $10 or
less, no payment need be made. The amended return shall reopen those facts,
figures, computations, or attachments from a previously filed return that are
not affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the
taxpayer's federal or state income tax return only:
         (a)   To determine the amount of tax that would be due if all facts,
figures, computations, and attachments were reopened; or
         (b)   If the applicable statute of limitations for civil actions or
prosecutions under §
35.12 has not expired for a previously filed return.
      (2)   The additional tax to be paid shall not exceed the amount of tax
that would be due if all facts, figures, computations, and attachments were
reopened; i.e., the payment shall be the lesser of the two amounts.
   (C)   (1)   In the case of an overpayment, a request for refund may be filed
under this division within the period prescribed by division (D) below for
filing the amended return, even if it is filed beyond the period prescribed in
that division if it otherwise conforms to the requirements of that division. If
the amount of the refund is less than $10, no refund need be paid by the
Village of Swanton. A request filed under this division shall claim refund of
overpayments resulting from alterations only to those facts, figures,
computations, or attachments required in the taxpayer's annual return that are
affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the taxpayer's
federal or state income tax return, unless it is also filed within the time
prescribed in §
35.09.
      (2)   The amount to be refunded shall not exceed the amount of refund
that would be due if all facts, figures, computations, and attachments were
reopened. All facts, figures, computations, and attachments may be reopened to
determine the refund amount due by inclusion of all facts, figures,
computations, and attachments.
   (D)   Within 60 days after the final determination of any federal or state
tax liability affecting the taxpayer's Village 's tax liability, that taxpayer
shall make and file an amended Village return showing income subject to the
Village of Swanton income tax based upon such final determination of federal or
state tax liability. The taxpayer shall pay any additional Village income tax
shown due thereon or make a claim for refund of any overpayment, unless the tax
or overpayment is less than $10.
(Ord. 2015-29, passed 11-9-2015; Ord. 2023-21, passed 12-11-2023; Ord. 2025-18,
passed 9-8-2025; Ord. 2025-19, passed 10-27-2025)
§ 35.12 LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   (a)   Civil actions to recover municipal income taxes and
penalties and interest on municipal income taxes shall be brought within the
later of:
            1.   Three years after the tax was due or the return was filed,
whichever is later; or
            2.   One year after the conclusion of the qualifying deferral
period, if any.
         (b)   The time limit described in division (A)(1)(a) above may be
extended at any time if both the Tax Administrator and the employer, agent of
the employer, other payer, or taxpayer consent in writing to the extension. Any
extension shall also extend for the same period of time the time limit
described in division (C) of this section.
      (2)   As used in this section, QUALIFYING DEFERRAL PERIOD means a period
of time beginning and ending as follows:
         (a)   Beginning on the date a person who is aggrieved by an assessment
files with the Board of Tax Review the request described in §
35.21. That date shall not be affected by any subsequent decision, finding, or
holding by any administrative body or court that the Board of Tax Review did
not have jurisdiction to affirm, reverse, or modify the assessment or any part
of that assessment.
         (b)   Ending the later of the sixtieth day after the date on which the
final determination of the Board of Tax Review becomes final or, if any party
appeals from the determination of the Board of Tax Review, the sixtieth day
after the date on which the final determination of the Board of Tax Review is
either ultimately affirmed in whole or in part or ultimately reversed and no
further appeal of either that affirmation, in whole or in part, or that
reversal is available or taken.
   (B)   Prosecutions for an offense made punishable under a resolution or
ordinance imposing an income tax shall be commenced within three years after
the commission of the offense, provided that in the case of fraud, failure to
file a return, or the omission of 25% or more of income required to be
reported, prosecutions may be commenced within six years after the commission
of the offense.
   (C)   A claim for a refund of municipal income taxes shall be brought within
the time limitation provided in §
35.09.
   (D)   (1)   Notwithstanding the fact that an appeal is pending, the
petitioner may pay all or a portion of the assessment that is the subject of
the appeal. The acceptance of a payment by the Village of Swanton does not
prejudice any claim for refund upon final determination of the appeal.
      (2)   If upon final determination of the appeal an error in the
assessment is corrected by the Tax Administrator, upon an appeal so filed or
pursuant to a final determination of the Board of Tax Review, of the Ohio Board
of Tax Appeals, or any court to which the decision of the Ohio Board of Tax
Appeals has been appealed, so that the resultant amount due is less than the
amount paid, a refund will be paid in the amount of the overpayment as provided
by §
35.09, with interest on that amount as provided by §
35.09(E).
   (E)   No civil action to recover the Village of Swanton income tax or
related penalties or interest shall be brought during either of the following
time periods:
      (1)   The period during which a taxpayer has a right to appeal the
imposition of that tax or interest or those penalties;
      (2)   The period during which an appeal related to the imposition of that
tax or interest or those penalties is pending.
(Ord. 2015-29, passed 11-9-2015; Ord. 2023-21, passed 12-11-2023; Ord. 2025-18,
passed 9-8-2025; Ord. 2025-19, passed 10-27-2025)
§ 35.13 AUDITS.
   (A)   At or before the commencement of an audit, the Tax Administrator shall
provide to the taxpayer a written description of the roles of the Tax
Administrator and of the taxpayer during the audit and a statement of the
taxpayer's rights, including any right to obtain a refund of an overpayment of
a tax. At or before the commencement of an audit, the Tax Administrator shall
inform the taxpayer when the audit is considered to have commenced.
   (B)   Except in cases involving suspected criminal activity, the Tax
Administrator shall conduct an audit of a taxpayer during regular business
hours and after providing reasonable notice to the taxpayer. A taxpayer who is
unable to comply with a proposed time for an audit on the grounds that the
proposed time would cause inconvenience or hardship must offer reasonable
alternative dates for the audit.
   (C)   (1)   At all stages of an audit by the Tax Administrator, a taxpayer
is entitled to be assisted or represented by an attorney, accountant,
bookkeeper, or other tax practitioner. The Tax Administrator shall prescribe a
form by which a taxpayer may designate such a person to assist or represent the
taxpayer in the conduct of any proceedings resulting from actions by the Tax
Administrator. If a taxpayer has not submitted such a form, the Tax
Administrator may accept other evidence, as the Tax Administrator considers
appropriate, that a person is the authorized representative of a taxpayer.
      (2)   A taxpayer may refuse to answer any questions asked by the person
conducting an audit until the taxpayer has an opportunity to consult with the
taxpayer's attorney, accountant, bookkeeper. or other tax practitioner.
      (3)   This division does not authorize the practice of law by a person
who is not an attorney.
   (D)   A taxpayer may record, electronically or otherwise, the audit
examination.
   (E)   The failure of the Tax Administrator to comply with a provision of
this section shall neither excuse a taxpayer from payment of any taxes owed by
the taxpayer nor cure any procedural defect in a taxpayer's case.
   (F)   If the Tax Administrator fails to substantially comply with the
provisions of this section, the Tax Administrator, upon application by the
taxpayer, shall excuse the taxpayer from penalties and interest.
(Ord. 2015-29, passed 11-9-2015; Ord. 2023-21, passed 12-11-2023; Ord. 2025-18,
passed 9-8-2025; Ord. 2025-19, passed 10-27-2025)
§ 35.14 SERVICE OF ASSESSMENT.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   LAST KNOWN ADDRESS. The address the Tax Administrator has at the
time a document is originally sent by certified mail, or any address the Tax
Administrator can ascertain using reasonable means such as the use of a change
of address service offered by the postal service or an authorized delivery
service under R.C. § 5703.056.
      (2)   UNDELIVERABLE ADDRESS. An address to which the postal service or an
authorized delivery service under R.C. § 5703.056 is not able to deliver an
assessment of the Tax Administrator, except when the reason for non-delivery is
because the addressee fails to acknowledge or accept the assessment.
   (B)   Subject to division (C) below, a copy of each assessment shall be
served upon the person affected thereby either by personal service, by
certified mail, or by a delivery service authorized under R.C. § 5703.056. With
the permission of the person affected by an assessment, the Tax Administrator
may deliver the assessment through alternative means as provided in this
section, including, but not limited to, delivery by secure electronic mail.
   (C)   (1)   (a)   If certified mail is returned because of an undeliverable
address, a Tax Administrator shall utilize reasonable means to ascertain a new
last known address, including the use of a change of address service offered by
the postal service or an authorized delivery service under R.C. § 5703.056. If
the Tax Administrator is unable to ascertain a new last known address, the
assessment shall be sent by ordinary mail and considered served. If the
ordinary mail is subsequently returned because of an undeliverable address, the
assessment remains appealable within 60 days after the assessment's postmark.
         (b)   Once the Tax Administrator or other Village official, or the
designee of either, serves an assessment on the person to whom the assessment
is directed, the person may protest the ruling of that assessment by filing an
appeal with the local Board of Tax Review within 60 days after the receipt of
service. The delivery of an assessment of the Tax Administrator under division
(C)(1)(a) above is prima facie evidence that delivery is complete and that the
assessment is served.
      (2)   (a)   If mailing of an assessment by a Tax Administrator by
certified mail is returned for some cause other than an undeliverable address,
the Tax Administrator shall resend the assessment by ordinary mail. The
assessment shall show the date the Tax Administrator sends the assessment and
include the following statement:
         "This assessment is deemed to be served on the addressee under
applicable law ten days from the date this assessment was mailed by the Tax
Administrator as shown on the assessment, and all periods within which an
appeal may be filed apply from and after that date."
         (b)   Unless the mailing is returned because of an undeliverable
address, the mailing of that information is prima facie evidence that delivery
of the assessment was completed ten days after the Tax Administrator sent the
assessment by ordinary mail and that the assessment was served.
         (c)   If the ordinary mail is subsequently returned because of an
undeliverable address, the Tax Administrator shall proceed under division (C)
(1)(a) above. A person may challenge the presumption of delivery and service
under this division in accordance with division (D) of this section.
   (D)   (1)   A person disputing the presumption of delivery and service under
division (C) above bears the burden of proving by a preponderance of the
evidence that the address to which the assessment was sent by certified mail
was not an address with which the person was associated at the time the Tax
Administrator originally mailed the assessment. For the purposes of this
section, a person is associated with an address at the time the Tax
Administrator originally mailed the assessment if, at that time, the person was
residing, receiving legal documents, or conducting business at the address; or
if, before that time, the person had conducted business at the address and,
when the assessment was mailed, the person's agent or the person's affiliate
was conducting business at the address. For the purposes of this section, a
person's affiliate is any other person that, at the time the assessment was
mailed, owned or controlled at least 20%, as determined by voting rights, of
the addressee's business.
      (2)   If a person elects to appeal an assessment on the basis described
in division (D)(1) above, and if that assessment is subject to collection and
is not otherwise appealable, the person must do so within 60 days after the
initial contact by the Tax Administrator or other Village official, or the
designee of either, with the person. Nothing in this division prevents the Tax
Administrator or other official from entering into a compromise with the person
if the person does not actually file such an appeal with the local Board of Tax
Review.
   (E)   Nothing in this section prohibits the Tax Administrator or the Tax
Administrator's designee from delivering an assessment by a Tax Administrator
by personal service.
   (F)   Collection actions taken upon any assessment being appealed under
division (C)(1)(b) above, including those on which a claim has been delivered
for collection, shall be stayed upon the pendency of an appeal under this
section.
   (G)   Additional regulations as detailed in the rules and regulations shall
apply.
(Ord. 2015-29, passed 11-9-2015; Ord. 2023-21, passed 12-11-2023; Ord. 2025-18,
passed 9-8-2025; Ord. 2025-19, passed 10-27-2025)
§ 35.15 ADMINISTRATION OF CLAIMS.
   (A)   As used in this section, CLAIM means a claim for an amount payable to
the Village of Swanton that arises pursuant to the Village's income tax imposed
in accordance with this chapter.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits a Tax Administrator from doing
either of the following if such action is in the best interests of the
municipal corporation:
      (1)   Compromise a claim;
      (2)   Extend for a reasonable period the time for payment of a claim by
agreeing to accept monthly or other periodic payments.
   (C)   The Tax Administrator's rejection of a compromise or payment-over-time
agreement proposed by a person with respect to a claim shall not be appealable.
   (D)   A compromise or payment-over-time agreement with respect to a claim
shall be binding upon and shall be to the benefit of only the parties to the
compromise or agreement, and shall not eliminate or otherwise affect the
liability of any other person.
   (E)   A compromise or payment-over-time agreement with respect to a claim
shall be void if the taxpayer defaults under the compromise or agreement or if
the compromise or agreement was obtained by fraud or by misrepresentation of a
material fact. Any amount that was due before the compromise or agreement and
that is unpaid shall remain due, and any penalties or interest that would have
accrued in the absence of the compromise or agreement shall continue to accrue
and be due.
(Ord. 2015-29, passed 11-9-2015; Ord. 2023-21, passed 12-11-2023; Ord. 2025-18,
passed 9-8-2025; Ord. 2025-19, passed 10-27-2025)
§ 35.16 TAX INFORMATION CONFIDENTIAL.
   (A)   Any information gained as a result of returns, investigations,
hearings, or verifications required or authorized by this chapter is
confidential, and no person shall access or disclose such information except in
accordance with a proper judicial order or in connection with the performance
of that person's official duties or the official business of the Village of
Swanton as authorized by this chapter. The Tax Administrator or a designee
thereof may furnish copies of returns filed or otherwise received under this
chapter and other related tax information to the Internal Revenue Service, the
Tax Commissioner, and tax administrators of other municipal corporations.
   (B)   This section does not prohibit the Village of Swanton from publishing
or disclosing statistics in a form that does not disclose information with
respect to particular taxpayers.
(Ord. 2015-29, passed 11-9-2015; Ord. 2023-21, passed 12-11-2023; Ord. 2025-18,
passed 9-8-2025; Ord. 2025-19, passed 10-27-2025)  Penalty, see §
35.99
§ 35.17 FRAUD.
   No person shall knowingly make, present, aid, or assist in the preparation
or presentation of a false or fraudulent report, return, schedule, statement,
claim, or document authorized or required by Village ordinance or state law to
be filed with a the Tax Administrator, or knowingly procure, counsel, or advise
the preparation or presentation of such report, return, schedule, statement,
claim, or document, or knowingly change, alter, or amend, or knowingly procure,
counsel or advise such change, alteration, or amendment of the records upon
which such report, return, schedule, statement, claim, or document is based
with intent to defraud the Village or the Tax Administrator.
(Ord. 2015-29, passed 11-9-2015; Ord. 2023-21, passed 12-11-2023; Ord. 2025-18,
passed 9-8-2025; Ord. 2025-19, passed 10-27-2025)  Penalty, see §
35.99
§ 35.18 INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   APPLICABLE LAW. This chapter, the resolutions, ordinances, codes,
directives, instructions, and rules adopted by the Village of Swanton provided
they impose or directly or indirectly address the levy, payment, remittance, or
filing requirements of the Village.
      (2)   FEDERAL SHORT-TERM RATE. The rate of the average market yield on
outstanding marketable obligations of the United States with remaining periods
to maturity of three years or less, as determined under § 1274 of the Internal
Revenue Code, for July of the current year.
      (3)   INCOME TAX, ESTIMATED INCOME TAX, and WITHHOLDING TAX. Any income
tax, estimated income tax, and withholding tax imposed by the Village pursuant
to applicable law, including at any time before January 1, 2016.
      (4)   INTEREST RATE AS DESCRIBED IN DIVISION (A) OF THIS SECTION. The
federal short-term rate, rounded to the nearest whole number percent, plus 5%.
The rate shall apply for the calendar year next following the July of the year
in which the federal short-term rate is determined in accordance with division
(A)(2) of this section.
      (5)   RETURN. Includes any tax return, report, reconciliation, schedule,
and other document required to be filed with the Tax Administrator or the
Village by a taxpayer, employer, any agent of the employer, or any other payer
pursuant to applicable law, including at any time before January 1, 2016.
      (6)   UNPAID ESTIMATED INCOME TAX. Estimated income tax due but not paid
by the date the tax is required to be paid under applicable law.
      (7)   UNPAID INCOME TAX. Income tax due but not paid by the date the
income tax is required to be paid under applicable law.
      (8)   UNPAID WITHHOLDING TAX. Withholding tax due but not paid by the
date the withholding tax is required to be paid under applicable law.
      (9)   WITHHOLDING TAX. Includes amounts an employer, any agent of an
employer, or any other payer did not withhold in whole or in part from an
employee's qualifying wages, but that, under applicable law, the employer,
agent, or other payer is required to withhold from an employee's qualifying
wages.
   (B)   (1)   This section applies to the following:
         (a)   Any return required to be filed under applicable law for taxable
years beginning on or after January 1, 2016;
         (b)   Income tax, estimated income tax, and withholding tax required
to be paid or remitted to the Village of Swanton on or after January 1, 2016.
      (2)   This section does not apply to returns required to be filed or
payments required to be made before January 1, 2016, regardless of the filing
or payment date. Returns required to be filed or payments required to be made
before January 1, 2016, but filed or paid after that date shall be subject to
the ordinances or rules and regulations, as adopted before January 1, 2016, of
the Village to which the return is to be filed or the payment is to be made.
   (C)   Should any taxpayer, employer, agent of the employer, or other payer
for any reason fail, in whole or in part, to make timely and full payment or
remittance of income tax, estimated income tax, or withholding tax or to file
timely with the Village any return required to be filed, the following
penalties and interest shall apply:
      (1)   Interest shall be imposed at the rate described in division (A) of
this section, per annum, on all unpaid income tax, unpaid estimated income tax,
and unpaid withholding tax.
      (2)   (a)   With respect to unpaid income tax and unpaid estimated income
tax, the Village may impose a penalty equal to 15% of the amount not timely
paid.
         (b)   With respect to any unpaid withholding tax, the Village may
impose a penalty equal to 50% of the amount not timely paid.
      (3)   (a)   For tax years ending on or before December 31, 2022, with
respect to returns other than estimated income tax returns, the Village of
Swanton may impose a penalty of $25 for each failure to timely file each
return, regardless of the liability shown thereon for each month, or any
fraction thereof, during which the return remains unfiled regardless of the
liability shown thereon. The penalty shall not exceed $150 for each failure.
         (b)   For tax years ending on or after January 1, 2023, with respect
to returns other than estimated income tax returns, the Village may impose a
penalty not exceeding $25 for each failure to timely file each return,
regardless of the liability shown thereon, except that the Village shall abate
or refund the penalty assessed on a taxpayer's first failure to timely file a
return after the taxpayer files that return.
   (D)   Nothing in this section requires the Village of Swanton to refund or
credit any penalty, amount of interest, charges, or additional fees that the
Village has properly imposed or collected before January 1, 2016.
   (E)   Nothing in this section limits the authority of the Village of Swanton
to abate or partially abate penalties or interest imposed under this section
when the Tax Administrator determines, in the Tax Administrator's sole
discretion, that such abatement is appropriate.
   (F)   By the thirty-first day of October of each year the Village of Swanton
shall publish the rate described in division (A) of this section applicable to
the next succeeding calendar year.
   (G)   The Village of Swanton may impose on the taxpayer, employer, any agent
of the employer, or any other payer the Village's post-judgment collection
costs and fees, including attorney's fees.
(Ord. 2015-29, passed 11-9-2015; Ord. 2023-21, passed 12-11-2023; Ord. 2025-18,
passed 9-8-2025; Ord. 2025-19, passed 10-27-2025)
§ 35.19 AUTHORITY OF TAX ADMINISTRATOR; VERIFICATION OF INFORMATION.
   (A)   Authority. Nothing in this chapter shall limit the authority of the
Tax Administrator to perform any of the following duties or functions, unless
the performance of such duties or functions is expressly limited by a provision
of the Ohio Revised Code:
      (1)   (a)   Exercise all powers whatsoever of a query nature as provided
by law, including the right to inspect books, accounts, records, memoranda, and
federal and state income tax returns; to examine persons under oath; to issue
orders or subpoenas for the production of books, accounts, papers, records,
documents, and testimony; to take depositions; to apply to a court for
attachment proceedings as for contempt; to approve vouchers for the fees of
officers and witnesses; and to administer oaths.
         (b)   The powers referred to in this division shall be exercised by
the Tax Administrator only in connection with the performance of the duties
respectively assigned to the Tax Administrator under the Village's income tax
ordinance;
      (2)   Appoint agents and prescribe their powers and duties;
      (3)   Confer and meet with officers of other municipal corporations and
states and officers of the United States on any matters pertaining to their
respective official duties as provided by law;
      (4)   Exercise the authority provided by law, including orders from
bankruptcy courts, relative to remitting or refunding taxes, including
penalties and interest thereon, for any reason overpaid. In addition, the Tax
Administrator may investigate any claim of overpayment and, if the Tax
Administrator finds that there has been an overpayment, make a written
statement of the Tax Administrator's findings, and approve and issue a refund
payable to the taxpayer, the taxpayer's assigns, or legal representative as
provided in this chapter;
      (5)   Exercise the authority provided by law relative to consenting to
the compromise and settlement of tax claims;
      (6)   Exercise the authority provided by law relative to the use of
alternative apportionment methods by taxpayers in accordance with §
35.03;
      (7)   (a)   Make all tax findings, determinations, computations, and
orders the Tax Administrator is by law authorized and required to make and,
pursuant to time limitations provided by law, on the Tax Administrator's own
motion, review, re-determine, or correct any tax findings, determinations,
computations, or orders the Tax Administrator has made.
         (b)   If an appeal has been filed with the Board of Tax Review or
other appropriate tribunal, the Tax Administrator shall not review, re-
determine, or correct any tax finding, determination, computation, or order
which the Tax Administrator has made, unless such appeal or application is
withdrawn by the appellant or applicant, is dismissed, or is otherwise final;
      (8)   Destroy any or all returns or other tax documents in the manner
authorized by law;
      (9)   Enter into an agreement with a taxpayer to simplify the withholding
obligations described in §
35.04.
   (B)   Verification of accuracy of returns and determination of liability.
      (1)   A Tax Administrator, or any authorized agent or employee thereof
may examine the books, papers, records, and federal and state income tax
returns of any employer, taxpayer, or other person that is subject to, or that
the Tax Administrator believes is subject to, the provisions of this chapter
for the purpose of verifying the accuracy of any return made or, if no return
was filed, to ascertain the tax due under this chapter. Upon written request by
the Tax Administrator or a duly authorized agent or employee thereof, every
employer, taxpayer, or other person subject to this section is required to
furnish the opportunity for the Tax Administrator, authorized agent, or
employee to investigate and examine such books, papers, records, and federal
and state income tax returns at a reasonable time and place designated in the
request.
      (2)   The records and other documents of any taxpayer, employer, or other
person that is subject to, or that a Tax Administrator believes is subject to,
the provisions of this chapter shall be open to the Tax Administrator's
inspection during business hours and shall be preserved for a period of six
years following the end of the taxable year to which the records or documents
relate, unless the Tax Administrator, in writing, consents to their destruction
within that period, or by order requires that they be kept longer. The Tax
Administrator may require any person, by notice served on that person, to keep
such records as the Tax Administrator determines necessary to show whether or
not that person is liable, and the extent of such liability, for the income tax
levied by the Village of Swanton or for the withholding of such tax.
      (3)   The Tax Administrator may examine under oath any person that the
Tax Administrator reasonably believes has knowledge concerning any income that
was or would have been returned for taxation or any transaction tending to
affect such income. The Tax Administrator may, for this purpose, compel any
such person to attend a hearing or examination and to produce any books,
papers, records, and federal and state income tax returns in such person's
possession or control. The person may be assisted or represented by an
attorney, accountant, bookkeeper, or other tax practitioner at any such hearing
or examination. This division does not authorize the practice of law by a
person who is not an attorney.
      (4)   No person issued written notice by the Tax Administrator compelling
attendance at a hearing or examination or the production of books, papers,
records, or federal or state income tax returns under this section shall fail
to comply.
   (C)   Identification information.
      (1)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits the Tax Administrator from
requiring any person filing a tax document with the Tax Administrator to
provide identifying information, which may include the person's social security
number, federal employer identification number, or other identification number
requested by the Tax Administrator. A person required by the Tax Administrator
to provide identifying information that has experienced any change with respect
to that information shall notify the Tax Administrator of the change before, or
upon, filing the next tax document requiring the identifying information.
      (2)   (a)   If the Tax Administrator makes a request for identifying
information and the Tax Administrator does not receive valid identifying
information within 30 days of making the request, nothing in this chapter
prohibits the Tax Administrator from imposing a penalty upon the person to whom
the request was directed pursuant to §
35.18, in addition to any applicable penalty described in §
35.99 .
         (b)   If a person required by the Tax Administrator to provide
identifying information does not notify the Tax Administrator of a change with
respect to that information as required under this division (C) within 30 days
after filing the next tax document requiring such identifying information,
nothing in this chapter prohibits the Tax Administrator from imposing a penalty
pursuant to §
35.18.
         (c)   The penalties provided for under divisions (C)(2)(a) and (b)
above may be billed and imposed in the same manner as the tax or fee with
respect to which the identifying information is sought and are in addition to
any applicable criminal penalties described in §
35.99 for a violation of §
35.17 and any other penalties that may be imposed by the Tax Administrator by
law.
(Ord. 2015-29, passed 11-9-2015; Ord. 2023-21, passed 12-11-2023; Ord. 2025-18,
passed 9-8-2025; Ord. 2025-19, passed 10-27-2025) Penalty, see §
35.99
§ 35.20 REQUEST FOR OPINION OF THE TAX ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   An OPINION OF THE TAX ADMINISTRATOR means an opinion issued under this
section with respect to prospective municipal income tax liability. It does not
include ordinary correspondence of the Tax Administrator.
   (B)   A taxpayer may submit a written request for an opinion of the Tax
Administrator in accordance with the rules and regulations.
   (C)   A taxpayer is not relieved of tax liability for any activity or
transaction related to a request for an opinion that contained any
misrepresentation or omission of one or more material facts.
   (D)   A Tax Administrator may refuse to offer an opinion on any request
received under this section. Such refusal is not subject to appeal.
   (E)   An opinion of the Tax Administrator binds the Tax Administrator only
with respect to the taxpayer for whom the opinion was prepared and does not
bind the Tax Administrator of any other municipal corporation.
   (F)   An opinion of the Tax Administrator issued under this section is not
subject to appeal.
(Ord. 2015-29, passed 11-9-2015; Ord. 2023-21, passed 12-11-2023; Ord. 2025-18,
passed 9-8-2025; Ord. 2025-19, passed 10-27-2025)
§ 35.21 BOARD OF TAX REVIEW.
   (A)   (1)   The Board of Tax Review shall consist of three members. Two
members shall be appointed by the legislative authority of the Village, but
such appointees may not be employees, elected officials, or contractors with
Village at any time during their term or in the five years immediately
preceding the date of appointment. One member shall be appointed by the Mayor
of the Village of Swanton. This member may be an employee of the Village of
Swanton, but may not be the Director of Finance or equivalent officer, or the
Tax Administrator or other similar official or an employee directly involved in
municipal tax matters, or any direct subordinate thereof.
      (2)   The term for members of the Board of Tax Review for the Village of
Swanton shall be two years. There is no limit on the number of terms that a
member may serve if the member is reappointed by the legislative authority. The
board member appointed by the Mayor of the Village shall serve at the
discretion of the administrative official.
      (3)   Members of the Board of Tax Review appointed by the legislative
authority may be removed by the legislative authority by majority vote for
malfeasance, misfeasance, or nonfeasance in office. To remove such a member,
the legislative authority must give the member a copy of the charges against
the member and afford the member an opportunity to be publicly heard in person
or by counsel in the member's own defense upon not less than ten days' notice.
The decision by the legislative authority on the charges is final and not
appealable.
      (4)   A member of the Board of Tax Review who, for any reason, ceases to
meet the qualifications for the position prescribed by this section shall
resign immediately by operation of law.
      (5)   A vacancy in an unexpired term shall be filled in the same manner
as the original appointment within 60 days of when the vacancy was created. Any
member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring prior to the expiration of the
term for which the member's predecessor was appointed shall hold office for the
remainder of such term. No vacancy on the Board of Tax Review shall impair the
power and authority of the remaining members to exercise all the powers of the
Board of Tax Review.
      (6)   If a member is temporarily unable to serve on the Board of Tax
Review due to a conflict of interest, illness, absence, or similar reason, the
legislative authority or top administrative official that appointed the member
shall appoint another individual to temporarily serve on the Board of Tax
Review in the member's place. The appointment of such an individual shall be
subject to the same requirements and limitations as are applicable to the
appointment of the member temporarily unable to serve.
   (B)   Whenever a Tax Administrator issues an assessment, the Tax
Administrator shall notify the taxpayer in writing at the same time of the
taxpayer's right to appeal the assessment, the manner in which the taxpayer may
appeal the assessment, and the address to which the appeal should be directed.
   (C)   Any person who has been issued an assessment may appeal the assessment
to the Board of Tax Review by filing a request with the Board of Tax Review.
The request shall be in writing, shall specify the reason or reasons why the
assessment should be deemed incorrect or unlawful, and shall be filed within 60
days after the taxpayer receives the assessment.
   (D)   The Board of Tax Review shall schedule a hearing to be held within 60
days after receiving an appeal of an assessment under division (C) of this
section, unless the taxpayer requests additional time to prepare or waives a
hearing. If the taxpayer does not waive the hearing, the taxpayer may appear
before the Board of Tax Review and may be represented by an attorney at law,
certified public accountant, or other representative. The Board of Tax Review
may allow a hearing to be continued as jointly agreed to by the parties. In
such a case, the hearing must be completed within 120 days after the first day
of the hearing unless the parties agree otherwise.
   (E)   The Board of Tax Review may affirm, reverse, or modify the Tax
Administrator's assessment or any part of that assessment. The Board of Tax
Review shall issue a final determination on the appeal within 90 days after the
Board of Tax Review's final hearing on the appeal, and send a copy of its final
determination by ordinary mail to all of the parties to the appeal within 15
days after issuing the final determination. The taxpayer or the Tax
Administrator may appeal the Board of Tax Review's final determination as
provided in R.C. § 5717.011.
   (F)   The Board of Tax Review created pursuant to this section shall adopt
rules governing its procedures and shall keep a record of its transactions.
Such records are not public records available for inspection under R.C. §
149.43. Hearings requested by a taxpayer before a Board of Tax Review created
pursuant to this section are not meetings of a public body subject to R.C. §
121.22.
(Ord. 2015-29, passed 11-9-2015; Ord. 2023-21, passed 12-11-2023; Ord. 2025-18,
passed 9-8-2025; Ord. 2025-19, passed 10-27-2025)
§ 35.22 AUTHORITY TO CREATE RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits the legislative authority of the
Village of Swanton, or a Tax Administrator pursuant to authority granted to the
Tax Administrator by resolution or ordinance, to adopt rules to administer an
income tax imposed by the Village of Swanton in accordance with this chapter.
Such rules shall not conflict with or be inconsistent with any provision of
this chapter. Taxpayers are hereby required to comply not only with the
requirements of this chapter, but also to comply with the rules and
regulations.
   (B)   All rules adopted under this section shall be published and posted on
the internet.
(Ord. 2015-29, passed 11-9-2015; Ord. 2023-21, passed 12-11-2023; Ord. 2025-18,
passed 9-8-2025; Ord. 2025-19, passed 10-27-2025)
§ 35.23 SAVINGS CLAUSE.
   This chapter shall not apply to any person, firm or corporation, or to any
property as to whom or which it is beyond the power of Council to impose the
tax herein provided for. Any sentence, clause, section or part of this chapter
or any tax against or exception granted any individual or any of the several
groups of persons, or forms of income specified herein if found to be
unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality or
invalidity shall affect only such clause, sentence, section or part of this
chapter and shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions,
sentences, clauses, sections or other parts of this chapter. It is hereby
declared to be the intention of Council that this chapter would have been
adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, or part hereof,
not been included therein.
(Ord. 2015-29, passed 11-9-2015; Ord. 2023-21, passed 12-11-2023; Ord. 2025-18,
passed 9-8-2025; Ord. 2025-19, passed 10-27-2025)
§ 35.24 COLLECTION OF TAX AFTER TERMINATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   This chapter shall continue effective insofar as the levy of taxes is
concerned until repealed, and insofar as the collection of taxes levied
hereunder and actions or proceedings for collecting any tax so levied or
enforcing any provisions of this chapter are concerned, it shall continue
effective until all of said taxes levied hereunder in the aforesaid periods are
fully paid and any and all suits and prosecutions for the collection of said
taxes or for the punishment of violations of this chapter shall have been fully
terminated, subject to the limitations contained in §§
35.12 and
35.99.
   (B)   Annual returns due for all or any part of the last effective year of
this chapter shall be due on the date provided in §§
35.04 and
35.05 as though the same were continuing.
(Ord. 2015-29, passed 11-9-2015; Ord. 2023-21, passed 12-11-2023; Ord. 2025-18,
passed 9-8-2025; Ord. 2025-19, passed 10-27-2025)
§ 35.25 ADOPTION OF RITA RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Village of Swanton hereby adopts the Regional Income Tax Agency (RITA)
rules and regulations, including amendments that may be made from time to time,
for use as the Village's income tax rules and regulations. In the event of a
conflict with any provision(s) of the Village of Swanton Income Tax Ordinance
and the RITA rules and regulations, this chapter will supersede. Until and if
the contractual relationship between the Village of Swanton and RITA ceases, §
35.26 will supersede all other provisions within this chapter regarding
promulgation of rules and regulations by the Tax Administrator.
(Ord. 2015-29, passed 11-9-2015; Ord. 2017-38, passed 12-11-2017; Ord. 2023-21,
passed 12-11-2023; Ord. 2025-18, passed 9-8-2025; Ord. 2025-19, passed 10-27-
2025)
§ 35.26 ELECTION TO BE SUBJECT TO R.C. 718.80 TO 718.95.
   (A)   The Village of Swanton hereby adopts and incorporates herein by
reference R.C. §§ 718.80 to 718.95 for tax years beginning on or after January
1, 2018.
   (B)   A taxpayer, as defined in division (C) of this section, may elect to
be subject to R.C. §§ 718.80 to 718.95 in lieu of the provisions of this
chapter.
   (C)   TAXPAYER has the same meaning as in R.C. § 718.01, except that
TAXPAYER does not include natural persons or entities subject to the tax
imposed under R.C. Chapter 5745. TAXPAYER may include receivers, assignees, or
trustees in bankruptcy when such persons are required to assume the role of a
taxpayer.
(Ord. 2023-21, passed 12-11-2023; Ord. 2025-18, passed 9-8-2025; Ord. 2025-19,
passed 10-27-2025)
§ 35.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates §
35.04, §
35.16(A), or §
35.17 by failing to remit the Village of Swanton income taxes deducted and
withheld from an employee, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree
and shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a
term of up to six months, or both. If the individual that commits the violation
is an employee, or official, of the Village, the individual is subject to
discharge from employment or dismissal from office.
   (B)   Any person who discloses information received from the Internal
Revenue Service in violation of §
35.16(A) shall be guilty of a felony of the fifth degree and shall be subject
to a fine of not more than $5,000 plus the costs of prosecution, or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years, or both. If the individual
that commits the violation is an employee, or official, of the Village of
Swanton, the individual is subject to discharge from employment or dismissal
from office.
   (C)   Each instance of access or disclosure in violation of §
35.16(A) constitutes a separate offense.
   (D)   If not otherwise specified herein, no person shall:
      (1)   Fail, neglect or refuse to make any return or declaration required
by this chapter;
      (2)   File any incomplete or false return;
      (3)   Fail, neglect or refuse to pay the tax, penalties or interest
imposed by this chapter;
      (4)   Refuse to permit the Tax Administrator or any duly authorized agent
or employee to examine his or her books, records, papers and federal and state
income tax returns relating to the income or net profits of a taxpayer;
      (5)   Fail to appear before the Tax Administrator and to produce his or
her books, records, papers or federal and state income tax returns relating to
the income or net profits of a taxpayer upon order or subpoena of the Tax
Administrator;
      (6)   Refuse to disclose to the Tax Administrator any information with
respect to the income or net profits of a taxpayer;
      (7)   Fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any order or
subpoena of the Tax Administrator authorized hereby;
      (8)   Give to an employer false information as to his or her true name,
correct social security number, and residence address, or fail to promptly
notify an employer of any change in residence address and date thereof;
      (9)   Attempt to do anything whatsoever to avoid the payment of the whole
or any part of the tax, penalties or interest imposed by this chapter.
   (E)   Any person who violates any of the provisions in division (D) above
shall be subject to the penalties provided for in division (A) above.
(Ord. 636, passed 11-24-1969; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 2015-29,
passed 11-9-2015; Ord. 2023-21, passed 12-11-2023; Ord. 2025-18, passed 9-8-
2025; Ord. 2025-19, passed 10-27-2025)
CHAPTER 36: VILLAGE POLICY
Section
   
36.01   Penalty for returned checks
   
36.02   Smoking
   
36.03   Investment policy
   
36.04   Disaster recovery policy
   
36.05   Payment of utility bills
   
36.06   (Reserved)
   
36.07   Video service provider fee
   
36.08   Adjustments to utility bill policy and procedure
   
36.09   Fees for rental of pavilion at Memorial Park and the Swanton Community
Center
§ 36.01 PENALTY FOR RETURNED CHECKS.
   (A)    A penalty is hereby established, for check tendered to the village,
and thereafter returned and charged against the village by the payor bank in
the amount of $50 per checks.
   (B)   A penalty is hereby established, for payments made through automated
clearing house (ACH) transactions to the village, and thereafter confirmed to
have non sufficient funds in said account in the amount of $50 per transaction.
   (C)   Notice of these penalties shall be conspicuously posted at the offices
of the village.
(Ord. 87-34, passed 12-21-1987; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 2018-27,
passed 10-9-2018; Ord. 2022-26, passed 11-14-2022)
§ 36.02 SMOKING.
   (A)   Smoking, and/or vaping, is prohibited within the municipal building
and other village owned facilities.
   (B)   Smoking, and/or vaping, is prohibited in all areas of parks owned or
leased by the village except in designated smoking areas.
   (C)   VAPING is defined as use of any electronic device, or similar device,
to inhale and exhale vapors produced by said device.
(Ord. 94-8, passed 2-14-1994; Ord. 2017-37, passed 11-27-2017)
§ 36.03 INVESTMENT POLICY.
   (A)   All investments shall be made by way of depositories or investment
agencies approved by prior ordinance or resolution to receive village deposits.
   (B)   No investment shall be made wherein the funds invested will be
unavailable for a period of time in excess of one year.
   (C)   All investments shall be limited to those investments authorized for
municipal corporations by R.C. Chapter 135 and R.C. Chapter 731.
   (D)   The Fiscal Officer shall monitor the investment balances to assure
that adequate funds are available for withdrawal to meet the ongoing financial
needs of the village.
   (E)   All funds shall be invested to obtain a maximum rate of interest which
is available while considering risk and all other criteria of the investment
policy herein set forth.
   (F)   The Fiscal Officer may transfer funds from one depository to another
to secure a higher rate of interest and return.
    (G)   The Fiscal Officer shall maintain an investment record and shall list
all investments made during the fiscal year, the return generated on each
investment, and the location of the depository where the investment has been
made.
   (H)   Village Council, and any sub-committee thereto, and the Mayor, shall
have the right at any time to request production and inspection of the
investment record or to inquire as to the investment activities of the Fiscal
Officer.
   (I)   That local depositories may be approved by separate resolution with
written agreement with the village.
(Ord. 96-31, passed 12-9-1996; Ord. 00-08, passed 4-10-2000)
§ 36.04 DISASTER RECOVERY POLICY.
   (A)   The following file applications shall be subject to Disaster Recovery
Policy for restoration in the event of an emergency.
   (B)   The village shall enter into an agreement for an alternate processing
facility with a minimum of one entity with close proximity to the village.
   (C)   The file application identified in division (A) above shall be subject
to the “backup” procedure a minimum of once every calendar month.
   (D)   A copy of the Disaster Recovery Plan and “backup” tapes shall be
stored at the offices of the Swanton Local School District, 108 N. Main Street,
Swanton, Ohio 43558.
   (E)   “Backup” tapes shall include all documentation relating to essential
systems for storage at the off-site location.
   (F)   The Director of Finance shall oversee compliance with this policy.
(Ord. 96-31, passed 12-9-1996)
§ 36.05 PAYMENT OF UTILITY BILLS.
   The Fiscal Officer is hereby authorized and empowered to pay village utility
bills as received and does not require prior approval of Village Council.
(Ord. 97-3, passed 3-10-1997)
§ 36.06 (RESERVED).
§ 36.07 VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE.
   (A)   The Council hereby establishes a VSP fee that is calculated by
applying a VSP fee percentage of 5% to the video service provider’s gross
revenues as defined in R.C. § 1332.32(B) of the Video Law. For purposes of
calculating the VSP fee, the provider’s gross revenues shall include
advertising revenues in accordance with R.C. § 1332.32(B)(2)(g) of the Video
Law. The VSP fee percentage and Video Law gross revenues definition, as
modified in this section, shall apply equally to all video service providers
and cable television operators providing video service in the village.
   (B)   The VSP fee shall be paid by each video service provider providing
service in the village on a quarterly basis but not sooner that 45 days nor
later than 60 days after the end of each calendar quarter.
(R.C. § 1332.32(A)).
   (C)   The Village Administrator is authorized and directed to provide an
video service provider with notice of the VSP fee percentage and gross revenues
definition as determined by this Council above, which notice shall be given by
certified mail, upon receipt of notice from such video service provider that it
will begin providing video service in the village pursuant to state-issued
video service authorization.
(Ord. 2010-4, passed 1-23-2010)
§ 36.08 ADJUSTMENTS TO UTILITY BILL POLICY AND PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Policy and purpose. It is the policy of the village to make
adjustments to customer utility bills where said adjustment is necessary to
correct billing errors, to correct errors due to equipment failure, or to
fairly apply the rates and rules of the utility. The purpose of this policy is
to improve customer service by enabling staff to quickly and accurately respond
to customer requests for adjustments to utility bills rather than waiting for
the matter to come before the Village Council and also setting forth the
situations where adjustments will and will not be considered.
   (B)   Responsibility. The Village Administrator, or designee, shall
determine the amount, if any, of the adjustment to be made. The Village
Administrator, or designee, shall receive requests and notify the customer of
the determination.
   (C)   Adjustments allowed. Staff is authorized to make adjustments to
utility bills, without Village Council action in the following cases:
      (1)   Billing errors. Where an error has occurred that results in an
inaccurate utility bill being sent to a customer, staff shall correct the error
as soon as discovered, whether by the customer or by staff. These adjustments
include data recording and entry errors as well as meter failures if tested and
found to be inaccurate.
      (2)   Late fees. Where a customer incurs late fees and requests an
adjustment, staff may reduce or remove the late fee based on the customer’s
circumstances and payment history.
      (3)   Sanitary sewer. Where a customer experiences extraordinary water
consumption during a billing period due to break in customer owned plumbing,
equipment malfunction, and the like and said water did not enter the sanitary
sewer system, staff may adjust the sanitary sewer charge to an amount that is
more typical of that customer’s normal usage. When an adjustment is made, a
credit for the amount of the adjustment, including any sales tax shall be made
to the customer’s account. When a customer makes a written request for an
adjustment, the amount under consideration for adjustment shall not be payable
until a determination on the adjustment is made. All other amounts not in
dispute shall be due according to utility rules. When a customer pays an amount
that is later adjusted, the credit shall remain on the account. No cash refunds
shall be made for adjustments unless the account has been or is subsequently
closed and a credit balance remains.
      (4)   Disconnection fees. When it becomes necessary for the village to
discontinue service to a customer for nonpayment of bills, there will be a
disconnection fee charge to the account and an adjustment will be made
accordingly.
      (5)   Delinquent accounts. When it becomes necessary for the village to
turn over the delinquent account to collections, an adjustment will be made
accordingly.
   (D)   Adjustments not allowed. The village will not consider adjustments for
the following situations:
      (1)   Water. Adjustments to water charges where customer experiences
extraordinary water consumption during a billing period due to a break in
customer-owned plumbing, equipment malfunction and the like.
      (2)   Sanitary sewer. Adjustments to sanitary sewer charges for customers
who claim normal outdoor water usage (such as, lawn or garden sprinkling, car
washing and the like) where the water used did not enter the sanitary sewer
system.
   (E)   Requests for adjustments. The request must be in writing. Written
requests shall state the name of the account holder, service address, contact
information and the reason for the requested adjustment. The customer shall
provide all information requested by the village and deemed necessary to make a
determination on the request.
   (F)   Response. The utility shall respond to the written request for
adjustment within ten business days after receiving from the customer all the
information necessary to make a determination on the request.
   (G)   Reporting. Village staff shall provide a quarterly report to the
Village Council on adjustments made under this policy exceeding $100.
   (H)   Appeals. Customers who disagree with the determination of staff
regarding their requested adjustments may appeal to the Village Council. Said
appeal must be in writing and shall be scheduled to be heard at the meeting
immediately after receipt of the written appeal.
(Ord. 2016-28, passed 8-8-2016)
§ 36.09 FEES FOR RENTAL OF PAVILION AT MEMORIAL PARK AND THE SWANTON COMMUNITY
CENTER.
   The following schedule of fees is for rental of the facilities of the
village:
 
Memorial Pavilion (enclosed structure)
                  Weekdays        Weekends
                  Monday - Friday Saturday and Sunday
Village resident  $75             $100
Non-resident user $100            $125
Reservation fee   $50             $50
Memorial Pavilion Hours
Closed: November - March
9:00 a.m. through 9:00 p.m. (April - October)
The outdoor pavilion is first come, first serve and there is no charge
 
 
Swanton Community Center
                  Weekdays        Weekends
                  Monday - Friday Saturday and Sunday
Village resident  $100            $150
Non-resident user $125            $175
Reservation fee   $50             $50
Swanton Community Center Hours
9:00 a.m. through 12:00 a.m. midnight
 
(Ord. 2016-29, passed 6-27-2016; Ord. 2019-46, passed 11-25-2019)
CHAPTER 37: ENTERPRISE ZONE
Section
   
37.01   Introduction
   
37.02   Purpose
   
37.03   Eligible businesses
   
37.04   Minimum assistance
   
37.05   Retroactively
   
37.06   Requirements
   
37.07   Principal only
   
37.08   Tax Incentive Review Council
   
37.09   Negotiating agreements
   
37.10   School Board notification
   
37.11   Continuing obligation
   
37.12   Deadline
   
37.13   Application process
   
37.14   Description of perimeter boundaries
   
37.15   Village corporation map
   
37.16   Village enterprise zone application - sample
   
37.17   Project completion schedule
   
37.18   Supplemental documentation and definition
   
37.19   Operational protocol for the Village Rescue Unit
§ 37.01 INTRODUCTION.
   (A)   In an effort to spur revitalization of the village’s industrial base,
the village has designated an Enterprise Zone pursuant to state law. An
ENTERPRISE ZONE is an area within which special tax incentives will be offered
by agreement to industry who agree to invest in capital improvements and create
and/or retain jobs. Tax incentives will be offered, provided the guidelines are
met and a substantial investment is made. Jobs must be either created or
retained.
   (B)   Each agreement with a business within the Zone relating to jobs,
investments and tax incentives must be submitted to the village for its
approval and ultimately to the Fulton County Commissioners for their approval.
(Ord. 93-8, passed 8-23-1993)
§ 37.02 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the Enterprise Zone is to encourage as much investment and
job creation as possible within the boundaries of the Enterprise Zone.
Retaining jobs is also a priority. Each agreement negotiated with an industry
shall be designed to spur capital investment while creating and/or retaining
jobs. In return, the village will agree to provide only the amount of tax
incentives necessary for each transaction.
(Ord. 93-8, passed 8-23-1993)
§ 37.03 ELIGIBLE BUSINESSES.
   Only those businesses, that are “qualified by financial responsibility and
business experience to create and preserve employee opportunities in the Zone
and to improve the economic climate of the municipal corporation...” (R.C. §
5709.63(A)), may apply for tax incentives available. Furthermore only industry
engaged in manufacturing, processing and packaging, research and development,
distribution, will be eligible to apply for tax incentives. No housing,
commercial or institutional endeavors may benefit from the Enterprise Zone
program.
(Ord. 93-8, passed 8-23-1993)
§ 37.04 MINIMUM ASSISTANCE.
   In order to minimize the loss of new tax revenues, only the minimum
incentive necessary to bring about the investment will be offered. State law
permits up to 100% abatement of new real and personal property taxes for up to
ten years in a municipal corporation. Optional services or assistance may be
provided to an eligible business by the municipality or county for a period up
to ten years. Exemptions of 75% or more must have local school board approval
by resolution.
(Ord. 93-8, passed 8-23-1993)
§ 37.05 RETROACTIVELY.
   State guidelines apply. Eligible investments may include only property that
has not been first used in business in the state.
(Ord. 93-8, passed 8-23-1993)
§ 37.06 REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Degree of investments required. Only industry that agree to make
substantial investment in either real property or personal property shall be
eligible to receive the benefits available under the program. The amount of the
investment needed to qualify as a substantial investment shall depend on the
facts and circumstances of each applying industry. As a general guideline, a
substantial investment in real or personal property shall exist when a
combination of the following conditions apply. State guidelines govern the
minimum requirements.
      (1)   Local governments. When new construction is involved, total project
costs will be at least $250,000, unless eight or more jobs are created.
      (2)   State requirement.
         (a)   Expand. Make expenditures to add land, buildings, machinery,
equipment or other materials, except inventory, to a facility that equals at
least 10% of market value of the facility prior to such expenditures, as
determined for the purpose of local property taxation.
         (b)   Renovate. Make expenditures to alter or repair a facility that
equal at least 50% of the market value of the facility prior to such
expenditures, as determined for the purpose of local property taxation.
    (B)   Impact on jobs. Any business applying for the incentives available,
in addition to the other requirements herein, must agree by agreement that
their project will result in the creation of new full time jobs or will
preserve employment opportunities for existing employees. In reviewing whether
the job impact agreed upon by a business has been complied with, employment of
minimum target of 70% of the number of full-time jobs, created or retained,
that has been agreed to in the agreement shall be considered sufficient.
   (C)   Other requirements. In addition to the guidelines set forth herein,
any businesses applying must comply with all other applicable local, county and
state regulations pertaining to the Enterprise Zone program. Applicants must
submit all information required by the village. The above guidelines are
subject to the provisions of the Enterprise Zone statutes being R.C. § 5709.61
and regulations promulgated thereunder.
(Ord. 93-8, passed 8-23-1993)
§ 37.07 PRINCIPAL ONLY.
   Only individuals who are principally involved as an owner or manager of a
business interested in the Enterprise Zone tax incentives and are primarily
responsible for paying all relevant taxes may negotiate with village officials
regarding the specific incentives available under the terms of any investment
agreement.
(Ord. 93-8, passed 8-23-1993)
§ 37.08 TAX INCENTIVE REVIEW COUNCIL.
   (A)   Pursuant to state law, a Tax Incentive Review Council will be created
to annually monitor compliance with terms of any agreement approved by the
village and the Fulton County Commissioners. The Tax Incentive Review Council
shall be composed of the Mayor of the village, or designee; a member of the
Village Council, chosen by the President of the Council, the County Auditor or
designee; the Village Director of Finance, one member of the Village Local
Board of Education, chosen by members of the Board; and two other members of
the public appointed by the Mayor, with the concurrence of the Village Council.
At least four members of the Tax Incentive Review Council shall be residents of
the village.
   (B)   The terms for appointment to the Review Tax Incentive Review Council
shall be one year, from January 1 to December 31. There is no limit to the
number of terms one individual may serve.
   (C)   Annually the Tax Incentive Review Council will review all outstanding
agreements to determine whether the businesses have complied with the terms of
the agreement, and make recommendations regarding the compliance to the Village
Council. The Council may take any action available to an agreement to obtain
compliance with the agreement.
(Ord. 93-8, passed 8-23-1993)
§ 37.09 NEGOTIATING AGREEMENTS.
   Tax incentive agreements, with applicants, shall be negotiated by two
persons appointed by the Mayor with the concurrence of Village Council. The
Fulton County Director of Economic Development will assist the negotiating
team. When the Village Council and the Board of Fulton County Commissioners
have approved the agreement, the Enterprise Zone Manager, as so designated,
will forward copies of the agreement to the Ohio Director of Development and to
the State Tax Commission. The agreement shall be sent within 15 days after it
is consummated.
(Ord. 93-8, passed 8-23-1993)
§ 37.10 SCHOOL BOARD NOTIFICATION.
   (A)   Within seven days after an application has been filed with the
village, the Enterprise Zone Manager will notify, in writing, the Swanton Local
Board of Education. A copy of the application will accompany the letter of
notice to the Board of Education. There shall be no formal action taken on the
application, by the Village Council, prior to notice being sent to the Board of
Education. If the company is requesting less than 75% tax abatement then the
village must notify the School Board with a minimum of 15 days’ notice before
Council action can occur. If the company is requesting more that than 75%
abatement then there must be a 30-day notice before Council action can occur.
   (B)   The Fiscal Officer or designee, no later than 24 hours prior to
scheduled action by the Village Council on the application, shall provide
written notice to the Board of Education advising the Board when action will be
considered.
   (C)   Written notice, as required herein, shall be addressed to the Village
Local Board of Education and forwarded to the Superintendent of the village
local schools. Any agreement where more than 75% abated is applied for must
have a School Board resolution. Any agreement under 75% should have a letter
from the School Board stating their approval. During the period of application
review, comments of the Village Local Board of Education, the Fulton County
Educational Service Center and the Penta County Joint Vocational School Board
shall be formally considered by Village Council.
(Ord. 93-8, passed 8-23-1993)
§ 37.11 CONTINUING OBLIGATION.
   During the term of an agreement, the business involved must continue to
cooperate with the village by providing all necessary information requested to
ensure compliance with terms of the agreement. This means filing annual reports
as required by the state before March 31 of each year.
(Ord. 93-8, passed 8-23-1993)
§ 37.12 DEADLINE.
   Pursuant to state law, the deadline for executing tax incentive agreements
shall be December 31, 1997. Any agreements negotiated prior to that time which
provide tax incentives for a period extending beyond the deadline shall remain
in full force and effect until the date of expiration.
(Ord. 93-8, passed 8-23-1993)
§ 37.13 APPLICATION PROCESS.
   (A)   The Fulton County Director of Economic Development has been appointed
as the Swanton Enterprise Zone Manager.
   (B)   An application for Enterprise Zone benefits shall be processed as
follows.
      (1)   The company must file an application on a form provided by the
Manager. Upon submittal to the Ohio Department of Development a $500
application fee must be submitted to the Ohio Department of Development. All
forms provided by the state shall be used in the process. Those forms being the
application, agreement and the annual reporting forms. Upon calculation of the
estimated first year tax incentive, an application fee equal to1% of the first
year tax savings will be paid to the Fulton County CIC. This nonrefundable fee
shall not be less than $50 nor more than $1,000.
      (2)   The Manager will verify the information presented in the
application and provide assistance necessary for completion of the project.
      (3)   The Manager’s analysis and the negotiating team’s recommendation
will be forwarded to the Village Council. Council will review the information
when considering the approval of an Enterprise Zone agreement.
      (4)   Upon passage of all required legislation, the company will finalize
its plans as outlined in the basic agreement.
      (5)   Approved projects will be reviewed annually, for compliance with
the agreement, by the Tax Incentive Review Council. The Manager will obtain all
necessary information needed by Council to conduct an annual review of existing
agreements. The Manager will assist the Council during the annual review
process.
      (6)   An annual processing fee equal to one-half of 1% of the annual tax
incentive will be paid to the Fulton County CIC. This fee shall not be less
than $50 nor more than $1,000. Failure to comply with the terms of the
agreement may result in the loss of incentives granted.
(Ord. 93-8, passed 8-23-1993)
§ 37.14 DESCRIPTION OF PERIMETER BOUNDARIES.
   Being an area of land contained in a part of Section 1, Township 7 North,
Range 8 East, Fulton Township and in parts of Section 11, 12 and 13, Township 7
North, Range 8 East, Swancreek Township, all in Fulton County, Ohio; the
boundaries of said area being more particularity described as follows:
    Commencing at a point in the intersection of the south right-of-way line of
the Ohio Turnpike with the east line of Section 1, Township 7 North, Range 8
East, Fulton Township, said section line also being the line between Fulton and
Lucas Counties and said point also being the place of beginning; thence
southerly along the east line of Section 1 to its intersection with the
northeast corner of Section 12, Township 7 North, Range 8 East Swancreek
Township said section corner being located at the intersection of Chestnut
Street and Hallett Avenue; thence continuing in a southerly direction along the
east line of Section 12 to a point in the centerline of right-of-way of State
Route 2-US20A; thence southerly along the east line of Section 12, said line
also being the boundary between Fulton and Lucas Counties a distance of
1,438.85 feet to a point in the intersection of said east line of Section 12
with the centerline of Swancreek-Lucas Ditch No. 3; thence southwesterly along
said ditch a distance of 130.46 feet to a point; thence northwesterly along
said ditch a distance of 93.60 feet to a point; thence southwesterly along said
ditch a distance of 347.24 feet to a point; thence northwesterly along said
ditch a distance of 206.42 feet to a point; thence northerly away from said
ditch on the east property line of a parcel of land a distance of 65.00 feet to
a point in the south line of the West Pointe Estates Subdivision; thence
southwesterly along the south line of the West Pointe Estates Subdivision a
distance of 283.42 feet to a point; thence southerly a distance of 110.33 feet
to a point in the center of Swancreek- Lucas Ditch No. 3; thence northwesterly
along said ditch a distance of 56.35 feet to a point; thence southwesterly
along said ditch a distance of 190.51 feet to a point; thence westerly along
said ditch a distance of 81.56 feet to a point in the centerline of right-of-
way of Road 1-1 otherwise known as the Centerville Road; thence northerly along
the centerline of right-of-way of Road 1-1 to a point at the intersection of
the centerline of Road 1-1 with the north boundary line of Swancreek Township-
Village of Swanton Cemetery; thence westerly along the north line of said
cemetery to the east line of a parcel of land that lies 181.00 feet east of the
north-south quarter line of Section 12; thence northerly along said east line a
distance of 650.30 feet to a point in the centerline of right-of-way of State
Route 2- US20A Highway; thence southwesterly along said centerline a distance
of 50.00 feet to a point; thence southerly and parallel to the aforesaid east
line a distance of 644.20 feet to a point; thence westerly a distance of 131.00
feet to a point in the north-south quarter line of Section 12; thence southerly
along said quarter line a distance of 744.60 feet to a point in the south
boundary of the Swancreek-Village of Swanton Cemetery; thence easterly along
said south boundary line to a point in the centerline of right-of-way line of
Road 1-1, said point being immediately south of the Swancreek-Lucas ditch No. 3
bridge across Road 1-1; thence southerly along the centerline of right-of-way
line of Road 1-1 to the south line of Section 12; thence westerly along said
south line of Section 12 a distance of 1317.32 feet to a point; thence
southerly along the north-south quarter line of Section 13 a distance of 330.57
feet to a point; thence easterly and parallel to the north line of Section 13 a
distance of 1318.00 feet to a point in the centerline of right-of-way of Road
1-1; thence southerly along said centerline of right-of-way a distance of
1771.48 feet to a point; thence westerly a distance of 254.00 feet to a point;
thence southerly a distance of 300.00 feet to a point; thence westerly a
distance of 246.00 feet to a point; thence southerly a distance of 175.00 feet
to a point; thence easterly a distance of 40.00 feet to a point; thence
southerly a distance of 360.00 feet to a point; thence easterly a distance of
460.00 feet to a point in the centerline of right-of-way of Road 1-1; thence
southerly along said centerline a distance of 1,179.64 feet to a point; thence
westerly a distance of 880.00 feet to a point; thence southerly a distance of
198.00 feet to a point; thence westerly a distance of 456.76 feet to a point on
the north-south quarter line of Section 13; thence continuing westerly a
distance of 1307.52 feet to a point in the west line of the northeast quarter
of the southwest quarter of Section 13; thence northerly along aforesaid west
line to the line between Sections 12 and 13; thence westerly along said section
line an approximate distance of 449.00 feet to a point 924.00 feet east of the
west corner between Sections 12 and 13; thence northerly at an interior angle
of 91'27'44" a distance of 1490.29 feet to a point; thence southwesterly and
parallel to the centerline of right-of-way of State Route No. 2-US20A a
distance of 222.75 feet to a point; thence northerly a distance of 212.00 feet
to a point; thence westerly to a point in the line between Sections 11 and 12
said line also being the centerline of right-of-way of Township Road 2, said
point lying 260.00 feet south of a known iron pin set in the intersection of
the west line of Section 12 with the centerline of right-of-way of State Route
2 and US20A; thence northerly along said section line a distance of 14.53 feet
to a point; thence westerly through Lot 18 of Homeville Subdivision a distance
of 344.91 feet to a point in the east right-of-way line of Holiday Drive of
said subdivision; thence northerly along the east line of said Holiday Drive a
distance of 206.28 feet to a point in the centerline of right-of-way of State
Route 2-US20A; thence northeasterly along said centerline to the aforementioned
iron pin at the intersection of said centerline and the line between Sections
11 and 12; thence continuing northeasterly along the centerline of right-of-
way of State Route 2-US20A a distance of 1364.61 feet to a point; thence
northerly a distance of 238.34 feet to a point; thence easterly a distance of
136.18 feet to a point; thence southerly a distance of 223.51 feet to a point
in the centerline of right-of-way of State Route 2 -US20A; thence northeasterly
along said centerline a distance of 516.20 feet to a point; thence northerly a
distance of 711.95 feet to a point; thence easterly a distance of 426.82 feet
to a point; thence southerly a distance of 276.95 feet to a point; thence
westerly a distance of 308.55 feet to a point; thence southerly a distance of
423.82 feet to a point in the centerline of right-of-way of State Route 2-
US20A; thence northeasterly along said centerline a distance of 682.00 feet to
its intersection with the west line of a 50 foot wide parcel of unannexed land
that extends southerly from the centerline of right-of-way of State Route 2-
US20A to the north line of the unannexed Swancreek Township-Village of Swanton
Cemetery, said intersection with the west line of the 50 foot wide parcel being
the point of boundary closure for all annexed land south of the centerline of
State Route 2 and US20A; thence southwesterly along the centerline of right-of-
way of State Route 2-US20A a distance of 127.50 feet to a point on the north-
south quarter line of Section 12; thence northerly along said quarter line a
distance of 1124.00 feet to a point; thence westerly a distance of 256.90 feet
to a point in the east right-of-way line extended of Elton’s Parkway; thence
northerly binding upon said street east line a distance of 125.00 feet to a
point; thence westerly across the 50 foot right-of- way of Elton’s Parkway and
binding upon the north right-of-way of Harding Drive a distance of 354.09 feet
to the beginning of a curve to the right; thence binding upon the arc length a
distance of 108.65 feet to the beginning of a curve to the left; thence binding
upon the arc length along the north right-of-way line of Harding Drive a
distance of 129.04 feet to a point; thence northerly a distance of 183.74 feet
to a point on the north line of Outlot 15; thence westerly a distance of 264.60
feet to a point; thence southerly a distance of 213.74 feet to a point in the
centerline of right-of-way of Harding Drive; thence westerly a distance of
204.00 feet along said centerline to a point; thence northerly a distance of
213.74 feet to a point; thence westerly along the north line of Outlot 15 a
distance of 206.41 feet to the centerline of right-of-way of Browning Street;
thence southerly along said centerline a distance of 91.20 feet to the south
line of the Clendenin & Wells Subdivision; thence westerly along the south line
of said subdivision a distance of 862.66 feet to the center of Branch No. 2 of
AI Creek; thence southeasterly along the centerline of said creek to its
intersection with an east-west property line that is 188.56 feet south and
parallel to the south line of the Clendenin & Wells Subdivision; thence
westerly along said property line to the line between Sections 11 and 12, said
line also being the centerline of right-of-way of Munson Road; thence southerly
along said centerline a distance of 89.69 feet to a point; thence westerly a
distance of 1,317.25 feet to a point; thence northerly a distance of 324.63
feet to a point; thence northerly a distance of 34.63 feet to a point; thence
easterly a distance of 1,316.84 feet to a point in the line between Sections 11
and 12 in the centerline of right-of-way of Munson Road; thence northerly along
said section line a distance of 1,294.88 feet to a point; thence westerly
parallel to the north line of Section 11 a distance of 253.75 feet to a point;
thence northerly parallel to the east line of Section 11 a distance of 330.00
feet to a point in the north line of Section 11; thence easterly along said
north section line a distance of 253.75 feet to the common corner between
Sections 11 and 12 Swancreek Township and Sections 1 and 2 Fulton Township, all
four sections being in Township 7 North, Range 8 East and said corner being at
the intersection of centerlines of right-of-way of Munson Road and Dodge
Street; thence northerly along the line between Sections 1 and 2 a distance of
991.50 feet to a point at the northwest corner of Misty Meadows Subdivision;
thence easterly along the north line of said subdivision a distance of 642.70
feet to its northeast corner; thence southerly along the east line of said
subdivision a distance of 425.69 feet to the north line of Lot 7 of Fulton
Heights Subdivision; thence easterly along said north line to the northeast
corner of said subdivision; thence continuing easterly along the same line a
distance of 283.80 feet to a point; thence northerly parallel to the north-
south-quarter-quarter line a distance of 100.30 feet to a point; thence
westerly a distance of 50.50 feet to a point; thence northerly parallel to
aforesaid quarter-quarter line a distance of 632.00 feet to a point in the
east-west quarter-quarter line; thence easterly a distance of 190.00 feet to
the north-south quarter-quarter line; thence northerly along said quarter-
quarter line to the east-west quarter line of Section 1; thence easterly along
said quarter line to the centerline of right-of-way line of Main Street also
being State Route No. 64; thence northwesterly along said centerline a distance
of 730.60 feet to a point; thence southwesterly a distance of 345.95 feet to a
point; thence northwesterly a distance of 169.62 feet to a point; thence
northeasterly a distance of 339.03 feet to a point in the centerline of right-
of-way of Main Street and State Route No. 64; thence northwesterly along said
centerline of right-of-way to its intersection with the south right-of-way line
of the Ohio Turnpike; thence easterly along said south right- of-way line to
the north-south quarter line of Section 1; thence northerly along said right-
of-way line a distance of 35.00 feet to a point; thence easterly along the
south right-of-way line of the Ohio Turnpike to its intersection with the east
line of Section 1, Township 7 North, Range 8 East, Fulton Township said
intersection point being in the line between Fulton and Lucas Counties and also
being the place of beginning. Also including in the annexed area a parcel of
land located on the north side of the north right-of-way line of the Ohio
Turnpike and on the east side of State Route No. 64 and being more
particularity described as follows: Commencing at the intersection of the
centerline of right-of-way of State Route No. 64 with the north right-of-way
line of the Ohio Turnpike, said intersection point also being the place of
beginning; thence northwesterly along said centerline of State Route No. 64 a
distance of 225.00 feet to a point; thence northeasterly at approximately 90'
to said centerline a distance of 200.00 feet to a point; thence easterly and
parallel to the north right-of-way line of the Ohio Turnpike a distance of
310.80 feet to a point; thence southerly a distance of 299.20 feet to a point
in the north right-of-way line of the Ohio Turnpike; thence westerly along said
north right-of-way line a distance of 335.20 feet to the place of beginning,
said described parcel containing 2.86 acres of land more or less. The above-
described boundaries of that part of the Village of Swanton located within the
confines of Fulton County encompass an approximate total of 1,110 acres more or
less.
(Ord. 93-8, passed 8-23-1993)
§ 37.15 VILLAGE CORPORATION MAP.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/083b2827ca6deba1b1fb1d5dec2edfde91f29d3b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1549.jpg]
 
(Ord. 93-8, passed 8-23-1993)
§ 37.16 VILLAGE ENTERPRISE ZONE APPLICATION - SAMPLE.
Village of Swanton
ENTERPRISE ZONE APPLICATION
 
Note: If additional space is needed for any item on the application, indicate with
an (*) and supply attachments.
1. Name of Applicant Firm:
___________________________________________________________________
2. Current Address:
___________________________________________________________________
3. Telephone: ___________________________________________________________________
4. Proposed Address if Different from above:
___________________________________________________________________
5. Type of Business Organization (Corporation, Partnership and the
like)________________________________
In State of: ______________________________________
6. Name(s) and Title(s) of Principal Owner(s), or Officers:
__________________________________________
7. Is the Business Seasonal in Nature?    Yes________ No _________
8. Present Number of Employees: _________________ Payroll $_________________
9. Proposed Number of New or Directly Retained Job at Project Site:
New _____________________________________ Retained
________________________________________
10. Estimated Annual Payroll Generated from the New Employees or Payroll Saved for
Retained Employees:
___________________________________________________________________
11. Pre-project Market Value of the Existing Facility (If Any) as Determined for
Local Property Taxation:
   A. Real Property:
$_____________________________________________________________
   B. Tangible Personal Property:
$____________________________________________________________
12. An Estimate of the Amounts to Be Invested:
    A. Purchase of Land/Building: $ ___________________________
   B. New Building Construction: $____________________________
   C. Building Additions:
$_____________________________________________________________
   D. Improvements to Existing Building:
$_____________________________________________________
   E. Machinery and Equipment:
$____________________________________________________________
   F. Furniture and Fixtures:
$______________________________________________________________
   G. Inventory: $______________________________________________________________
13. Total investment amount:
$__________________________________________________________________
14. Total investment ELIGIBLE FOR ABATEMENT:
$_____________________________________________
15. Present Current Investment in the New Facility or New Site (if any):
$______________________________
16. Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) number:
________________________________________________
   CERTIFICATIONS
   A. The applicant believes the information contained hereon and submitted
herewith is complete and correct to the best of his or her knowledge and belief.
   B. The applicant understands that, if approved, the information contained on
this application will form the basis for a signed Agreement between the applicant
firm and the village, county, state law and local policy required annual
monitoring for conformance to that Agreement. Failure to comply may result in loss
of incentives.
   C. This applicant hereby certifies that the firm is current in all tax
obligations in Fulton County and the State of Ohio.
Typed Name and Title:
_____________________________________________________________________
Signatures: _____________________________________________________________________
Date: _____________________________________________
 
(Ord. 93-8, passed 8-23-1993)
§ 37.17 PROJECT COMPLETION SCHEDULE.
   (A)   Indicate pre-project values under “Current” column and value of
increases or improvements over each previous year for columns “One through
“Five” as appropriate.
   (B)   Your projected first year for startup of commercial operations
resulting from this project is 20____.
 
          Current 20___ One 20___ Two 20___ Three 20___ Four 20___ Five 20___
Employment                                                      
Inventory                                                       
Payroll                                                         
Personal                                                        
property
Real                                                            
property
 
(Ord. 93-8, passed 8-23-1993)
§ 37.18 SUPPLEMENTAL DOCUMENTATION AND DEFINITION.
   (A)   Supplemental documentation. The village must find “…that the
enterprise submitting the proposal is qualified by financial responsibility and
business experience to create and preserve employment opportunities in the
zone…” according to the R.C. § 5709.62(C). In order to meet these and other
obligations, we are requiring the following documentation:
      (1)   Company financial statements for the previous three fiscal years
including both profit and loss statements and balance sheet; or three year Pro
Forms projections if a startup;
      (2)   Brief history of company and description of the business:
      (3)   Copy of the most recent tangible personal property tax filing to
county or state; and
      (4)   Legal description of property, including taxing district and parcel
numbers.
   (B)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      FACILITY. An enterprise’s place of business in a zone, including land
buildings, machinery, equipment and other material used in business.
(Ord. 93-8, passed 8-23-1993)
§ 37.19 OPERATIONAL PROTOCOL FOR THE VILLAGE RESCUE UNIT.
   A complete text of which is of which is on file in the office of the Village
Administrator.
(Ord. 93-8, passed 8-23-1993)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   RESIDENTIAL REFUSE COLLECTION
      
51.   SEWERS
      
52.   WATER
      
53.   FEES AND PARTS
      
54.   STORM WATER UTILITY
CHAPTER 50: RESIDENTIAL REFUSE COLLECTION
Section
   
50.01   Definitions
   
50.02   Contract to be granted by Council
   
50.03   Billings and payments
   
50.04   Collection regulations
   
50.05   Previous permits and licenses revoked
 
   
50.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Adjustments to utility bill policy and procedure, see §
36.08
§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMERCIAL. A non-dwelling property upon which solid waste and refuse is
created and collected once a week pickup by container size up to eight yards,
except that residential buildings with four or more units will be considered
COMMERCIAL.
   CUSTOMER. Any residential property within the village upon which refuse is
created, but shall not include vacant units of persons or property.
   INDUSTRIAL. Units are defined as follows:
      (1)   Commercial pickups requiring larger containers than eight yards, or
requiring pickup more than one each week;
      (2)   Residential buildings with four or more units; and
      (3)   Manufactured home parks and mobile home parks.
   REFUSE. Includes solid waste, as defined herein, and will not consist of old
appliances (white goods), water tanks, furniture, mattresses, dismantled swing
sets, tires, auto parts, engines, batteries, blocks, fenders, parts of
automobile bodies, used oil or building materials.
   REFUSE CONTRACTOR. The person, corporation or other entity granted the
exclusive franchise for collection of residential refuse by separate ordinance.
   RESIDENTIAL. A dwelling unit, non-“commercial” as defined above, upon which
is created solid waste or other refuse provided, however, that a dwelling or
residential building shall contain no more than four apartments or residential
units. A duplex shall be considered two residential units.
   SOLID WASTE. All putrescible wastes, except sewage and body wastes,
including vegetable and animal offal and carcasses of dead animals, together
with all non-putrescible wastes. SOLID WASTE shall include all discarded
household waste such as garbage, trash, ashes, tin, glass, paper, rags and the
like, except building materials, stone, rock and dirt. Tree limbs, brush or
wood will be considered SOLID WASTE as long as it is bundled in lengths of no
more than four feet and diameter not exceeding two feet and securely tied.
(Ord. 88-45, passed 9-26-1988; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 50.02 CONTRACT TO BE GRANTED BY COUNCIL.
   The Council shall by separate ordinance, grant the rights and privileges of
an exclusive contract for the hauling of refuse from residential units within
the village. No person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind shall engage in the business of collecting and hauling
refuse from residential premises within the corporate limits of the village
unless authorized by contract by the village. Industrial and commercial units
are exempt from said ordinance.
(Ord. 88-45, passed 9-26-1988; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 50.03 BILLINGS AND PAYMENTS.
   Every residential unit shall be charged a quarterly fee, payable in advance,
as established by separate ordinance, for refuse collection. Billings and
payments shall be made directly through the refuse contractor.
(Ord. 88-45, passed 9-26-1988; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 50.04 COLLECTION REGULATIONS.
   The following regulations are hereby established for refuse collection.
   (A)   Collection will be made between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
every Monday or Tuesday, if Monday is a holiday.
   (B)   Collection will be at the curbside or at alley line adjacent to
collection unit. No customer shall place the refuse as to obstruct the streets,
sidewalk, alleyways or passageways of the village or in such a manner to create
a nuisance.
   (C)   Customers shall place the refuse to be collected at curbside or alley
no sooner than 8:00 p.m. of the prior day.
    (D)   Refuse shall be placed in bags or containers approved by the Village
Administrator, not to exceed 50 pounds in weight, and a maximum of six bags or
containers per week.
   (E)   Customers who shall be absent from their premises for three
consecutive months may apply, in advance, for an exemption from the provisions
of this chapter for said period.
   (F)   All refuse shall be drained of liquid before being deposited for
collection.
   (G)   Special application may be made to the Village Administrator for cases
of aged, feeble or disabled customers with whom the designate time or curbside
collection is a hardship.
   (H)   Broken glass must be properly wrapped.
   (I)   It shall be unlawful for any customer to keep refuse for a longer
period of time upon the premises than that expiring between two consecutive
collection dates.
(Ord. 88-45, passed 9-26-1988; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 96-26, passed
7-26-1992) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.05 PREVIOUS PERMITS AND LICENSES REVOKED.
   All permits or licenses heretofore issued by the village to individuals,
corporations or associations permitting the collection, removal and disposal of
refuse from residential premises are hereby revoked. The Village Administrator
is hereby directed to direct notice of said action to all existing permit
holders.
(Ord. 88-45, passed 9-26-1988; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be guilty of a minor misdemeanor on the first offense; and a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree on any subsequent offense. Each day such a violation continues
shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 88-45, passed 9-26-1988; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
CHAPTER 51: SEWERS
Section
General Provisions
   
51.001   Definitions
   
51.002   Disposition of funds
   
51.003   Tampering with or damaging works prohibited
   
51.004   Violations
   
51.005   Powers and authority of inspectors
   
51.006   Village Administrator to make rules; appeals
Use of Public Sewers
   
51.015   Allowable discharge of unpolluted water
   
51.016   Authority for control of wastewater discharges
   
51.017   Connection with sewer required
   
51.018   Discharge of untreated wastes to any natural outlet
   
51.019   Discharge of wastes to storm sewers
   
51.020   Grease and oil interceptors
   
51.021   Ground garbage
   
51.022   Industrial agreements
   
51.023   Maintenance of pretreatment facilities
   
51.024   Privies, privy vaults, septic tanks, cesspools prohibited; exception
   
51.025   Prohibition on unpolluted water
   
51.026   Sewer pipe ventilation
   
51.027   Storm and surface waters
   
51.028   Substances limited
   
51.029   Substances prohibited
   
51.030   Toilet facilities and connections required
   
51.031   When preliminary treatment required
Control of Industrial Wastes
   
51.045   Analyses
   
51.046   Control manholes
   
51.047   Extension of time
   
51.048   Flow measurement, sampling and monitoring
   
51.049   Inadmissible wastes
   
51.050   Normal concentrations of wastes
   
51.051   Oil and grease
   
51.052   Pollutants in excess of normal concentrations
   
51.053   Segregation of clean and polluted water
   
51.054   Submission of basic data
   
51.055   Temperature control
   
51.056   Toxic materials
   
51.057   Wastewater harmful to wastewater facilities
   
51.058   Wastewater volume determination
Design of Public Sewers
   
51.070   Approval
   
51.071   Connection to public sewer
   
51.072   Depth, grade, alignment and change of direction
   
51.073   EPA standard applies
   
51.074   Independent sewers required; exception
   
51.075   Laterals
   
51.076   Lifting sewage by artificial means
   
51.077   Removal of sewer by village; charges a lien
   
51.078   Trap required
   
51.079   Type of pipe required
   
51.080   Use of old sewer for new buildings
Construction of Public Sewers and Building Sewers
   
51.095   Abandoned laterals
   
51.096   Barricades and warning lights; restoration
   
51.097   Installation
   
51.098   Owner to pay costs, indemnify village for damages
   
51.099   Permit required
   
51.100   Submission of plans
Inspection of Public Sewers and Building Sewers
   
51.115   Applicant to notify when work ready for inspection and connection
   
51.116   Classes of permits; application and fee
   
51.117   Inspection of existing facilities
   
51.118   Inspection of new laterals
   
51.119   Notification
Private Sewers and Sewage Disposal
   
51.135   Conflict with requirements of Health Officer
   
51.136   Connection to public sewer required when available
   
51.137   General conditions
   
51.138   Health district recommendations; subsurface soil absorption; discharge
to public sewer or natural outlet
   
51.139   Owner’s responsibility
   
51.140   Permit required; application and fee
   
51.141   Required improvements
   
51.142   Sanitary operation and maintenance
Revenue Schedule
   
51.155   Declaration of necessity
   
51.156   Sewer Revenue Fund; uses
   
51.157   User charges; wastes of normal concentration
   
51.158   Debt service charges; wastes of normal concentration
   
51.159   Extra strength surcharges (for user charges and debt service charges)
   
51.160   Industrial cost recovery surcharge
   
51.161   Wastewater collection and treatment rates
   
51.162   Method of payment
   
51.163   Charges a lien
   
51.164   Measurement and determination of water used
   
51.165   Fire hydrants exempted
   
51.166   Effective date of charges
   
51.167   Method of collecting charges
   
51.168   Exemption of sewer charge on initial filling of swimming pools
Service Extension Outside the Village
   
51.180   Cost of material and labor
   
51.181   General conditions
   
51.182   Rates and charges
 
   
51.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Adjustments to utility bill policy and procedure, see §
36.08
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATOR. The Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, or
any person authorized to act for him or her.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five days at 20°C expressed in milligrams per liter.
   BUILDING DRAIN. That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and convey it to the building sewer, beginning
three feet outside the building wall.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension for the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal.
   CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
chemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures
expressed in milligrams per liter.
   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer receiving both surface runoff and municipal wastes.
   COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. BOD, suspended solids, pH fecal coliform bacteria and
additional pollutants identified in the NPDES permit if the publicly owned
treatment works was designed to treat such pollutants and in fact does remove
such pollutants to a substantial degree. Examples of such additional pollutants
may include: COD; total organic carbon; phosphorus and phosphorus compounds;
nitrogen and nitrogen compounds; fats, oils and greases of animal or vegetable
origin except as prohibited under §
51.029.
   DOMESTIC WASTES. The liquid material from sanitary conveniences collected
from residences, business buildings, institutions and industries. DOMESTIC
WASTES do not include trade or process wastes.
   ENGINEER. The Engineer of the village or his or her authorized
representative.
   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY. The Federal (or United States)
Environmental Protection Agency, or any person authorized to act for the
agency.
   FEDERAL ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972,
Pub. L. No. 92-500, being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq., and any amendments
thereto; as well as any guidelines, limitations and standards promulgated by
the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the Act.
   FLOATABLE OIL. Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility.
   GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food,
and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
   INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Any pollutant which is not a compatible pollutant as
defined above.
   INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY (ICR). Recovery by the village from the industrial
users of the treatment works of the grant amount that would be allocated to the
treatment of wastes from such users.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. The wastewater from industrial trade, or business
processes as distinct from domestic wastes.
   INDUSTRY. A manufacturing activity identified as a “Division A, B, D, E or
I” industry, as defined in the Office of Management and Budget’s Standard
Industrial Classification Manual, 1997, as amended and supplemented.
   INTERCEPTING SEWER. A sewer intended to receive flows from both combined
sewers and sanitary sewers.
   MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRY. An industrial user of the publicly owned
treatment works that meets any one or more of the following criteria:
      (1)   Has a flow of 50,000 gallons or more per average work day;
      (2)   Has a flow greater than 5% of the flow carried by the municipal
system receiving the waste;
      (3)   Has in its waste, a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in
standards issued under § 307(a) of the Federal Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1317(a);
or
      (4)   Is found by the permit issuance authority in connection with the
issuance of an NPDES permit to the publicly owned treatment works receiving the
waste, to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other
contributing industries, on that treatment works or upon the quality of
effluent from the treatment works.
   MAINTENANCE. Upkeep and repair costs required to maintain the wastewater
treatment works structures and equipment in efficient operating conditions
during the service life of such works.
   MAY. Is permissive.
   MUNICIPAL WASTES. A combination of water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with
such ground, surface and storm waters as may be present.
    MUNICIPAL WASTES TREATMENT PLANT. Any arrangement of devices and structures
used for treating municipal wastes.
   MUNICIPAL WASTES WORKS. All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing of municipal wastes.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other
body or surface or ground water.
   NPDES PERMIT. The national pollutant discharge elimination system permit.
   OPERATION. Any physical and mechanical actions, processes or functions
required to efficiently operate the wastewater treatment works as defined
herein.
   PERSON. An individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or
group.
   pH. The reciprocal of the logarithm of the hydrogen ion concentration. The
concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions, in grams, per liter of solution.
Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of 7 and a hydrogen ion
concentration of 10 -7.
   POLLUTANT. Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, wastewater,
garbage, wastewater sludge, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar
dirt and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into water.
   PRETREATMENT. The treatment of wastewater from sources before introduction
into publicly owned wastewater treatment facilities.
   PRIVATE SEWER. Any extension of the wastewater facilities which is not a
public sewer.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The water from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half-inch in any dimension.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal
rights, and is controlled by public authority.
   REPLACEMENT. Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances necessary to retain design capacity and
performance of the wastewater treatment works throughout the village’s
jurisdiction.
   SANITARY SEWAGE. Domestic wastes contributed by reason of human occupancy.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industries and institutions, together with
minor quantities of ground, storm and surface waters that are not admitted
intentionally.
   SANITARY SEWER CHARGES. The aggregate of rate increments established by
three separate revenue systems, i.e., user charges, industrial cost recovery
(ICR) and debt service charges.
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit for carrying municipal wastes.
   SHALL. Is mandatory.
   SLUG. Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any
given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration
longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration
or flows during normal operation and shall adversely affect the collection
system and/or performance of the wastewater treatment works.
   STORM DRAIN or STORM SEWER. A drain or sewer for conveying water, ground
water, subsurface water or unpolluted water from any source, but excludes
domestic wastes.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The Superintendent of Municipal Wastes Works of the village,
or his or her authorized deputy, agent or representative.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Total suspended matter that either floats on the surface
of, or is in suspension in, water, wastewater or other liquids and that is
removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater, and referred to as nonfilterable residue.
   TOXIC POLLUTANTS. Means, but is not necessarily limited to, aldrin-dieldrin,
benzidine, cadmium, cyanide, DDT-endrin, mercury, polychlorinated biphenyls
(PCBs) and toxaphene. Pollutants included as TOXIC shall be those promulgated
as such by the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria delineated in the NPDES permit or water that would not cause violation
of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge
to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
   USER CHARGE. A charge levied on users of the wastewater works for the cost
of operation and maintenance of such works.
   USER CLASS. Any class of users of the wastewater works, as defined in §§
51.155 through
51.167.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Swanton, Fulton County, Ohio.
   WASTEWATER. The spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source,
it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with any
ground water, surface water and storm water that may be present.
   WASTEWATER FACILITIES. The structures, equipment and processes required to
collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of
the effluent.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS, WASTE TREATMENT PLANT, WASTEWATER TREATMENT
PLANT or WATER POLLUTION CONTROL PLANT. An arrangement of devices and structure
for treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge. WASTEWATER TREATMENT
WORKS shall include sanitary sewers, combined sewers and intercepting sewers,
but shall not include storm sewers.
   WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously
or intermittently.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 51.002 DISPOSITION OF FUNDS.
   All money for permit and inspection fees collected under the provisions of
§§
51.116 and
51.140 shall be deposited in the Sewer System Development Fund.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 51.003 TAMPERING WITH OR DAMAGING WORKS PROHIBITED.
   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is a part of the municipal wastewater facilities. Any person
violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of
disorderly conduct.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.004 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter, except
§
51.003, shall be served by the village with written notice stating the nature
of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within a period of time stated in such
notice, permanently cease all violations.
   (B)   If violations of any provision of this chapter shall be found, a
written notice, stating the nature of the violation, shall be sent by first
class mail to the person apparently guilty of the violation. This notice shall
be deemed sufficient, in the event of violation, if sent to the address of that
person as shown on water account records. The notice shall, in all cases, set
forth a time limit during which all noted violations shall cease and be abated,
and appropriate corrective action taken, and if the violator shall not thus
comply, the provisions of the following division (C) below shall then apply.
   (C)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
become liable to the village for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the
village by reason of such violation, notwithstanding whether said person may
have been prosecuted for a violation of the terms of this chapter.
   (D)   Any person violating state and/or federal regulations as a consequence
of violating any provisions of this chapter shall be subject to penalties
imposed by state and/or federal regulations, irrespective of the provisions of
§
51.003.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.005 POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.
   (A)   Employees of the village, duly authorized by the Village Administrator
and bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter
all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling and testing pertinent to discharge to the wastewater treatment works
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The authorized employees of
the village are authorized to obtain information concerning industrial or
commercial processes which have a direct bearing on the kind and source of
discharge to the wastewater treatment works. A user may withhold information
considered confidential. A user must establish that the revelation to the
public of the information in question might result in an advantage to
competitors.
   (B)   While performing the necessary work on private properties, the
authorized employees of the village shall observe all safety rules applicable
to the premises established by the owner, and the owner shall be held harmless
for injury or death to the village employees, and the village shall indemnify
the demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the owner
and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be
caused by negligence or failure of the owner to maintain safe conditions as
required in §
51.142.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 51.006 VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR TO MAKE RULES; APPEALS.
   The Village Administrator shall make and enforce rules and regulations,
subject to approval of Council, establishing the types and characteristics of
sanitary sewage and industrial wastes, and other matter not specifically
covered in this chapter which shall not be discharged into the village sewerage
system, and the types and characteristics of sanitary sewage and industrial
wastes admissible to the village sewerage system only after pretreatment. Such
rules and regulations shall be subject to appeal to Council, which shall
appoint three reputable and qualified persons to investigate the appeal and
agree to affirm or reject the ruling of the Village Administrator.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS.
§ 51.015 ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE OF UNPOLLUTED WATER.
   Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such
sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to
a natural outlet approved by the village and other regulating agencies.
Unpolluted industrial cooling water or process waters may be discharged on
approval by the village and the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency to a storm
sewer or natural outlet.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 51.016 AUTHORITY FOR CONTROL OF WASTEWATER DISCHARGES.
   (A)   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which contain the substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in §§
51.028 and
51.029 and which in the judgment of the Village Administrator, may have a
deleterious effect upon the wastewater facilities, processes, equipment or
receiving waters, including violation of applicable water quality standards, or
which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the
Village Administrator may:
      (1)   Reject the wastes;
      (2)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
      (3)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
      (4)   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating
the wastes under the provisions of §§
51.155 through
51.167.
   (B)   All industrial wastes discharges to the public sewers by major
contributing industries shall as a minimum meet the national pretreatment
standards or best practical control technology currently available for
incompatible pollutants as published in 40 C.F.R. part 129 unless the village
is committed, in its NPDES permit, to remove a specified percentage of the
incompatible pollutant. In those instances the applicable pretreatment
standards may be correspondingly reduced to levels determined by the
Administrator, or his or her duly authorized representative or state regulatory
agencies.
   (C)   If the Village Administrator requires pretreatment or equalization of
waste flow, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be
subject to the review and approval of the Village Administrator and state
regulatory agencies and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes,
ordinances and laws.
    (D)   (1)   Pursuant to the policy of the Ohio Environmental Protection
Agency, infiltration/inflow (I&I) credits from the village are available for
reservation on a first-come, first-serve basis. If I&I credits are available,
and after recommendation of the village water and sewer committee, and approval
of the Village Council, the village will reserve them for a development
effective on the date the sanitary sewer plans for the development are approved
by the village, contingent on approval by the Ohio Environmental Protection
Agency. If I&I credits are not available, the development will be placed on a
standby list until I&I credits become available. Developments will be placed on
the standby list in the order in which the sanitary sewer plans for each
development were approved by the village and developments will be allocated I&I
credits as they become available in the same order.
      (2)   I&I credits which are not used within one year after the same are
reserved will be subject to the following: all or part of the credits which
remain unused shall revert to the village upon request of the Village
Administrator and upon the approval of the Village Council in the event other
requests have been made for the same credits and the developer or person
reserving said credits has not provided adequate assurances that the sanitary
sewers will be completed within six months; or upon insolvency, bankruptcy or
termination of the development or project; or in the event the Ohio EPA
modifies its rules and regulations relative to the use of such credits. The
developer or property owner shall sign any and all documents required to return
such credits to the village.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 2003-29,
passed 8-11-2003)
§ 51.017 CONNECTION WITH SEWER REQUIRED.
   No person shall maintain or use or permit to be used upon any lot or land
abutting upon or adjacent and accessible to a public sanitary sewer any water
closet, urinal or sink not connected with such sewer in such manner as to
properly discharge its contents into such sewer. No abandoned well shall be
used as a sink or privy vault.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.018 DISCHARGE OF UNTREATED WASTES TO ANY NATURAL OUTLET.
   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the village,
or in any area under the jurisdiction of the village, any sanitary sewage,
industrial wastes or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has
been provided in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.019 DISCHARGE OF WASTES TO STORM SEWERS.
   Wastes shall not be discharged into a storm sewer unless the waste is of
such character as would permit the waste to be discharged directly to the body
of waste to which the storm sewer discharges and be in compliance with all
criteria and standards of discharge established by the Village Administrator
and other regulatory agencies.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.020 GREASE AND OIL INTERCEPTORS.
   For grease, oil and inorganic material such as sand, grit and the like,
interceptors shall be provided when in the opinion of the Village
Administrator, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes
containing floatable grease in excessive amounts, as specified in §
51.028, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that
such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials
capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall
be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped with easily removable
covers which, when bolted in place, shall be gastight and watertight. All
interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Village
Administrator, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for
cleaning and inspection. In the maintenance of these interceptors the owner
shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means
of the captured material and shall maintain records of the dates, and means of
disposal which are subject to review by the Village Administrator. Any removal
and hauling of the collected materials not performed by the owner personnel
must be performed by currently licensed waste disposal firms.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.021 GROUND GARBAGE.
   (A)   This disposal of unground garbage to the sewer system is prohibited.
To prevent the disposal of solid industrial wastes and large quantities of
solid organic materials as ground garbage, garbage grinder installations are
restricted to locations where food is prepared for consumption on the premises.
   (B)   Four requirements for “properly ground garbage” are that only food
wastes be considered a garbage; that all ground particles be of such size that
they will be carried freely under the normal flow conditions prevailing in the
sewer conduit to which they are contributory; that installation of a garbage
grinder with a three-fourths horsepower (or greater) motor be subject to
approval of the Village Administrator or his or her authorized representative;
and that limitation on acceptable garbage grinder operation specify that no
more than 30%, on the dry basis, pass a No. 40 U.S. Standard sieve.
(Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) (Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.022 INDUSTRIAL AGREEMENTS.
   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the village and any industrial concern
whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by
the village for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industrial
concern.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.023 MAINTENANCE OF PRETREATMENT FACILITIES.
   Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or
wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective
operation, by the owner at his or her expense.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.024 PRIVIES, PRIVY VAULTS, SEPTIC TANKS, CESSPOOLS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.
   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.025 PROHIBITION ON UNPOLLUTED WATER.
   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted storm
water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling
water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. Any
existing roof drain connections to sanitary sewers or combined sewers shall be
connected into available storm sewer or shall be disconnected above ground in
the manner approved by the Village Administrator.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.026 SEWER PIPE VENTILATION.
   No sewer pipe for a water closet or any other connection shall be allowed
inside any house or building unless proper means are provided for the
ventilation of such pipe or sewer so as to effectually prevent sewer gas from
entering the house or building.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.027 STORM AND SURFACE WATERS.
   All surface runoff from areas expected to yield good quality water such as
roofs, paved areas, lawns and discharge from ground water collection systems
must be excluded from separate sanitary sewers. Runoff from certain uncovered
areas of an industrial plant during the initial period of rainfall is likely at
times to contain appreciable concentrations of materials. Such areas as rail
car or truck unloading stations, tank farms or unhoused process equipment may
be expected to receive material from leaks, spills, drips, tank washouts, tank
overflows, hose drainages and clean-outs. Limited and isolated areas can be
drained to the sanitary sewers so that both the wet and dry weather flows
receive treatment. If such an area is too extensive to permit admittance to the
sanitary sewer of the quantity of rainfall runoff involved, a system for
admitting the first flush of runoff to the sanitary sewer and automatic
division of additional runoff to the storm sewer shall be installed. The
diversion should be made after 0.25 inches (0.64 cm) of rainfall. An
alternative to the direct diversion of wastewaters from these areas is the use
of approved holding facilities with controlled discharge. Basements shall be
drained to the sanitary sewer because the wastewaters from washing machines,
portable laundry tubs and shower baths can cause gross pollution of storm sewer
outlets. Foundation drains are required to be discharged to a storm sewer.
Unpolluted water from air-conditioning systems, industrial cooling operation,
swimming pools and so forth shall be discharged to the storm sewers or directly
to natural drainage outlets.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.028 SUBSTANCES LIMITED.
   (A)   The following described substances, materials, waters or wastes shall
be limited in discharges to municipal systems to concentration or quantities
which will not harm either the sewers, wastewater treatment process or
equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or will not
otherwise endanger lives, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. The
Village Administrator may set limitations lower than the limitations
established in the regulations below if in his or her opinion more severe
limitations are necessary to meet the above objectives. Deliberate dilution
with unpolluted water to meet the concentrations established in the regulations
below shall not be acceptable. In forming his or her opinion as to the
acceptability, the Village Administrator will give consideration to such facts
as the quantity of such waste in relation to flows and velocities in the
sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, the wastewater treatment
process employed, capacity of the wastewater treatment plant, and other
pertinent factors.
   (B)   The limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of
waste or wastewater discharged to the sanitary sewer which shall not be
violated without approval of the Village Administrator are as follows:
      (1)   Wastewater having a temperature higher than 150°F;
      (2)   Wastewater containing more than 50 milligrams per liter of
petroleum oil, non- biodegradable cutting oils, products of mineral oil origin,
floatable oils, fat, wax and grease;
      (3)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Garbage grinders
may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions,
restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments or similar places where garbage
originates from the preparation of food in the kitchens for the purpose of
consumption on the premises or when served by caterers;
      (4)   (a)   Any waters or wastes containing solids, liquids or gases in
sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes to
injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard
to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard to humans
or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving
waters of the wastewater treatment plant including, but not limited to,
cyanides, hexavalent chromium, copper, zinc, cadmium, nickel and phenols in the
wastes as discharged to the public sewer. The following concentrations shall
not be exceeded in industrial wastes discharged to the public sewers:
Cadmium             0.2 mg/l
Copper              1.0 mg/l
Hexavalent chromium 1.0 mg/l
Hydrogen sulfide    10 mg/l
Lead                0.5 mg/l
Mercury             0.01 mg/l
Nickel              2.0 mg/l
Phenols             0.2 mg/l
Silver              0.2 mg/l
Sulfur dioxide gas  5 mg/l
Total cyanide (CN)  0.5 milligrams per liter (mg/l)
Zinc                1.0 mg/l
 
         (b)   These maximum concentrations may be changed as necessary by the
Village Administrator or state regulatory agencies based on new information
concerning inhibitory substances or to protect treatment plant processes.
Industrial dischargers covered by federal pretreatment requirements shall meet
those limitations specified under effluent guidelines published under §§ 304(b)
and 307(b) of the Federal Act, being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1314(b) and 1317(b) or the
above concentrations, whichever is more stringent. Major contributing
industries discharging incompatible pollutants into the public sewers shall be
regulated as provided in §
51.017.
      (5)   Any waters or wastes containing odor-producing substances exceeding
limits which may be established by the Village Administrator or any local or
state regulatory agencies;
      (6)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits in compliance with applicable state or
federal regulations;
      (7)   Quantities of flow, concentrations or both which constitute “slug”
as defined in §
51.001;
      (8)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed, or are
amenable only to such degree that the wastewater treatment plant effluent
cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge to the receiving waters; and
      (9)   Any water or wastes which by interaction with water or wastes in
the public sewer system, release noxious gases, from suspended solids which
interfere with the collection system, or create a condition deleterious to
structures and treatment processes.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.029 SUBSTANCES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described materials into any public sewers (or treatment works):
   (A)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, cleaning solvents, paint
vehicles or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas;
   (B)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 6.0 or higher than 9.0 or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment and personnel of the wastewater treatment works;
   (C)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interferences with the
proper operation of the wastewater facilities such as, but not limited to,
ashes, bones, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure,
hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers and the
like, either whole or ground by garbage grinders. Direct discharge of such
materials as tar, asphalt, paint and waxes shall also be prohibited because
they may adhere to sewers and thus reduce the effective size of the pipe;
   (D)   Any garbage which has not been properly shredded as described in
detail in §
51.021; and
   (E)   Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a
public nuisance.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.030 TOILET FACILITIES AND CONNECTIONS REQUIRED.
   The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purposes situated within the village and
abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or
may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the
village, is hereby required at his or her expense to install suitable toilet
facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper
public sewer in the provisions of this chapter, within 90 days after the date
of the official notice provided such public sewer is within 100 feet of the
property line.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.031 WHEN PRELIMINARY TREATMENT REQUIRED.
   The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having a five-
day BOD in excess of normal sewage shall be subject to the review and approval
of the Village Administrator. When necessary, in the opinion of the Village
Administrator, such preliminary treatment facilities as may be needed to
control the quantities and rates of discharges or reduce objectionable
characteristics or constituents shall be constructed according to plans
approved by the Village Administrator.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
51.999
CONTROL OF INDUSTRIAL WASTES.
§ 51.045 ANALYSES.
   (A)   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association.
Sampling methods, locations, times, durations and frequencies are to be
determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the Village
Administrator or his or her duly authorized representative.
    (B)   Determination of the character and concentration of the industrial
wastes shall be made by the user responsible for the discharge, or his or her
qualified agent as approved by the Village Administrator. The results of the
analyses, shall be reported to the village on a monthly basis on forms provided
by the village. The village makes its own analyses on the wastes and these
determinations shall be binding as a basis for charges, except under
circumstances in division (C) below.
   (C)   In case the analyses performed by the industry and the village result
in substantially different values, an effort shall be made by the industry to
collect samples at the same time the village collects its own samples. The
results of the analyses on the samples collected by the village and the
industry shall be compared using the same testing procedures as outlines in the
latest edition of Standard Methods and the differences negotiated.
   (D)   All costs incident to sampling and analyses shall be borne by each
user requiring such testing and analysis. Such costs incurred by the village
shall be billed annually to each such user, based upon actual cost to the
village, plus reasonable overhead. Such billing shall be billed with, and be
considered a part of, the sanitary sewer charge for the month billed.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.046 CONTROL MANHOLES.
   Each person discharging industrial wastes into a public sewer shall
construct and maintain one or more control manholes or access points to
facilitate observation, measurement and sampling of his or her wastes,
including sanitary wastewater. Control manholes or access facilities shall be
located and built in a manner acceptable to the Village Administrator. Where
required, measuring devices are to be permanently installed in the control
manhole, and shall be of a type acceptable to the Village Administrator.
Control manholes, access facilities and related equipment shall be installed by
the person discharging the waste at his or her expense and shall be maintained
by him or her so as to be in safe condition, accessible and in proper operating
condition at all times. Plans for the installation of such facilities shall be
approved by the Village Administrator prior to the beginning of construction.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.047 EXTENSION OF TIME.
   (A)   When it can be demonstrated that circumstances exist which would
create an unreasonable burden on the person to comply with the time schedule
imposed by §
51.054, a request for extension of time may be presented for consideration of
the Village Administrator. All requests for extension of time shall be
submitted in writing, stating the reasons for such a request.
   (B)   Under no circumstances shall the extension of time exceed 60 days
after approval of the extension by the Village Administrator.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.048 FLOW MEASUREMENT, SAMPLING AND MONITORING.
   The use of a water level recorder should be used for head measurements.
Consideration should be given to the fact that wastewater flow is subject to
variation depending on season, day of the week and plant production levels.
Collection of samples of wastewater for laboratory analysis requires extreme
care to obtain a representative sample. A series of samples must be collected
and composited in proportion to flow rates over a 24-hour period to obtain a
representative sample for laboratory analysis. Where a plant has more than one
sewer outlet, samples must be collected at each outlet and composited in
proportion to the flow rate at the outlet. The composite for the entire plant
is computed from these data. Flow is usually measured over a 24-hour period. To
measure slugs, readings at 15-minute intervals are necessary. A continuous
analyzer requires samples be taken every 15 minutes.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 51.049 INADMISSIBLE WASTES.
   Certain waste products shall be completely excluded from the sewers. These
waste products fall into five categories:
   (A)   Wastes that create a fire or explosive hazard in the sewers or
wastewater facility (§
51.029 (A));
   (B)   Waste products that will impair the hydraulics capacity of the sewer
system (§
51.029(B), (C) and (D)); and
   (C)   Wastes that, in any quantity, create a hazard to people, the sewer
system, the treatment process or the receiving waters (§
51.029).
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.050 NORMAL CONCENTRATIONS OF WASTES.
   (A)   Charges for wastes treatment pursuant to §§
51.155 through
51.167 shall apply to wastes not exceeding normal concentrations as follows:
      (1)   BOD: 200 milligrams per liter; and
      (2)   Suspended solids: 240 milligrams per liter.
   (B)   Applicable concentrations shall be based upon average concentrations,
weighted in proportion to volume of flow, determined during each monthly
billing period by the most practicable method possible. Should the average
concentration of any constituent exceed the normal concentration provided in
division (A) above, a surcharge for each constituent so exceeded shall apply
for the applicable monthly billing period, in accordance with the provisions of
§§
51.155 through
51.167.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 51.051 OIL AND GREASE.
   If oils and grease are biodegradable and in a physical state that does not
cause clogging or undue maintenance problems in the wastewater facilities, the
discharge of these substances can be accepted in a wastewater treatment system.
Animal and vegetable oils and greases (polar substances) are readily degradable
in aerobic and anaerobic biological treatment systems provided that the
physical states of the oils and grease do not prevent the necessary contact
with the biological suspensions responsible for treatment. However oils and
grease of mineral origin (primarily non-polar substances) are essentially non-
biodegradable either in aerobic or anaerobic processes and should be removed
from industrial wastes to the maximum degree practical before discharge. The
discharge of these oils and greases of mineral origin shall be limited to the
regulation of the village. Grease separators are required for all meat packing
plants and on building sewers serving hotels, restaurants and institutions in
which large numbers of meals are served. However, the use of garbage grinders
precludes the use of gravity grease separators. Flammable waste and grit
intercepting facilities must be provided on all building sewers from garages,
filling stations, cleaning establishments and other concerns using volatile
oils or solvents. Special pretreatment methods are required for the removal of
soluble cutting oils. All grease and oil removal facilities must be approved by
the Village Administrator.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.052 POLLUTANTS IN EXCESS OF NORMAL CONCENTRATIONS.
   (A)   Wastewater containing pollutants in excess of normal concentrations as
defined in §
51.050 shall be:
      (1)   Subject to prohibition of discharge to the wastewater treatment
works;
      (2)   Subject to pretreatment prior to discharge to the wastewater
treatment works to comply with concentrations or amounts of pollutants
established by the village and subject to payment of a surcharge pursuant to §§
51.155 through
51.167; or
      (3)   Permitted to be discharged to the wastewater treatment works
without pretreatment, subject to payment of a surcharge pursuant to §§
51.155 through
51.167.
   (B)   The Village Administrator shall determine which of the three
alternates shall apply, based upon the volume and concentration of pollutants
of the wastewaters involved.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 51.053 SEGREGATION OF CLEAN AND POLLUTED WATER.
   Wastewaters discharged from industrial and commercial establishments include
process wastewaters containing organic or inorganic solids and cooling or
condensing waters containing no added organic matter or reducing gases. Waters
of the latter class, incapable of causing objectionable conditions in an open
watercourse, shall be segregated from polluted wastes and discharged to storm
sewers or to a natural outlet. Rainfall runoff shall not always be considered
clean water but shall be routed according to its quality as per §
51.027. Even though unpolluted wastes do not increase the organic load on
wastewater treatment units, the added volume increases pumping costs and
reduces detention periods of settling tanks, and aeration units.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.054 SUBMISSION OF BASIC DATA.
   Within 90 days after passage of this chapter, each person whose operation
entails the discharge of industrial wastes to a public sewer shall prepare and
file with the Village Administrator, a written statement setting forth the
nature of the operation contemplated or presently carried on, the amount and
source of waste required for use, the proposed point of discharge of said
wastes into the wastewater collection system of the village, the estimated
amount to be so discharged and a fair statement setting forth the expected
bacterial, physical, chemical and other known characteristics of said wastes.
Within a reasonable time of receipt of such statement, it shall be the duty of
the Village Administrator to make an order stating such minimum restrictions as
in the judgment of the Village Administrator may be necessary to adequately
guard against unlawful uses of the village’s wastewater system.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.055 TEMPERATURE CONTROL.
   The direct discharge of storm and boiler blow-offs is prohibited along with
the discharge of any wastewater at a temperature above 150°F (65°C). In areas
where hydrogen sulfide production is of unusual significance in wastewater,
this limit may be too high, and a lower limit shall be set at the discretion of
the Village Administrator.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.056 TOXIC MATERIALS.
   The discharge of water containing dangerous levels of toxic materials
including those listed below, is limited to the regulation of the Village
Administrator:
   (A)   Substances having toxic effects, fire and explosive hazards, or
corrosive properties;
   (B)   Substances having a cumulative toxic effect in the food chain;
   (C)   Substances that are refractory to biological degradation;
   (D)   Heavy metals such as copper, zinc and nickel which are additive in
their effect of inhibition of the activated sludge process. The restriction
shall be based on a summation of the concentration of these metals, each
modified by a relative toxicity factor; and
   (E)   Mineral acids and alkaline metals that affect the concentration of
hydrogen ions and hydroxyl ions in the wastewater. The pH of the wastewater
should be between 6.0 and 9.0.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.057 WASTEWATER HARMFUL TO WASTEWATER FACILITIES.
   The discharge of all wastes that would damage or interfere with the
operation of the wastewater facility, subject to the provision of adequate
pretreatment, is limited to the discretion of the Village Administrator.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.058 WASTEWATER VOLUME DETERMINATION.
   (A)   The volume of flow used for computing industrial waste surcharges
shall be the metered water consumption of the user as shown in the records of
water meter readings maintained by the village except as herein provided in
this section.
   (B)   If the user discharging industrial wastes into the public sewers
procures any part, or all of this water from sources other than the village
water system, all or part of which is discharged into the public sewer, the
user shall install and maintain at his or her expense water meters of a type
approved by the Village Administrator for the purpose of determining the volume
of water obtained from those other sources.
   (C)   The user discharging industrial wastes into the public sewers may
install and maintain at his or her expense metering devices for determining the
volume of waste being discharged to the public sewer, from which the industrial
waste surcharge would be computed. The measuring devices shall be of a type
acceptable to the Village Administrator.
   (D)   The Village Administrator may require the installation of devices for
measuring the volume of waste discharged, if these volumes cannot otherwise be
determined from the metered water consumption records.
   (E)   Any metering device for determining the volume of waste discharged to
the public sewer shall be installed, owned and maintained by the user.
Following approval and installation, such meters may not be removed without the
consent of the Village Administrator.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
51.999
DESIGN OF PUBLIC SEWERS.
§ 51.070 APPROVAL.
   All designs shall be approved by the Village Administrator prior to
construction.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.071 CONNECTION TO PUBLIC SEWER.
   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at
a Y-tap, which shall be installed by the applicant and which shall have a
clean-out brought up to ground level using materials and specifications set
forth in §
51.079. The location of the clean-out shall be designated by the Supervisor of
Public Services.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.072 DEPTH, GRADE, ALIGNMENT AND CHANGE OF DIRECTION.
   Whenever possible the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an
elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to
or within three feet of any bearing wall which might thereby be weakened. The
depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost. The building sewer
shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as possible.
Changes in direction shall be made only with properly curved pipe and fittings.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.073 EPA STANDARD APPLIES.
   Sewers shall be designed in accordance with the Ohio Environmental
Protection Agency Design Guidelines.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.074 INDEPENDENT SEWERS REQUIRED; EXCEPTION.
   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building. However, where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the
whole considered as one building sewer. All costs and expenses incidental to
the installation, connection and maintenance of a building sewer lateral shall
be borne by the owner. The owner and/or contractor shall indemnify the village
from any loss, damage or costs that may be directly or indirectly occasioned by
the installation and/or maintenance and operation of any building sewer.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.075 LATERALS.
   The size and slope of the building sewer lateral shall be subject to the
approval of the Village Administrator, but in no event shall the diameter be
less than six inches. The slope of such six-inch pipe may be not less than one-
eighth inch per foot.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.076 LIFTING SEWAGE BY ARTIFICIAL MEANS.
   In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity
flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall be lifted
by approved artificial means and discharged to the building sewer.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.077 REMOVAL OF SEWER BY VILLAGE; CHARGES A LIEN.
   The Village Administrator may cause to be taken up or removed any drain or
sewer constructed in violation of §
51.079 so far as the same is within the limits of any public property, thereby
disconnecting such sewer or drain from any pubic sewer, unless the owner or
person benefitted by the drain or sewer provides a trap therefore. The costs
and expenses of removal shall constitute a charge against the owner of and be a
lien upon the property intended to be drained by such drain or sewer, and if
not paid upon demand by the Village Administrator the same shall be certified
to the Fulton County Auditor to be placed upon the tax duplicate for such
property, or shall be otherwise collected.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.078 TRAP REQUIRED.
   It shall be a minor misdemeanor for the owner of any property abutting upon
any public sewer, or which is drained or may be drained by any public sewer, to
construct, cause or suffer to be constructed from his or her property or any
part thereof any drain or sewer to connect with any public sewer unless there
is provided for an attached to the drain or sewer a good and sufficient trap.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.079 TYPE OF PIPE REQUIRED.
   (A)   The building sewer shall conform to the following specifications:
Pipe Material Spec. Joint Spec.
Pipe                  Material Spec.   Joint Spec.
ABS (4 in. and 6 in.) ASTM D-2661      ASTM D-2661
ABS (8 in. and over)  ASTM D-2680      ASTM D-2680
Asbestos cement       ASTM C-428       ASTM D-1869
Asbestos cement       ASTM C-644       ASTM D-1869
Cast iron             AWWA C-106       AWWA C-111
Clay                  ASTM C-700       ASTM C-425
PVC                   ASTM C-3034      ASTM D-3212
                      (SDR35 or less)
PVC                   ASTM C-3033      ASTM D-3212
                      (SDR 35 or less)
 
   (B)   Pipe other than listed above shall be permitted only when approved by
the Engineer. The approval will be subject to depth of installation, trench
width, soil conditions and locations of the pipe. To make transitions and
connections, watertight adapters and/or flexible couplings with stainless steel
bands shall be used.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 78-24, passed
8-14-1978) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.080 USE OF OLD SEWER FOR NEW BUILDINGS.
   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when
they are found, on examination and test by the Public Services Supervisor, to
meet all requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
51.999
CONSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC SEWERS AND BUILDING SEWERS.
§ 51.095 ABANDONED LATERALS.
   Sanitary sewers in buildings to be demolished shall be permanently sealed,
in a manner acceptable to the Public Services Supervisor, before demolition is
started.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.096 BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS; RESTORATION.
   All excavations for a building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course
of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the Public Services
Supervisor. All excavations in roadway areas shall be backfilled with well-
compacted sand or gravel, tamped in place.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.097 INSTALLATION.
   The requirements for bedding, haunching and initial backfilling shall be in
accordance with the following.
   (A)   Bedding. A minimum layer of six-inch bedding consisting of 000T #8
granular bedding material shall be provided upon a stable undisturbed subgrade.
If an unstable subgrade is encountered, the Village Administrator or his or her
duly authorized representative shall determine the method of building required
subgrade support.
   (B)   Haunching. After the pipe has been placed on the approved bedding
material, 000T #8 granular material shall be placed around the sides of the
pipe from the undisturbed trench wall to the pipe. Under no circumstances shall
the maximum allowable trench width for the type, size and depth of pipe be
exceeded. Unless otherwise approved or ordered, the maximum allowable trench
widths measured at the top of the pipe shall be 27 inches for six- and eight-
inch diameter pipe, 30 inches for ten-inch diameter pipe, 33 inches for 12-inch
diameter pipe.
   (C)   Initial backfill. No backfill shall be placed until after inspection
is completed by the Public Services Supervisor or his or her duly authorized
representative. After the haunching of the pipe has been completed, the pipe
shall be covered with 000T #8 granular material to a plane, six-inches above
the top of the pipe.
   (D)   Backfill. Upon completion of the initial backfill, the best excavated
material shall be used for backfilling the trench. Trash, boulders, frozen soil
and the like shall not be used as backfill material. If the pipe is laid under
a pavement or berm area, the pipe shall be backfilled with approved granular
material, a minimum of six-feet beyond the edge of the berm or edge of pavement
in absence of a berm.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.098 OWNER TO PAY COSTS, INDEMNIFY VILLAGE FOR DAMAGES.
   All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the
village for any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by
the installation of the building sewer.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.099 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening
into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without
first obtaining a written permit from the Village Administrator.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.100 SUBMISSION OF PLANS.
   Upon completion of construction, drawings shall be corrected to represent
the “as-built” elevations, grades and sizes. One reproducible print shall be
supplied to the village.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
51.999
INSPECTION OF PUBLIC SEWERS AND BUILDING SEWERS.
§ 51.115 APPLICANT TO NOTIFY WHEN WORK READY FOR INSPECTION AND CONNECTION.
   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Village
Administrator when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to
the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the
Public Services Supervisor.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.116 CLASSES OF PERMITS; APPLICATION AND FEE.
   (A)   There shall be two classes of building sewer permits as follows:
      (1)   For residential and commercial use; and
      (2)   For service to establishments producing industrial wastes.
   (B)   In either case, the owner or his or her agent shall make application
on a special form furnished by the village. The permit application shall be
supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered
pertinent in the judgment of the Village Administrator. A permit and inspection
fee of $650 shall be paid to the Fiscal Officer at the time the application is
filed.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 91-10, passed 7-15-1991; Ord. 92-20, passed
9-28-1992; Ord. 97-27, passed 10-27-1997) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.117 INSPECTION OF EXISTING FACILITIES.
   The Village Administrator and his or her authorized agents and employees are
granted the right to enter any and all properties and buildings, public and
private, upon reasonable notice and at a reasonable time to inspect sewer
connections any appurtenances thereto, to collect samples of wastes, and to
test for violators of these rules and regulations.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.118 INSPECTION OF NEW LATERALS.
   The building sewer lateral and its connection into the main sanitary sewer
shall be left exposed for inspection and approval of the Public Services
Supervisor or his or her duly authorized agent. Upon approval, the Public
Services Supervisor will authorize the placing of backfill over the connection
and pipe at which time the building sewer lateral may be used for its intended
purpose.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.119 NOTIFICATION.
   Prior to commencing any construction of public or building sewers a minimum
of 24 hours’ notice shall be given to the office of the Public Services
Supervisor. No construction of sewers shall be allowed on legal holidays,
Saturdays, Sundays or after 4:30 p.m. unless written permission is obtained
from the Village Administrator. The Village Administrator may require the
payment by the contractor if inspection costs for work performed on days and at
times listed in the written permission.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
51.999
PRIVATE SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
§ 51.135 CONFLICT WITH REQUIREMENTS OF HEALTH OFFICER.
   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed to interfere with
any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Ohio Environmental
Protection Agency.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 51.136 CONNECTION TO PUBLIC SEWER REQUIRED WHEN AVAILABLE.
   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a
private sewage disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the public
sewer in compliance with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools and
similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with
suitable material.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.137 GENERAL CONDITIONS.
   All private sewers shall be subject to the conditions set forth in this
chapter.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.138 HEALTH DISTRICT RECOMMENDATIONS; SUBSURFACE SOIL ABSORPTION; DISCHARGE
TO PUBLIC SEWER OR NATURAL OUTLET.
   The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal
system shall comply with all recommendations of the Ohio Environmental
Protection Agency and be approved in writing by the Fulton County Health
Department. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system
employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is
less than 15,000 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to
discharge to any public sewer or natural outlet.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.139 OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   All costs and expenses incidental to the installation, connection and
maintenance of a building sewer lateral shall be borne by the owner. The owner,
and/or contractor shall indemnify the village from any loss, damage or costs
that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation and/or
maintenance and operation of any building sewer.
   (B)   The owner’s responsibility for repair is limited to the property
street right-of-way. The owner remains liable for clean-outs to the sewer main.
Repairs beyond the right-of-way, on public property, are the responsibility of
the village.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 91-10, passed 7-15-1991; Ord. 92-20, passed
9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.140 PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION AND FEE.
   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the
owner shall first provide written proof to the Village Administrator that such
system has been approved by the County Health Department.
(Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 51.141 REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS.
   The village may require improvements to private sewers to reduce
infiltration and/or inflow or require a sewage meter be installed to meter the
infiltration and/or inflow to determine an accurate sewage charge.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 51.142 SANITARY OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE.
   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities
in a safe and sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the village.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
51.999
REVENUE SCHEDULE.
§ 51.155 DECLARATION OF NECESSITY.
   It is hereby determined and declared to be necessary to the protection of
the public health, safety, welfare and convenience of the citizens of the
village to establish and collect charges upon all lots, lands and premises
served by or having connections with the village sewerage system.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 51.156 SEWER REVENUE FUND; USES.
   (A)   All funds received from the collection of the rates and charges
provided in §
51.157 shall be deposited regularly in the Village Treasury, who shall keep the
same in a fund designated “Sewer Revenue Fund”, subject to the provisions of
any ordinance or indenture of mortgage authorizing and securing the issuance of
mortgage revenue bonds for such system.
   (B)   Monies in the Fund shall be used for the payment of costs of
construction, management, maintenance, operation and repair of the sewerage
system and sewage pumping, treatment and disposal works, and for the payment of
debt charges on bonds issued for the construction, extension and improvement of
the system. Any surplus in such fund over and above the requirements previously
mentioned may be used for additions, betterment, enlargement and replacement of
the system and parts thereof, for the payment of such debt, but shall not be
used for any other purpose which would be contrary to the purposes permitted
under R.C. § 729.52.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 51.157 USER CHARGES; WASTES OF NORMAL CONCENTRATION.
   (A)   A user charge shall be levied on all users of the wastewater treatment
works to provide funds necessary to pay for the cost of operation and
maintenance of such works. The user charges must result in the distribution of
all cost of operation and maintenance of the treatment works to each user, or
user class, in proportion to such users contribution to the total wastewater
loading of the treatment works. Factors such as strength, volume and delivery
flow rate characteristics shall be considered and included as the basis for the
user’s contribution to ensure a proportional distribution of operation and
maintenance costs. The method to be used to establish the user charges for
wastes within the limits of normal concentrations as defined in §
51.052 shall be defined in this section. The method to be used to establish the
user charge extra strength surcharge for wastes in excess of normal
concentrations shall be defined in §
51.159.
   (B)   The volume of wastewater from each user shall be subject to a base
user charge per 1,000 gallons, as follows:
      (1)   Charges for each billing period during a calendar year shall be
based upon the following values for that calendar year:
         (a)   Estimated total operation and maintenance expenses, excluding
those expenses attributable to debt service costs and excluding any expenses
classified as reimbursable expenses;
         (b)   Estimated annual revenue from extra strength surcharges; and
         (c)   Estimated total water consumption subject to sanitary sewer
charges.
      (2)   The base user charge per 1,000 gallons shall equal:
         (a)   Estimated total operation and maintenance expenses pursuant to
division (B)(1)(a) above;
         (b)   Estimated revenue from extra strength surcharges; and
         (c)   Estimated water consumption subject to sanitary sewer charges,
in 1,000 gallons.
   (C)   User charges levied pursuant to this section shall be billed pursuant
to §
51.162. The rates shall be as pursuant to §
51.161.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 51.158 DEBT SERVICE CHARGES; WASTES OF NORMAL CONCENTRATION.
   (A)   A debt service charge shall be levied on all users of the wastewater
treatment works to provide funds necessary to meet all principal and interest
payments on the village’s share of the wastewater treatment works construction
and to generate funds for new capital improvements in the wastewater treatment
works (including the collection system). The method to be used to establish the
debt service charges for wastes within the limits of normal concentrations (as
defined in §
51.052) shall be defined in this section. The method to be used to establish
the debt service charge - extra strength surcharge for wastes in excess of
normal concentrations shall be defined in §
51.159.
   (B)   The volume of wastewater from each user shall be subject to a base
debt service charge per 1,000 gallons, as follows:
       (1)   Charges for each billing period during a calendar year shall be
based upon the following values for that calendar year:
         (a)   Total debt service payments attributable to the wastewater
treatment works (and attributable to sanitary sewer charges as the source of
revenues for such payments);
         (b)   The annual budget amount established by the Village Council to
be allocated for new capital improvements in the wastewater treatment works;
and
         (c)   Estimated total water consumption subject to sanitary sewer
charges.
      (2)   The base debt service charge per 1,000 gallons shall equal:
         (a)   Total debt service payments pursuant to division (B)(1)(a)
above; plus
         (b)   Annual budget amount for new capital improvements pursuant to
division (B)(1)(b) above; and
         (c)   Estimated water consumption subject to sanitary sewer charges,
in 1,000 gallons.
   (C)   Debt service charges pursuant to this section shall be billed pursuant
to §
51.162. The rates shall be as pursuant to §
51.161.
   (D)   In addition to the charges set forth in division (A) above, an
infiltration and inflow (I&I) capital expansion charge shall be made for each
tap into the sanitary sewerage system. This portion of the capital expansion
charge shall be $2 for each gallon per day (gpd) entering the sewerage system
from within the village and $4 for each gallon per day entering the sewerage
system from outside the village. The flow used in the calculation of this
charge shall be determined by using one of the methods described in division
(D)(1), (D)(2) or (D)(3) below.
      (1)   (a)   If the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency has issued a
permit to install for all of the facilities tributary to a tap, this charge
shall be based on the average daily design flow in gpd as stated in the
application for the permit to install.
         (b)   Flows shall be based upon the Ohio EPA Flow Guide attached as
Appendix A, adopted by reference as if set out in full herein.
      (2)   If all of the facilities tributary to a tap are residential, this
charge shall be based on a flow of 400 gpd per dwelling unit ($800 inside the
village per home; $1,600 outside the village per home.)
      (3)   If the facilities tributary to a tap do not meet the parameters of
division (D)(1) or (D)(2) above, the sewer customer shall submit all
information necessary, including supporting data acceptable to the village, to
establish an average design flow for the facilities.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 2003-32,
passed 8-25-2003)
§ 51.159 EXTRA STRENGTH SURCHARGES (FOR USER CHARGES AND DEBT SERVICE CHARGES).
   (A)   In addition to the base user charges and debt service charges
applicable pursuant to §§
51.157 and
51.158, users discharging pollutants to the wastewater treatment works of the
village, whose average concentration, as defined in §
51.052, in one or more classifications exceeds in any month that concentration
defined as normal in §
51.052 for the corresponding classification, shall be subject to surcharges
calculated as follows:
       (1)   (a)   Surcharges for each billing month during a calendar year
shall be based upon the following values for that calendar year:
            1.   Estimated total operation and maintenance expenses pursuant to
§
51.157(B)(1)(a): Cto;
            2.   Total debt service payments pursuant to §
51.158 (B)(1)(a): Ctd;
            3.   Estimated total pounds of BOD received at the plant: Bt; and
            4.   Estimated total pounds of suspended solids received at the
plant: St.
         (b)   Data not available shall be established in the most practicable
manner possible.
      (2)   Surcharge on user charges per pound of BOD in excess of normal
equals:
Cto x 0.3
_________________
Bt
      (3)   Surcharge on user charges per pound of suspended solids in excess
of normal equals:
Cto x 0.3
_________________
St
      (4)   Surcharge on debt service charges per pound of BOD in excess of
normal equals:
Cto x 0.25
_________________
Bt
      (5)   Surcharge on debt service charges per pound of suspended solids in
excess of normal equals:
Cto x 0.25
_________________
St
      (6)   Pounds of BOD per billing period subject to surcharge equals:
(average concentration of BOD, calculated pursuant to § 51.050, in milligrams
per liter minus 200 milligrams per liter) times volume of wastewater discharged
from the user to the wastewater treatment works per billing period, in 1,000
gallons, times 0.00834. If average concentration of BOD is 200 milligrams per
liter, or less, no surcharge for BOD shall apply.
      (7)   Pounds of suspended solids per billing period subject to surcharge
equals: (average concentration of suspended solids, calculated pursuant to §
51.050, in milligrams per liter minus 240 milligrams per liter) times volume of
wastewater discharged from the user to the wastewater treatment works per
billing period, in 1,000 gallons, times 0.00834. If average concentration of
suspended solids is 240 milligrams per liter, or less, no surcharge for
suspended solids shall apply.
      (8)   Surcharge on user charges equals (pound of BOD calculated pursuant
to division (A)(6) above) times (surcharge per pound calculated pursuant to
division (A)(2) above); plus (pounds of suspended solids calculated pursuant to
division (A)(7) above) times (surcharge per pound calculated pursuant to
division (A)(5) above).
      (9)   Surcharge on debt service charges equals (pounds of BOD calculated
pursuant to division (A)(6) above) times (surcharge per pound calculated
pursuant to division (A)(4) above; plus pounds of suspended solids calculated
pursuant to division (A)(7) above) times (surcharge per pound calculated
pursuant to division (A)(3)) above).
      (10)   Formulas as contained in divisions (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4) and (A)
(5) above shall be subject to adjustment as necessary, based upon annual audit
of sewer revenue fund expenses.
   (B)   Surcharges may also be established for pollutants other than those
provided for in this section which are permitted to be discharged to the
wastewater treatment works by the village, after pretreatment, or without
pretreatment.
   (C)   Surcharges levied pursuant to this section shall be billed quarterly
or as otherwise established by the Village Council. The rates shall be as
pursuant to §
51.161.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 51.160 INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY SURCHARGE.
   (A)   In addition to the applicable base user charges and debt service
charges pursuant to §§
51.157 and
51.158, and in addition to any applicable surcharge for wastes in excess of
normal pursuant to §
51.159, all users in the industrial user class shall be levied an industrial
cost recovery (ICR) surcharge in order that their proportionate share of the
federal grant for the wastewater treatment plant improvements (Federal Project
Number C 390957) will be recovered, provided, however, that pursuant to United
States Pub. L. No. 95-217, § 24B, being 33 U.S.C. § 204(b) industrial users
discharging the equivalent of 25,000 gallons a day or less, of any sanitary
waste, which does not contain any pollutants that: interfere with the treatment
processes, are incompatible, or contaminate or reduce the utility of the sludge
treatment works are exempted from the surcharges required herein. Upon
application in writing, the Superintendent shall make such determination. All
users in the nonindustrial user class shall be exempt from the surcharges
required in this section.
   (B)   The ICR surcharges shall be calculated as follows:
      (1)   Surcharges for flow for each billing period during a calendar year
shall be based upon the design average flow for the wastewater treatment plant
(expressed in 1,000 gallons/day): design average flow equals 920,000 gallons/
day, (Qd = 920).
      (2)   (a)   The ICR surcharge per 1,000 gallons of water metered for each
industry subject to the grant recover surcharges equals:
(Grant Amount + 30)
____________________
Qd x 365
         (b)   The “grant amount” shall be determined by their United States
Environmental Protection Agency for Project No. C 390 957.
       (3)   The ICR surcharges for each billing period for industrial wastes
having biochemical oxygen demand and suspended solids concentrations above the
normal pursuant to §
51.052 shall be based upon the design BOD and suspended solids loading for the
wastewater treatment plant (expressed in pounds per day): design BOD loading
equals 1,534 pounds per day (Bd); design suspended solids loading equals 1,841
pounds per day (Sd).
      (4)   The ICR surcharge per pound of BOD in excess of normal equals:
0.25 x (Grant Amount + 30)
____ ____________________
Bd x 365
 
      (5)   The ICR surcharge per pound of suspended solids in excess of normal
equals:
0.25 x (Grant Amount + 30)
____ ____________________
S d x 365
 
      (6)   Pounds of BOD per billing period subject to ICR surcharge shall be
calculated pursuant to §
51.159(A)(6).
      (7)   Pounds of suspended solids per billing period subject to ICR
surcharge shall be calculated pursuant to §
51.159(A)(7).
      (8)   The grant recovery provisions of this section shall remain in
effect for a period of 30 years commencing on the date on which this chapter
takes effect.
      (9)   The ICR surcharge revenues collected by the village shall be
distributed as follows:
         (a)   Fifty percent of the ICR surcharges and any interest earned
thereon, shall be reimbursed to the United States Treasury annually in
accordance with United States Environmental Protection Agency regulations;
         (b)   1.   Forty percent of the ICR surcharges shall be retained by
the village and may be used only for purposes of expansion and reconstruction
of the wastewater treatment works;
            2.   Written permission must be obtained from the Regional
Administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency before
expenditures from these retained amounts can be made; and
            3.   Pending use, the village shall invest the retained amounts for
reconstruction and expansion in accordance with the rules and regulations
established by the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
         (c)   Ten percent of the ICR surcharges may be utilized by the village
as deemed proper. There are no United States Environmental Protection Agency
restrictions on how this portion of the ICR revenues can be expended.
      (10)   Formulas as contained in divisions (B)(4) and (B)(5) above shall
be subject to adjustment as necessary, based upon an annual audit and review of
the ICR surcharges.
   (C)   Surcharges levied pursuant to this section shall be billed annually or
as otherwise established by the Village Council. The rates shall be as pursuant
to §
51.161.
    (D)   Within the limitations of all applicable federal, state and local
laws, the Federal Environmental Protection Agency shall have the right to audit
industrial waste discharge records.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 78-8, passed 4-24-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed
9-28-1992)
§ 51.161 WASTEWATER COLLECTION AND TREATMENT RATES.
   (A)   Rate structure within village corporation limits.
      (1)   Adjustment of rates on or after January 1, 2025. The rates
established in division (A) above shall automatically be adjusted to the
following rate structure for wastewater collected from premises inside the
village and treated by the village water resource recovery facility on or after
January 1, 2025:
 
Gallons         Rates
0—2,000       $36.72
2,001 and above $11.43 per thousand gallons
 
      (2)   Adjustment of rates on or after January 1, 2026. The rates
established in division (A)(1) above shall automatically be adjusted to the
following rate structure for wastewater collected from premises inside the
village and treated by the village water resource recovery facility on or after
January 1, 2026:
 
Gallons         Rates
0—2,000       $41.90
2,001 and above $11.73 per thousand gallons
 
      (3)   (a)   Adjustment of rates on or after January 1, 2027. The rates
established in division (A)(2) above shall automatically be adjusted to the
following rate structure for wastewater collected from premises inside the
village and treated by the village water resource recovery facility on or after
January 1, 2027:
 
Gallons         Rates
0—2,000       $47.76
2,001 and above $12.03 per thousand gallons
 
         (b)   Adjustment of rates on or after January 1, 2028. The rates
established in division (A)(2) above shall automatically be adjusted to the
following rate structure for wastewater collected from premises inside the
village and treated by the village water resource recovery facility on or after
January 1, 2028:
 
Gallons         Rates
0—2,000       $53.37
2,001 and above $12.33 per thousand gallons
 
         (c)   Adjustment of rates on or after January 1, 2029. The rates
established in division (A)(2) above shall automatically be adjusted to the
following rate structure for wastewater collected from premises inside the
village and treated by the village water resource recovery facility on or after
January 1, 2029:
 
Gallons         Rates
0—2,000       $57.93
2,001 and above $12.63 per thousand gallons
 
      (4)   Adjustment of rates on or after January 1, 2030. Unless otherwise
modified, the rates established in division (A)(3) above shall automatically be
adjusted for wastewater collected from premises inside the village and treated
by the village water resource recovery facility on or after January 1, 2030, on
an annual basis at an additional amount as follows:
         (a)   Monthly base rate: $1.25 increase per year effective January 1
of each subsequent year.
         (b)   Usage rate per 1,000 gallons: $0.30 increase per year effective
January 1 of each subsequent year.
   (B)   Rate structure outside the village corporation limits.
      (1)   Adjustment of rates on or after January 1, 2025. The rates
established in division (B) above shall automatically be adjusted to the
following rate structure for wastewater collected from premises outside the
village and treated by the village water resource recovery facility on or after
January 1, 2025:
 
Gallons         Rates
0—2,000       $75.70
2,001 and above $25.31 per thousand gallons
 
      (2)   Adjustment of rates on or after January 1, 2026. The rates
established in division (B)(1) above shall automatically be adjusted to the
following rate structure for wastewater collected from premises outside the
village and treated by the village water resource recovery facility on or after
January 1, 2026:
 
Gallons         Rates
0—2,000       $84.78
2,001 and above $25.61 per thousand gallons
 
      (3)   (a)   Adjustment of rates on or after January 1, 2027. The rates
established in division (B)(2) above shall automatically be adjusted to the
following rate structure for wastewater collected from premises outside the
village and treated by the village water resource recovery facility on or after
January 1, 2027:
 
Gallons         Rates
0—2,000       $94.93
2,001 and above $25.91 per thousand gallons
 
         (b)   Adjustment of rates on or after January 1, 2028. The rates
established in division (B)(2) above shall automatically be adjusted to the
following rate structure for wastewater collected from premises outside the
village and treated by the village water resource recovery facility on or after
January 1, 2028:
 
Gallons         Rates
0—2,000       $104.32
2,001 and above $26.21 per thousand gallons
 
         (c)   Adjustment of rates on or after January 1, 2029. The rates
established in division (B)(2) above shall automatically be adjusted to the
following rate structure for wastewater collected from premises outside the
village and treated by the village water resource recovery facility on or after
January 1, 2029:
 
Gallons         Rates
0—2,000       $111.42
2,001 and above $26.51 per thousand gallons
 
      (4)   Adjustment of rates on or after January 1, 2030. The rates
established in division (B)(3) above shall automatically be adjusted to the
following rate structure for wastewater collected from premises outside the
village and treated by the village water resource recovery facility on or after
January 1, 2030:
         (a)   Monthly base rate: $1.25 increase per year effective January 1
of each subsequent year.
         (b)   Usage rate per 1,000 gallons: $0.30 increase per year effective
January 1 of each subsequent year.
   (C)   User surcharges.
 
Extra Strength Surcharges
   B1. User charges         $0.12/lb. BOD
      2. Debt service charges $0.08/lb. BOD
      Total                   $0.20/lb. BOD
 
Industrial User Class
Industrial User Class
   Industrial cost recovery                         
surcharge
                              Base rate               $0.21/1,000 gallons
                              BOD surcharge rate      $0.04/lb. BOD
                              Suspended solids        $0.04/lb. Suspended
                               surcharge rate          solids
Suspended Solids
                              1. User charges         $0.14/lb. suspended
                                                       solids
                              2. Debt service charges $0.08/lb. suspended
                                                       solids
                              Total                   $0.22/lb. suspended
                                                       solids
The sanitary sewer charge rates shall be reviewed annually and shall be
revised periodically, as required, to reflect actual treatment works
operation, maintenance and debt service payment costs
 
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 80-19, passed 8-25-1980; Ord. 92-11, passed
6-8-1992; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 99-21, passed 9-13-1999; Ord.
2002-29, passed 8-12-2002; Ord. 2006-18, passed 9-11-2006; Ord. 2017-23, passed
8-28-2017; Ord. 2024-16, passed 12-9-2024)
§ 51.162 METHOD OF PAYMENT.
   For the purposes provided in §
51.156 and this section, there is hereby levied and charged upon each lot,
parcel of land or premises having an active connection with the system or
otherwise discharging sewage, industrial wastes, water or other liquids, either
directly or indirectly, into the village system, sewage charges computed, and
in an amount determinable as follows.
   (A)   Wherever more than one family unit or more than one business
professional or commercial establishment or a combination of one or more family
units, business, professional or commercial establishments are supplied by one
water meter, then the sewer rental rate shall be applied to each family,
business, professional or commercial establishment in the same manner as though
a separate water service and meter supplied each family or each business,
professional or commercial establishment. This section shall include, but shall
not be limited to, mobile homes. The largest charge will be applied to each
family, business, professional or commercial establishment before the next
lower rate is applied in determining the sewer rental rate.
   (B)   The sewage rental charge shall be paid monthly according to the
billing procedure established from time to time by the Village Council.
   (C)   The foregoing rates shall be considered net charges for sewer service
if paid within a period of 20 days next following the date of billing. If paid
after such 20-day period, the applicable charges shall be at the gross rate
which shall be 10% greater than the net charge.
   (D)   With respect to any such premises situated outside of the corporate
limits of the village, which premises now or hereafter has active connections
with the system pursuant to authorization of the Village Council, the charges
shall be the same as the charges for service inside the corporate limits, plus
a surcharge in addition thereto equal to 100% of such or gross charges.
   (E)   There is hereby established a turn-on and shutoff charge of $10 per
occurrence.
   (F)   The Village Council shall establish from time to time a charge for new
or additional taps into sewerage system.
   (G)   Each classification of service of the sewerage system as established
by the Village Council shall be charged the minimum charge and any and all
other charges over and above such minimum charge as are applicable under §
51.161.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 80-26, passed - -; Ord. 83-34, passed - -;
Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 51.163 CHARGES A LIEN.
   Charges shall constitute a lien upon the property served by such connection,
and if not paid within 90 days shall be certified to the Fulton County Auditor
and shall be collected in the same manner as other village taxes. The village
shall have the right in the event of nonpayment to discontinue water service to
such premises until the unpaid charges have been fully paid.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 51.164 MEASUREMENT AND DETERMINATION OF WATER USED.
   The following methods shall be used to determine the sewage charges provided
by §
51.161 upon premises served by the system.
   (A)   On premises using water exclusively supplied by the municipal water
works and having a water meter acceptable to the village, the quantity of water
used, as measured by such meter, shall determine the sewer charge as provided
herein.
   (B)   On premises using water exclusively supplied from other sources than
the municipal waste works, where the quantity of water used is not measured by
a water meter or is measured by a water meter not acceptable to the village,
the owner or other interested party may be required at his or her expense to
install and maintain an acceptable water meter. The quantity of water used, as
measured by such meter, shall determine the water quantity for the sewage
charge as provided herein, or such water quantity may be established by
negotiation between such owner or interested party and the village.
   (C)   On premises using water supplied both by the municipal water works and
from other sources not measured by a meter acceptable to the village, such
owner or other interested party may be required at his or her expense to
install and maintain an acceptable water meter to measure water from such other
sources. The quantity of water used as measured by such meter, plus such
measured quantity as supplied by the municipal water works, shall determine the
water quantity for the sewage charge as herein provided, or such water quantity
may be established by negotiation between such owner or interested party and
the village.
   (D)   In the event it can be shown to the satisfaction of the village, with
respect to any premises, that a portion of the water from any source used
thereon does not and cannot enter the system, then the owner or other
interested party may at his or her expense install and maintain separate water
meters where necessary to show only that portion of water used which is
discharged into the system. That quantity of water used as measured by such
meter showing discharge into the system shall determine the sewage charge
thereon at the rates provided herein. If the quantity of water being discharged
into the system is established by negotiation, such negotiated quantity at the
rate provided herein shall determine the sewage charge thereon. Swimming pools
and similar uses shall be negotiated and the volume of water used may be
established by the volume of the container and the volume of the water which
does not enter into the sewage system.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 51.165 FIRE HYDRANTS EXEMPTED.
   No water supplied by the village water works system for extinguishing fires
or furnishings or supplying water to fire hydrants and/or risers for sprinkler
systems shall be used to determine any sewer charge as set forth in §
51.161.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 79-5, passed 4-9-1979; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-
28-1992)
§ 51.166 EFFECTIVE DATE OF CHARGES.
   The rates and charges established by §
51.161 shall take effect for the month beginning January 1, 1980 and thereafter
shall be billed become payable as provided in §
51.167. The Village Council is hereby authorized to make such adjustments as it
may deem equitable or necessary with respect to the amount of charges to any
premises made for the first bill period after January 1, 1980, in order to
reflect the proper determination as to the volume of water used during the
period in accordance with §
51.164.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 79-5, passed 4-9-1979; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-
28-1992)
§ 51.167 METHOD OF COLLECTING CHARGES.
   (A)   The sewer charges provided in §
51.161 shall be payable monthly or quarterly at the municipal building. Charges
established with respect to premises served by the village water works system
shall be include in and payable with the village water bill to such premises.
With respect to premises not so served, charges shall be billed and payable at
the same times as the village water bills are rendered and become payable. Any
building or premises making connections with the system and using the same
after April 1, 1978, shall be charged a per diem prorate amount based upon the
quarter or annual minimum charge from the time such sewer connection is made or
such discharge into the system, either directly or indirectly, is begun until
the commencement of the next following billing period applicable to such
premises. However, should the measured service exceed the minimum charge, the
measured rates shall be charged.
   (B)   All property owners or other interested persons owning or being in
charge of properties situated where sewer facilities are available and having
sanitary sewage or industrial wastes shall connect all drains with the village
sewer system and pay the sewerage rental rates herein established.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.168 EXEMPTION OF SEWER CHARGE ON INITIAL FILLING OF SWIMMING POOLS.
   (A)   Users shall not be charged for sewer charge the first time a new pool
is filled upon initial construction.
   (B)   Users, who have a zoning permit on file with the village for an
existing swimming pool, constructed within the last 15 years, are eligible for
an annual flat fee adjustment for the sewer charge on the initial annual
filling of said swimming pool. This adjustment request must be submitted, to
the village, within 60 days of the initial annual fill.
      (1)   The Village Administrator, or his/her designee, will confirm if a
zoning permit is on file, within the property records maintained by the
village, and confirm that said pool on permit still exists, before adjustment
will be reviewed.
      (2)   Once zoning permit and pool are confirmed, users shall read the
water meter before and after the pool is filled, and report the meter readings,
with subsequent dates of said readings, to the village on approved form.
      (3)   The village reserves the right to verify readings, and dates,
within the fixed network system used for utility meter readings.
      (4)   The flat fee will be approved by Council annually.
   (C)   Inflatable pools, of any size, and any temporary pools are not
included in this exemption. Temporary pools are those which are used for the
season and then removed at the end of the season.
(Ord. 94-19, passed 9-12-1994; Ord. 2016-26, passed 8-8-2016; Ord. 2021-21,
passed 10-12-2021)
SERVICE EXTENSION OUTSIDE THE VILLAGE.
§ 51.180 COST OF MATERIAL AND LABOR.
   The owners of the premises outside the village who desire sewer service
shall pay the cost of materials and labor for the extension of such service
outside the village limits, or is already extended, from the point of extension
to the premises to be served. Such cost shall be paid by the owners of parcels
served and benefitted.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 51.181 GENERAL CONDITIONS.
   (A)   The village may extend sewer services to premises outside of the
village limits according to the following provisions:
      (1)   (a)   If said property is contiguous to the village, properties
must be annexed to the village prior to extension of service, whether or not a
sewer line is accessible to their premises; or
         (b)   With approval of Village Council, if said property is contiguous
to the village, the property owner agrees to file for annexation of said
property at the property owner’s expense as soon as legally possible and pursue
all appeals relative to said annexation; and enter into an agreement with the
village which sets forth terms for extension of service. Said agreement shall
be recorded in the land records of the County Recorder. No connection to said
system shall be allowed until said annexation petition is filed. For this
provision to apply, a three-fourths affirmative vote of Council is necessary.
      (2)   If annexation is not legally possible, sewer service may be
extended upon the execution of an agreement between the village and the
property owner(s) that they will petition for annexation, at their expense, as
soon as legally possible. Such agreement will be recorded in the land records
of the County Recorder and bind the successors in interest to owners’ property.
      (3)   If a main sewer line exists accessible to owners’ property, the
village may charge, in addition to the tap-in fee and any extraordinary costs
to access such main line (i.e., road bore), that property’s proportionate share
of the main sewer line installation, if not already paid, together with a
reasonable amount of interest from the date the village paid for the project.
      (4)   If a main sewer line is not accessible to a property desiring sewer
service, the village may extend a main sewer line and allocate all costs of
same to the abutting property owners. If payment arrangements are not made
prior to installation of the main sewer line, no property owner shall be
permitted to access such main sewer line until his or her proportionate share
of the cost of the main line is paid, together with a reasonable amount of
interest from the date of payment by the village, and the requirements of
either division (A)(1) or (A)(2) above, are satisfied.
   (B)   For any extension to premises outside of the village limits not
already served, a two-thirds affirmative vote of Council is necessary prior to
extension of service.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 95-9, passed
3-27-1995; Ord. 97-31, passed 11-10-1997; Ord. 2000-40, passed 1-22-2001)
§ 51.182 RATES AND CHARGES.
   The owners of the premises outside the village who desire sewer service
shall comply with such regulations for such services and shall pay such rates
and charges incident to such services as may be established from time to time
by the Village Council.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 51.999 PENALTY.
   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided
for in §
51.004 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not exceeding $250 for each
violation and incarceration not more than 30 days. Each day in which any such
violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
CHAPTER 52: WATER
Section
Fees and Charges
   
52.01   Rate structure
   
52.02   Method of payment
   
52.03   Disconnection of service
   
52.04   Charges a lien
   
52.05   Disconnection/reconnection fee
   
52.06   New connection; tap and meter fees
   
52.07   New accounts
   
52.08   Service outside the village limits
   
52.09   Reserved
   
52.10   Submission of plans
   
52.11   Savings clause
   
52.12   Fire hydrant meter deposit charges
General Regulations
   
52.20   Mandatory connection
   
52.21   Permit required
   
52.22   Maintenance of service lines
   
52.23   Cross-connection
   
52.24   Construction of water mains; submission of plans
   
52.25   Use of old water lines for new buildings
   
52.26   Determination of water used
   
52.27   Owner to pay costs, indemnify village for damages
   
52.28   Powers of the Village Administrator
   
52.29   Tampering
   
52.30   Outdoor use meters
Backflow Prevention
   
52.40   Surveys and investigations
   
52.41   Backflow prevention devices to be installed
   
52.42   Right of entry of Superintendent; information to be furnished
   
52.43   Discontinuance of service for violation
   
52.44   Individual fixture devices or air gaps
 
   
52.99   Penalty
 
   
Appendix A   Water Meter Costs
Cross-reference:
   Adjustments to utility bill policy and procedure, see §
36.08
FEES AND CHARGES
§ 52.01 RATE STRUCTURE.
   (A)   Water rate structure inside the village corporation limits. There is
hereby established the following rate structure for water furnished to premises
inside the village limits supplied by the Village Municipal Water Works from
October 1, 2017 to December 31, 2017:
 
Gallons         Rate
0–2,000       $25.43
2,001 and above $5.20 per 1,000 gallons
 
      (1)   Adjustment of rates on or after January 1, 2018. The rates
established in division (A) above shall automatically be adjusted to the
following rate structure for water furnished to premises inside the village
supplied by the Village Municipal Water Works on or after January 1, 2018:
 
Gallons         Rate
0–2,000       $26.70
2,001 and above $5.36 per 1,000 gallons
 
      (2)   Adjustment of rates on or after January 1, 2019. The rates
established in division (A)(1) above shall automatically be adjusted to the
following rate structure for water furnished to premises inside the village
supplied by the Village Municipal Water Works on or after January 1, 2019:
 
Gallons         Rate
0–2,000       $28.04
2,001 and above $5.52 per 1,000 gallons
 
      (3)   Adjustment of rates on or after January 1, 2020. The rates
established in division (A)(2) above shall automatically be adjusted to the
following rate structure for water furnished to premises inside the village
supplied by the Village Municipal Water Works on or after January 1, 2020:
 
Gallons         Rate
0–2,000       $29.44
2,001 and above $5.69 per 1,000 gallons
 
      (4)   Adjustment of rates on or after January 1, 2021. Unless otherwise
modified, the rates established in division (A)(3) above shall automatically be
adjusted for water furnished to premises inside the village supplied by the
Village Municipal Waterworks on or after January 1, 2021 on an annual basis at
an additional amount as follows:
         (a)   Monthly base rate: $1.35 increase per year effective January 1
of each subsequent year.
         (b)   Usage rate per 1,000 gallons: $0.17 increase per year effective
January 1 of each subsequent year.
   (B)   Water rate structure for athletic fields located at Swanton High
School. Water rate structure for athletic fields located at Swanton High School
serviced as outdoor use meter accounts only and not paying sanitary sewer
charges shall be charged a monthly base rate of $25 for 0–2,000 gallons used
and $6.04 per 1,000 gallons for 2,001 gallons and above. The usage rate per
1,000 gallons shall increase automatically as follows: $0.17 increase per year
effective January 1 of each subsequent year.
   (C)   Refer to §
52.05 for disconnection/reconnection fee information.
(Ord. 80-26, passed 11-10-1980; Ord. 90-5, passed 3-26-1990; Ord. 92-20, passed
9-28-1992; Ord. 99-20, passed 9-13-1999; Ord. 2002-30, passed 8-26-2003; Ord.
2006-17, passed 9-11-2006; Ord. 2015-7, passed 3-23-2015; Ord. 2017-24, passed
8-28-2017; Ord. 2017-28, passed 9-25-2017; Ord. 2018-16, passed 6-11-2018; Ord.
2019-17, passed 5-13-2019)
§ 52.02 METHOD OF PAYMENT.
   (A)   Water meters will be read monthly with bills sent monthly. For those
months in which the meter is not read, the bill will be based on an estimate of
the water which will be used in the month. This estimate will be based on the
previous consumption, however this estimate may be modified by the Village
Administrator. Upon subsequent reading of the meter, the bill will be adjusted
to account for the difference between the estimated and the actual consumption.
Bills will be sent on the first of each month and will be due on the 15th of
the same month. A 10% late payment penalty will be assessed on the outstanding
balance of the current month. The due date and/or the late charge may be
modified by the Village Administrator in unusual or exceptional cases.
   (B)   Wherever more than one family unit or more than one business,
professional or commercial establishment are supplied by one meter, then the
water created shall be applied to each unit as though a separate water meter
supplied each unit. This section shall include, but not be limited to, mobile
home courts. The largest charge will be applied to each unit before the next
lowest rate is applied.
(Ord. 80-26, passed 11-10-1980; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 2016-27,
passed 6-27-2016; Ord. 2019-17, passed 5-13-2019)
§ 52.03 DISCONNECTION OF SERVICE.
   The village shall disconnect utility service in accord with the following
policies.
   (A)   When it becomes necessary for the village to discontinue utility
service to a customer for nonpayment, service will be reinstated only after all
payments for utility service and the disconnection fee then due have been
received. It is the policy of the village to discontinue utility service to
customers by reason of nonpayment of bills only after notice and a meaningful
opportunity to be heard on disputed bills. The village's Establishment of
Utility Service Application and all bills shall contain, in addition to the
utility billing address, telephone number, email address, charge, past due
charge, and shut off date, clearly visible and easily readable provisions to
the effect:
      (1)   All bills are due and payable on or before the date set forth on
the bill;
      (2)   Disconnection of service will take place on the 2nd of the month
following the due date of the bill if payment has not been received.
      (3)   Any customer disputing the correctness of his or her bill shall
have a right to a hearing at which time he or she may be represented in person
and by counsel or any other person of his or her choosing and may present
orally or in writing his or her complaint and contentions to the village
official in charge of utility billing. This official shall be authorized to
order that the customer's service not be discontinued and shall have the
authority to make a final determination of the customer's complaint.
   (B)   Requests of delays or waiver of payment will not be entertained; only
questions of proper and correct billing will be considered. In the absence of
payment of the bill rendered or resort to the hearing procedure provided
herein, service will be discontinued at the time specified.
   (C)   The village reserves the right to discontinue utility service to any
utility customer of the village who has not had an actual utility meter service
reading conducted by village personnel for six consecutive months. Thirty days
prior to any disconnection of utility service, village personnel shall attempt
to notify the utility customer by certified mail or personal service by posting
a notice on the entry door to the premises requesting access to their property
to obtain an actual utility service reading. If an actual reading is not
obtained within ten days after the attempted notification is made, utility
service will be discontinued until an actual reading can be obtained. Prior to
the restoration of service, the village will install a meter reader at the
property at no cost to the customer to facilitate more efficient meter reading
services.
(Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 2008-24, passed 10-27-2008; Ord. 2019-17,
passed 5-13-2019)
§ 52.04 CHARGES A LIEN.
   Water and sewer charges shall constitute a lien upon the property served,
and, if unpaid, may be certified to the Fulton County Auditor and shall be
collected in the same manner as other village taxes. The village shall reserve
the right to discontinue water service to such premises until such time as the
unpaid charges are paid in full.
(Ord. 80-26, passed 11-10-1980; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 2019-17,
passed 5-13-2019)
§ 52.05 DISCONNECTION/RECONNECTION FEE.
   For residents within the village, a fee of $50 will be assessed to the
account once crews are dispatched from the utility billing office to disconnect
service. This fee will be increased to $75 if the disconnection is not
performed during normal working hours. For individuals who reside outside the
incorporated village, a fee of $75 will be charged whenever water service is
disconnected at the curb-box. This fee will be increased to $100 if the
disconnection is not performed during normal working hours. Normal working
hours shall be considered 7:00 a.m. through 3:30 p.m., Monday through Friday
with the exception of village holidays. There will be no charge for
reconnection.
(Ord. 97-34, passed 12-8-1997; Ord. 2016-25, passed 8-8-2016; Ord. 2019-17,
passed 5-13-2019)
§ 52.06 NEW CONNECTION; TAP AND METER FEES.
   (A)   For any new connection to the village water system within the
corporation limits, a tap-in fee of $1,500 shall be assessed. For any approved
new connection to the village water system outside the corporation limits, as
provided in §
52.08, a tap-in fee of $2,500 shall apply.
   (B)   Following payment of the applicable fee, the village will install the
tap, curb box, and service line connecting the two. However, if a water meter
larger than three-fourths inch or a service line exceeding one inch in diameter
is required, all additional material and installation costs shall be the sole
responsibility of the property owner.
   (C)   All new water service connections are required to be metered. The
property owner or applicant shall bear the full cost of the water meter and any
associated components, as determined by the village. Meter sizes and associated
charges are detailed in
Chapter 52, Appendix A, which may be updated by ordinance to reflect actual
procurement costs.
   (D)   When applicable, a temporary surcharge may be applied to account for
external market factors (e.g., tariffs). The final meter cost will reflect the
most current rate listed in
Chapter 52, Appendix A at the time of purchase or installation.
(Ord. 80-26, passed 11-10-1980; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 97-27,
passed 10-27-1997; Ord. 97-34, passed 12-8-1997; Ord. 2004-31, passed 10-11-
2004; Ord. 2019-17, passed 5-13-2019; Ord. 2025-14, passed 6-9-2025)
§ 52.07 NEW ACCOUNTS.
   (A)   For any individuals applying for a new account for water service with
the village, a form must be filed as supplied by the Administrator providing
necessary account information and establishing the party responsible for
payment.
   (B)   A deposit of $100 is required to establish service at a rental
property location inside the corporation limit of the village. A deposit of
$150 is required to establish service at a rental property location outside the
corporation limit of the village. Deposit refunds will only be made upon
termination of water and sewer utility service and the payment of all
outstanding charges for water and sewer utility service.
   (C)   The establishment of new water or sewer utility accounts is prohibited
for any individuals, property owners, business, corporation, or governmental
organization found to be delinquent in the payment of outstanding village
income taxes, water, sewer or storm water utility accounts or who have failed
to file their village income taxes. No new water or sewer utility accounts will
be established until all outstanding payments to the village are paid in full.
(Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 97-34, passed 12-8-1997; Ord. 2007-4,
passed 2-26-2007; Ord. 2009-1, passed 3-9-2009; Ord. 2019-17, passed 5-13-2019)
§ 52.08 SERVICE OUTSIDE THE VILLAGE LIMITS.
   (A)   Water rate structure outside the village corporation limits. There is
hereby established the following rate structure for water furnished to premises
outside of the village limits supplied by the municipal water works from
October 1, 2017 to December 31, 2017:
 
Gallons         Rate
0–2,000       $63.93
2,001 and above $7.04 per 1,000 gallons
 
      (1)   Adjustment of rates on or after January 1, 2018. The rates
established in division (A) above shall automatically be adjusted to the
following rate structure for water furnished to premises outside the village
supplied by the municipal waterworks on or after January 1, 2018:
 
Gallons         Rate
0–2,000       $65.20
2,001 and above $7.20 per 1,000 gallons
 
      (2)   Adjustment of rates on or after January 1, 2019. The rates
established in division (A)(1) above shall automatically be adjusted to the
following rate structure for water furnished to premises outside the village
supplied by the municipal waterworks on or after January 1, 2019:
 
Gallons         Rate
0–2,000       $66.54
2,001 and above $7.36 per 1,000 gallons
 
      (3)   Adjustment of rates on or after January 1, 2020. The rates
established in division (A)(2) above shall automatically be adjusted to the
following rate structure for water furnished to premises outside the village
supplied by the municipal water works on or after January 1, 2020:
 
Gallons         Rate
0–2,000       $67.94
2,001 and above $7.53 per 1,000 gallons
 
      (4)   Adjustment of rates on or after January 1, 2021. The rates
established in division (A)(3) above shall automatically be adjusted to the
following rate structure for water furnished to premises outside the village
supplied by the municipal waterworks on or after January 1, 2021:
         (a)   Monthly base rate: $1.35 increase per year effective January 1
of each subsequent year.
         (b)   Usage rate per 1,000 gallons: $0.17 increase per year effective
January 1 of each subsequent year.
   (B)   The village may extend water services to premises outside of the
village limits according to the following provisions.
      (1)   (a)   If said property is contiguous to the village, properties
must be annexed to the village prior to extension of service, whether or not a
water line is accessible to their premises; or
         (b)   With approval of Village Council, if said property is contiguous
to the village, the property owner agrees to file for annexation of said
property at the property owner's expense as soon as legally possible and pursue
all appeals relative to said annexation; and enter into an agreement with the
village which sets forth terms for extension of service. Said agreement shall
be recorded in the land records of the County Recorder. No connection to said
system shall be allowed until said annexation petition is filed. For this
provision to apply, a three-fourths affirmative vote of Council is necessary.
      (2)   If annexation is not legally possible, water service may be
extended upon the execution of an agreement between the village and the
property owner(s) that they will petition for annexation, at their expense, as
soon as legally possible. Such agreement will be recorded in the land records
of the County Recorder and bind the successors in the interest to owners'
property. Until annexation, said property will be charged out-of-village water
rates.
      (3)   If a main water line exists accessible to the owners' property, the
village may charge, in addition to the tap-in fee and any extraordinary costs
to access such main line (i.e., road bore), that property's proportionate share
of the main water line installation, if not already paid, together with a
reasonable amount of interest from the date the village paid for the project.
      (4)   If a main water line is not accessible to a property desiring water
service, the village may extend a main water line and allocate all costs of
same to the abutting property owners. If payment arrangements are not made
prior to installation of the main water line, no property owner shall be
permitted to access such main water line until his or her proportionate share
of the cost of the main line is paid, together with a reasonable amount of
interest from the date of payment by the village, and the requirements of
either division (B)(1) or (B)(2) above, are satisfied.
   (C)   For any extension to premises outside of the village limits not
already served, a two-thirds affirmative vote of Council is necessary prior to
extension of service.
   (D)   Refer to §
52.05 for disconnection/reconnection fee information.
(Ord. passed 80-26, passed 11-10-1980; Ord. 90-5, passed 3-26-1990; Ord. 92-20,
passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 95-8, passed 3-13-1995; Ord. 97-34, passed 12-8-1997;
Ord. 99-20, passed 9-13-1999; Ord. 2000-40, passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2002-30,
passed 8-26-2002; Ord. 2006-17, passed 9-11-2006; Ord. 2017-24, passed 8-28-
2017; Ord. 2017-28, passed 9-25-2017; Ord. 2019-17, passed 5-13-2019)
§ 52.09 RESERVED
§ 52.10 SUBMISSION OF PLANS.
   Upon completion of construction of any water mains, drawing shall be
corrected to represent "as-built" elevations, grades and sizes. One
reproducible print shall be supplied to the village.
(Ord. 80-26, passed 11-10-1980; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 2019-17,
passed 5-13-2019)
§ 52.11 SAVINGS CLAUSE.
   The invalidity of any paragraph, clause, sentence or provision of this
subchapter shall not affect the validity of any other part of the subchapter
which can be given effect without such invalid part or parts. In addition,
nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as preventing any special
agreement or arrangement between the village and any industrial or commercial
user, nor shall this subchapter be construed as affecting any existing or
future customers whose water service is based on a written contract between the
village and the customer, provided, however, that any such contract shall have
the concurrence of two-thirds of Council.
(Ord. 80-26, passed 11-10-1980; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 2019-17,
passed 5-13-2019)
§ 52.12 FIRE HYDRANT METER DEPOSIT CHARGES.
   Use of any village owned fire hydrant meter for connection to any village
owned fire hydrant will be evaluated on a case by case basis by Village
Council. Any approved use will include a deposit, user fee, and backflow
prevention device. Further, for any approved use, the Superintendent of Water
Purification will ensure all EPA standards and regulations are met.
(Ord. 2013-9, passed 5-28-2013; Ord. 2017-42, passed 1-22-2018; Ord. 2019-17,
passed 5-13-2019)
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 52.20 MANDATORY CONNECTION.
   No person shall maintain or use or permit to be used upon any lot or land
abutting upon or adjacent and accessible to a water main, any premises or
building not connected to the village water system, unless the building
contains no provisions for potable water.
(Ord. 80-26, passed 11-10-1980; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 2019-17,
passed 5-13-2019)
§ 52.21 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or alter or
disturb any appurtenance to the water system without first obtaining a written
permit from the Village Administrator.
(Ord. 80-26, passed 11-10-1980; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 2019-17,
passed 5-13-2019) Penalty, see §
52.99.
§ 52.22 MAINTENANCE OF SERVICE LINES.
   (A)   The village shall be responsible to the maintenance of that portion of
the service line between the main and the curb box, and shall maintain said
portion in a manner as to ensure an acceptable volume of water to the premises.
   (B)   The property owner shall be responsible to the maintenance of that
portion of the service line between the curb box and the premises.
   (C)   In the event of a frozen line, the village will make all reasonable
attempts to thaw the frozen section, and if unsuccessful, to supply an
alternative source of water until such item as the line can be thawed. Under no
circumstances, however, will the village bear any responsibility for the
electrical thawing of lines.
   (D)   Should any customer desire a new service line between the main and the
curb box, for any other reason than failure of the old line, the property owner
shall pay all costs associated with the installation of the new line.
   (E)   In any building consisting of two or more dwellings, commercial or
industrial units, where the property owner desires the water and sewer utility
service accounts to be the payment responsibility of a unit renter or tenant, a
separate service line, a lockable interior shut-off valve and/or curb box shut-
off valve shall be installed for each individual dwelling, commercial or
industrial unit permitting the village to discontinue utility services to the
occupant of any individual dwelling, commercial or industrial unit for
nonpayment of water or sewer utility bills. All costs associated with the
installation of the new service line(s), lockable interior shut-off valve(s) or
curb box(s) shall be the responsibility of the property owner. All lockable
interior shut-off valve designs must be approved by the village prior to
installation with all keys and/or locks remaining the property and in the
custody of the village. Any property owner who installs an interior shut-off
valve expressly agrees to permit the village full access to the interior of his
or her building to shut off and lock all access to tenant utility services for
nonpayment of water or sewer utility bills. Any property owner of a multi-
tenant building who, after 90 days written notice by certified mail from the
village, fails to comply with the requirements of this division (E), shall have
all utility services to the building discontinued until compliance with this
division (E) can be obtained by the village.
(Ord. 80-26, passed 11-10-1980; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 95-7, passed
4-10-1995; Ord. 2010-10, passed 5-24-2010; Ord. 2019-17, passed 5-13-2019)
§ 52.23 CROSS-CONNECTION.
   No cross-connection between the village water supply and any other water
supply shall be allowed.
(Ord. 80-26, passed 11-10-1980; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 2019-17,
passed 5-13-2019) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.24 CONSTRUCTION OF WATER MAINS; SUBMISSION OF PLANS.
   (A)   Prior to construction of new water mains, all plans and materials must
be approved by the Village Administrator, in addition to obtain other approvals
required by law. All constructions will be in accordance with accepted
engineering practice and American Water Works Association Standards and Ohio
Environmental Protection Agency Design Standards relating to both construction
methods and material. In addition, no backfill will be placed on any new
construction until after inspection is completed by the Village Administrator
or his or her duly authorized representative. The owner shall pay any costs
resulting from said inspection.
   (B)   Upon completion of construction of any water mains, drawing shall be
corrected to represent "as built" elevations, grades and sizes. One
reproducible print shall be supplied to the village.
   (C)   In addition to the requirements enumerated in divisions (A) and (B)
above, a bacteriological testing charge shall be made for each new, cleaned or
repaired water main in the village. The charge shall be $100 for all testing
necessary to meet Ohio Environmental Protection Agency disinfection
requirements. This fee will be increased to $200 if the testing is not
performed during normal working hours. Normal working hours shall be considered
7:00 a.m. through 3:30 p.m., Monday through Friday with the exception of
village holidays.
(Ord. 80-26, passed 11-10-1980; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 2003-50,
passed 12-8-2003; Ord. 2019-17, passed 5-13-2019)
§ 52.25 USE OF OLD WATER LINES FOR NEW BUILDINGS.
   Old water services may be used in connection with new buildings only when
they are found, on examination, to meet all requirements.
(Ord. 80-26, passed 11-10-1980; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 2019-17,
passed 5-13-2019)
§ 52.26 DETERMINATION OF WATER USED.
   The village will install and maintain in accordance with American Water
Works Association Standards a water meter of sufficient design and capacity to
measure all water being used, however, the village may charge for replacement
of any meter damaged through abuse of the user, in addition to other penalties
that may be applied under this chapter.
(Ord. 80-26, passed 11-10-1980; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 2019-17,
passed 5-13-2019) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.27 OWNER TO PAY COSTS, INDEMNIFY VILLAGE FOR DAMAGES.
   All costs and expenses incidental to the installation of water mains and
connections, other than those installations provided by the village, shall be
borne by the owners. The owners shall indemnify the village for any loss or
damage that may directly or indirectly result from the installation.
(Ord. 80-26, passed 11-10-1980; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 2019-17,
passed 5-13-2019)
§ 52.28 POWERS OF THE VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Village Administrator shall manage and supervise the water system of the
village including the making of by-laws and regulations, to the extent not
repugnant to municipal ordinances and resolutions, deemed necessary by him or
her for the safe, economical and efficient management and protection of such
system.
(Ord. 80-26, passed 11-10-1980; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 2019-17,
passed 5-13-2019)
§ 52.29 TAMPERING.
   No person shall knowingly, without the consent of the village, tamper with a
water meter or attachment belonging to the village, or reconnect any water
service which has been disconnected by the village. In addition, no person
shall knowingly consume any water that has not been correctly registered
because a meter or attachment has been tampered with. In prosecution under this
section, proof that a meter or attachment has been tampered with is prima facie
evidence that the person who is obligated to pay for the service rendered
through the meter and is in possession or control of the meter or attachment at
the time the tampering occurred has caused the tampering with intent to violate
this section. Further, proof that water service has been reconnected without
the consent of the village is prima facie evidence that the person in control
or possession of the meter or is responsible for payment of the bill has
reconnected the service with intent to violate this section.
(Ord. 80-26, passed 11-10-1980; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 2019-17,
passed 5-13-2019) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.30 OUTDOOR USE METERS.
   (A)   Users may purchase, from the village, meters exclusively supplying
water to an outside faucet, and hereafter referred to as "outdoor use meter".
   (B)   Water supplied through the outdoor use meter may be used for lawns,
pools and other outside activities not intended to result in treatment through
the sanitary sewer system of the village.
   (C)   Users are responsible for all household plumbing required to connect
the outdoor use meter, which shall be installed by the village.
   (D)   Users are responsible for installing a backflow prevention device on
said outdoor use meter in compliance with §§
52.40 through
52.44.
   (E)   The village shall read, monthly from January to December, and provide
an invoice, from May to December, for water usage through the outdoor use
meter.
   (F)   Users shall be billed for water usage only, not the combined water/
sewer rate.
   (G)   The water rate structure for outdoor use meter water used to sprinkle
athletic fields at Swanton High School shall be as enumerated in §
52.01(B).
(Ord. 94-18, passed 9-12-1994; Ord. 2015-7, passed 3-23-2015; Ord. 2018-41,
passed 1-28-2019; Ord. 2019-17, passed 5-13-2019)
BACKFLOW PREVENTION
§ 52.40 SURVEYS AND INVESTIGATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Superintendent of Water, or his or her
duly authorized representative, to cause surveys and investigations be made of
industrial and other properties served by the public water supply, and where
necessary, for the safety of the public water system, the Superintendent of
Water will give notice to the water consumer to install an approved backflow
prevention device immediately.
   (B)   The water consumer shall, at his or her own expense, obtain the
necessary plumbing permit, and install such an approved device at a location
and in manner approved by the Superintendent of Water, or his or her duly
authorized representative, and shall have tests and inspection performed by a
certified inspector annually, or as required by the Superintendent of Water,
and all costs of repairs and tests shall be paid by the consumer. If the water
consumer fails to install said device within 30 days after written notice from
the Superintendent of Water, the Superintendent shall cause the installation of
said device to be made and the cost thereof shall be charged through the
consumer's water bill.
   (C)   All surveys and investigations shall be made a matter of public
record, and the location and date of each installation of an approved backflow
prevention device shall be properly recorded in a permanent file.
(Ord. 76-18, passed 12-13-1976; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 2019-17,
passed 5-13-2019)
§ 52.41 BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES TO BE INSTALLED.
    Backflow prevention devices shall be installed in all locations as listed
in the Ohio Administrative Code Chapter 3745-95 Backflow Prevention and Cross-
Connection Control hereafter amended. No person, firm or corporation shall
establish or permit to be established, or maintain, or permit to be maintained,
any connection whereby a private auxiliary or emergency water supply, other
than the regular public water supply of the village, may enter the supply or
distribution system of said municipality.
(Ord. 76-18, passed 12-13-1976; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 2019-17,
passed 5-13-2019; Ord. 2024-18, passed 11-25-2024) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.42 RIGHT OF ENTRY OF SUPERINTENDENT; INFORMATION TO BE FURNISHED.
   The Superintendent of Water of the village or his or her duly authorized
representative, shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any
property served by a connection to the public water supply or distribution
system of the village for the purpose of inspecting the piping system or
systems thereof. On demand, the owner, lessees or occupants, of any property so
served shall furnish to the Superintendent of Water any information which he or
she may request regarding the piping system or systems or water use on such
property. The refusal of such information, when demanded, shall, within the
discretion of the Superintendent of Water, be deemed evidence of the presence
of improper connections as provided in this subchapter.
(Ord. 76-18, passed 12-13-1976; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 2019-17,
passed 5-13-2019)
§ 52.43 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE FOR VIOLATION.
   The Superintendent of Water is hereby authorized and directed to
discontinue, after reasonable notice to the occupant thereof, the water service
to any property wherein any connection in violation of the provisions of this
subchapter is known to exist, and to take such other precautionary measures as
he or she may deem necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the
public water supply distribution mains. Water service to such property shall
not be restored until such conditions have been eliminated or corrected in
compliance with the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 76-18, passed 12-13-1976; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 2019-17,
passed 5-13-2019)
§ 52.44 INDIVIDUAL FIXTURE DEVICES OR AIR GAPS.
   The use of any approved backflow prevention device at the water service
connection does not in any way effect or eliminate the need for individual
fixture devices, or air gaps as required by § BB-51-38 of the Ohio Building
Code.
(Ord. 76-18, passed 12-13-1976; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 2019-17,
passed 5-13-2019)
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Whoever violates §
52.29 is guilty of tampering with utility equipment. If the cost of the water
and sewer service stolen, plus the cost of repair or replacement of the meters,
conduits or attachments damaged in violation of §
52.29 is less than $150, tampering with utility equipment is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the cost of the water and sewer service stolen, plus the
cost of repair or replacement of the meters, conduits or attachments damaged is
$150 or more, or if the offender has previously been convicted of a violation
of §
52.29, tampering with utility equipment is a felony of the fourth degree.
Whoever violates §
52.29 shall make restitution to the utility for the cost of repair or
replacement of the meters, conduits or attachments damaged and for the value of
the water and sewer service consumed.
(Ord. 2019-17, passed 5-13-2019)
APPENDIX A: WATER METER COSTS
   (A)   The following schedule outlines the standard costs for water meters of
various sizes, inclusive of necessary components such as encoders and radios
where applicable. Due to current tariff conditions, an additional 7% surcharge
has been temporarily applied to cover increased procurement costs. These rates
may be reviewed and adjusted as market conditions change.
 
Meter Size        Base Cost Cost with 7% Tariff Notes
                            Adjustment
5/8 in. x 3/4 in. $332      $355.24             Standard residential meter
1 in.             $478      $511.46              
1 1/2 in.         $679      $726.53              
2 in.             $2,458    $2,630.06           Includes encoder and radio
3 in.             $3,712    $3,971              Includes encoder and radio
4 in.             $5,887.00 $6,299.09           Includes encoder and radio
 
   (B)   These amounts represent the current cost to the village for meter
purchase and installation preparation. All new meter installations or
replacements will be charged at the adjusted rate until further notice. Any
future changes in tariffs or supplier pricing may result in updates to this
schedule through formal amendment.
(Ord. 2025-14, passed 6-9-2025)
Cross-reference:
   See §
52.06
CHAPTER 53: FEES AND PARTS
Section
   
53.01   Fees
   
53.02   Parts
§ 53.01 FEES.
Backhoe and operator                  $250/hr.
Brush chipper and operator            $200/hr.
Dump truck and operator               $200/hr.
Inspection services                   $100/hr. regular time
                                      $125/hr. overtime
Labor                                 $100/hr.
Mower and operator                    $150/hr.
Tractor and operator with flail mower $250/hr.
Street sweeper and operator           $250/hr.
Vactor and operator                   $300/hr.
 
(Ord. 97-27, passed 10-27-1997; Ord. 98-22, passed 5-26-1998; Ord. 2016-45,
passed 9-26-2016; Ord. 2025-04, passed 1-27-2025)
§ 53.02 PARTS.
   List price plus 10%
(Ord. 97-27, passed 10-27-1997)
CHAPTER 54: STORM WATER UTILITY
Section
   
54.01   Definitions
   
54.02   Necessity for charges
   
54.03   Powers of Village Administrator
   
54.04   Rate structure
   
54.05   Storm water only accounts
   
54.06   Billings and terms of payment
   
54.07   Collection
   
54.08   Adjustments
   
54.09   Right to appeal
   
54.10   Penalties, liabilities and injunctions
Cross-reference:
   Adjustments to utility bill policy and procedure, see §
36.08
§ 54.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABATEMENT. Any action taken to remedy, correct or eliminate a condition
within, associated with or impacting a drainage system.
   ADJUSTMENT. A modification in a non-residential customer’s storm water
service fee for certain activities that impact storm water runoff or impacts
the village’s costs of providing storm water management.
   ADMINISTRATOR. The Village Administrator.
   AGRICULTURAL PROPERTY. Is considered to be a residential property and
assigned 1 ERU for billing purposes unless it is determined by the Lucas or
Fulton County Auditor’s office that the property is designated as a Commercial
Agricultural Use Valuation designation for tax reduction purposes and will then
be treated as a non-residential property.
   APARTMENT/CONDOMINIUM PROPERTY. Is considered to be a lot or parcel of real
estate on which is situated a building containing three or more single-family
dwelling units.
   APPROVED PLANS. Plans approved according to a permit and plan review which
will govern all improvements made within the village that require storm water
facilities or changes or alterations to existing storm water facilities.
   CODE. The Codified Ordinances of the village.
   COMBINED SEWER. A pipe or conduit primarily designed to convey sanitary
sewage and secondarily intended to convey storm water.
   DETENTION. Described as a temporary storage of storm water runoff in a
basin, pond or other structure to control the peak discharge rates by holding
the storm water for a lengthened period of time and which provides some gravity
settling of particulate.
   DETENTION FACILITY. A facility by means of a single control point which
provides temporary storage of storm water runoff in ponds, parking lots,
depressed areas, rooftops, buried underground vaults or tanks, and the like for
future release, and is used to relay and attenuate flow.
   EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT (ERU). A value, equal to 3,460 square feet of
measured impervious area and is equal to the average amount of impervious area
of residential properties within the village.
   FACILITIES. Various storm water and drainage works that may include inlets,
pipes, pumping stations, conduits, manholes, energy dissipation structures,
channels, outlets, retention/detention basins and other structural components.
   IMPERVIOUS AREA. Areas that have been paved and/or covered with buildings
and materials that do not allow natural infiltration, which include, but are
not limited to, concrete, asphalt, rooftop and blacktop.
   INFILTRATION. A complex process of allowing runoff to penetrate the ground
surface and flow through the upper soil surface.
   NON-RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES. All properties not encompassed by the definition
of residential and shall be defined as non-residential. NON-RESIDENTIAL
PROPERTIES will include:
      (1)   Agricultural property with Commercial Agricultural Use Valuation
designation;
      (2)   Apartment and condominium properties;
      (3)   Mobile home parks;
      (4)   Commercial property;
      (5)   Industrial property;
      (6)   Institutional property;
      (7)   Governmental property;
      (8)   Churches;
      (9)   Schools;
      (10)   Federal, state and local properties; and
      (11)   Any other property not mentioned in this or the list of
residential properties below.
   OWNER.  The owner of the property and shall be defined as the person who
holds actual, not merely equitable, title to the property. Executors,
administrators of estates and persons who hold property in trust shall be
considered owners.
   NPDES. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
   NPDES PERMIT. A permit issued to the village pursuant to § 402 of the Clean
Water Act.
   PEAK DISCHARGE or PEAK FLOW. The maximum rate of flow of water passing a
given point during or after a rainfall event.
   PRIVATE STORM WATER FACILITIES. Various storm water and drainage works not
under the control or ownership of the village, county, state and/or federal
government which may include inlets, conduits, pipes, pumping stations,
manholes, structures, channels, outlets, retention or detention basins, other
structural components and equipment designed to transport, move or regulate
storm water.
   PUBLIC STORM WATER FACILITIES. Various storm water and drainage works under
the control and/or ownership of the village, county, state or federal
government which may include inlets, roadside drainage ditches within the
right-of-way, conduits, pipes, pumping stations, manholes, structures,
channels, outlets, retention or detention basins, other structural components
and equipment designed to transport, move or regulate storm water.
   PUBLIC STORM WATER OPEN CHANNEL. All open channels, which convey, in part or
in whole, storm water, and are owned, operated or maintained by the village, or
a storm water open channel which has a permanent drainage/storm water easement
owned by the village and drains an area which includes village-owned property
or right-of-way. A PUBLIC STORM WATER OPEN CHANNEL does not include roadside
ditches, which convey only immediate right-of-way drainage.
   RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. All single-family properties and duplexes within the
village.
   RETENTION. The holding of storm water runoff in a constructed basin or pond
or in a natural body of water without release except by means of evaporation,
infiltration or emergency bypass.
   RETENTION FACILITY. A facility, which provides storage of storm water runoff
and is designed to eliminate subsequent surface discharges.
   SQUARE FOOTAGE OF IMPERVIOUS AREA. For the purpose of assigning an
appropriate number of ERUs to a parcel of real property, the square footage of
all impervious area using the outside boundary dimensions of the impervious
area to include the total enclosed square footage, without regard for
topographic features of the enclosed surface.
   STORM SEWER. A sewer, which carries storm water, surface runoff, street wash
waters and drainage, but which excludes sanitary sewage and industrial wastes,
other than unpolluted cooling water.
   STORM WATER. Storm water runoff, snowmelt runoff, and surface runoff and
drainage.
   STORM WATER SERVICE CHARGE. A charge billed to users of the village’s storm
water collection, impounding and transportation system.
   STORM WATER SYSTEM. All man-made facilities, structures and natural
watercourses owned by the village, used for collection and conducting storm
water to, through, and from drainage areas to the points of final outlet
including, but not limited to, any and all of the following: conduits and
appurtenant features, canals, creeks, catch basins, ditches, streams, gulches,
gullies, flumes, culverts, siphons, streets, curbs, gutters, dams, floodwalls,
levees and pumping stations.
(Ord. 2005-21, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 54.02 NECESSITY FOR CHARGES.
   It is hereby determined necessary for the protection of public health,
safety, and welfare and to conform with federal, state, and local laws and
regulations that a system of just and equitable charges for storm water service
be established which allocates the cost of providing storm water service to
each user in such a manner that the allocated costs are proportionate to the
cost of providing storm water service to that user, insofar as those costs can
reasonably be determined.
(Ord. 2005-21, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 54.03 POWERS OF VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR.
   Storm water service charges levied pursuant to this chapter shall be
collected by the village. The Village Administrator shall make and enforce such
rules and regulations as deemed necessary for the safe, economical, and
efficient management and protection of the village’s storm water system; for
the construction and use of storm sewers and connections to the storm water
system; and for the regulation, collection, rebating and refunding of such
storm water charges. Such rules, regulations or any addition to or amendment
thereof shall become effective upon approval of Village Council. Under the
direction of the Village Administrator, the Fiscal Officer of the village shall
report to the Village Council, on a monthly basis, as to the financial status
of the Storm Water Fund. This report shall include all receipts and
expenditures.
(Ord. 2005-21, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 54.04 RATE STRUCTURE.
   (A)   A storm water service charge shall be billed annually to the owner of
residential properties occupied by a tenant. All other property owners shall be
billed monthly. This charge shall be billed to each and every lot and parcel of
land within the village that contains impervious area. This charge is necessary
to pay for the repair, replacement, planning, improvement, operation,
regulation and maintenance of the existing and future village storm water
system. This charge is not related to water and/or sewer service and applies
whether or not the premises are occupied. Property owned by the village shall
be exempt from such charges.
   (B)   All properties having impervious area within the village will be
assigned an Equivalent Residential Unit (ERU) or a multiple thereof, with all
properties having any impervious area receiving at least one ERU as follows:
      (1)   All residential properties, as defined in §
54.01, will be assigned one ERU. A flat rate will apply to all residential
properties.
      (2)   All non-residential properties, as defined in §
54.01, will be assigned an ERU multiple based upon the properties’ individually
measured impervious area, in square feet, divided by 3,460 square feet ERU but
in no event less than one ERU. This division will be calculated to the first
decimal place and rounded according to mathematical convention.
   (C)   The storm water utility charge per month shall be $3 per one
Equivalent Residential Unit (ERU). One ERU is equal to 3,460 square feet of
measured impervious surface.
(Ord. 2005-21, passed 1-23-2006; Ord. 2005-22, passed 1-23-2006; Ord. 2021-22,
passed 10-12-2021)
§ 54.05 STORM WATER ONLY ACCOUNTS.
   Storm water only accounts are properties that do not utilize water and/or
sanitary sewer services but do contain impervious area or hard surface. A copy
of every permit issued by the village for new construction that does not
utilize water and/or sanitary sewer services shall be reviewed by the Village
Administrator for a determination of whether or not storm water service charges
apply.
(Ord. 2005-21, passed 1-23-2006; Ord. 2021-22, passed 10-12-2021)
§ 54.06 BILLINGS AND TERMS OF PAYMENT.
   (A)   The storm water charges established by the Village Council shall be
due and payable to the village on the date noted on the bill provided by the
village.
   (B)   In the event the amount billed for storm water service is not paid in
full on or before the due date noted on the bill, an amount equal 10% of the
amount billed shall be added. Such 10% charge shall be due and payable in
addition to the total amount noted on the bill including, but not limited to,
arrearages, administrative charges, deposits, defers and local charges.
(Ord. 2005-21, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 54.07 COLLECTION.
   When charges for storm water service are not paid when due, the
Administrator may:
   (A)   Terminate water service to the property pursuant to existing written
policy;
   (B)   Forward the account for collection by an outside collection agency;
   (C)   Transfer the delinquency to any other property owned by the account
holder that receives water or sewer utility service from the village;
   (D)   Bring an action at law for the collection of the delinquent amount; or
   (E)   Certify the charges, together with any penalties, to the County
Auditor, who shall place the certified amount on the real property tax
duplicate of the property served directly or indirectly by the storm water
system of the village. The amount certified shall be a lien on the property
served from the date placed on the list, and duplicate shall be collected in
the same manner as other taxes, notwithstanding R.C. § 323.15, a County
Treasurer shall accept a payment in such amount when separately tendered as
payment for the full amount of such unpaid storm water charges and associated
penalties.
(Ord. 2005-21, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 54.08 ADJUSTMENTS.
   (A)   In the event the amount of impervious area on a non-residential
property is increased above that assigned by the Village Administrator, an
adjustment may be made to the ERU multiple assigned to the property to properly
reflect the amount of impervious area. The new ERU multiple shall be billed
from the date on which the village mails a notification of the change to the
owner of the property and shall not be stayed by an appeal under §
54.09. If the Village Administrator finds that the village has been under
billing a non-residential property as a result of the increase in an impervious
area, the owner may be charged for the difference between the amount actually
billed and the amount that should have been billed for a period of time not to
exceed one year prior to the date of the village’s mailing of a notification to
the owner that an adjustment is being made to the property’s ERU multiple.
   (B)   The owner of a non-residential property may apply for an adjustment to
the ERU multiple if the owner has taken certain actions that reduce the impact
of storm water runoff to the storm water system. The maximum adjustment that
may be made to the ERU multiple for any non-residential property is 30%
consisting of any one or more of the following credit options:
      (1)   Detention/retention ponds: 30%;
      (2)   Forested (stream) buffer/grass filter strip: 10%;
      (3)   Industrial NPDES: 10%;
      (4)   Open-channel maintenance: 30%; and
      (5)   Swales: 10%.
(Ord. 2005-21, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 54.09 RIGHT TO APPEAL.
   (A)   A non-residential property owner may challenge the ERU multiple
assigned his or her property by filing an appeal with the Village Administrator
for adjustment thereof, stating in writing the grounds for the appeal. The
Administrator shall cause appropriate investigation thereof and report the
findings to the property owner. The Administrator shall consider the appeal and
determine whether an adjustment of the ERU multiple for any such lot or parcel
is necessary, and adjust such ERU multiple if appropriate.
   (B)   If the property owner is not satisfied with the finding, a public
hearing before the Village Council may be requested. Council shall make a
decision based on the evidence presented and the need to protect, preserve, and
improve the village’s storm water drainage system, equal treatment of like
properties, fairness to unique properties, and the health and welfare of
village residents. Council may affirm, modify or reverse any decision of the
Village Administrator. After consideration, the Village Council shall issue a
written decision to the property owner which shall be the final decision of the
village.
(Ord. 2005-21, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 54.10 PENALTIES, LIABILITIES AND INJUNCTIONS.
   Any person or corporation found to be violating any provisions of this
chapter or any of the rules and regulations established herein shall be served
by the village with written notice stating the nature of the violation and
providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The
offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently
cease all violations. Any person or corporation who shall continue any
violation beyond the time limit provided above shall be guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined an amount not
exceeding $100. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be
deemed a separate offense. Further, in addition to other penalties provided
herein, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or the rules
and regulations adopted in this chapter shall become liable to the village for
any expense, loss, or damage incurred by the village by reason of such
violation. The village may also prevent or stop violations of this chapter or
any of the rules and regulations established herein by injunction proceedings
in the appropriate court.
(Ord. 2005-21, passed 1-23-2006)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
72.   VEHICLES AND RECREATIONAL PROPERTY REGULATIONS
      
73.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
74.   PARKING SCHEDULES
      
75.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
      
76.   LOW SPEED, UTILITY, AND MINI-TRUCK VEHICLES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
70.01   Adoption of state law by reference
   
70.02   Traffic directions in emergencies
   
70.03   Exceptions
   
70.04   Drivers of government vehicles
   
70.05   Parades and assemblages
   
70.06   Toy vehicles on roadway
   
70.07   Placing and maintaining signs and signals
   
70.08   Motor vehicle license tax
§ 70.01 ADOPTION OF STATE LAW BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   Adoption of traffic code.
      (1)   The village does hereby adopt for its traffic code the exact
wording and terminology, (excepting, however, all references to the
establishment of state boards, bureaus and licenses, and the administration
thereof, and also excepting all references to felonies) the following sections
of the Ohio Revised Code: R.C. §§ 4501.01 through and including R.C. § 4549.65,
inclusive; R.C. §§ 5577.01 through and including R.C. § 5577.99, inclusive;
R.C. §§ 5589.01 through and including R.C. § 5589.99, inclusive; and aforesaid
sections are incorporated herein and made a part hereof as though fully
rewritten herein.
      (2)   The village also adopts as a part of its traffic code any changes,
amendments or additions, which may be made in said R.C. §§ 4501.01 through
4549.65, inclusive; R.C. §§ 5577.01 through 5577.99, inclusive; R.C. §§ 5589.01
through 5589.99, inclusive of the Ohio Revised Code and said changes,
amendments or additions shall become effective as of the effective date of said
changes, amendments or additions.
      (3)   The penalty for the violation of any section of the traffic code of
the village shall be the penalty provided by the various sections of the Ohio
Revised Code which are made a part hereof.
   (B)   The various sections of this code shall be designated by the number of
the enacting ordinance of this codification and the individual number of the
section of the Ohio Revised Code herein adopted. Example: Ordinance 92-20-
4511.19.
(Ord. 83-29, passed 8-22-1983; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 2010-16,
passed 6-28-2010)
§ 70.02 TRAFFIC DIRECTIONS IN EMERGENCIES.
   Police officers may direct or regulate traffic in accordance with the
provisions of this traffic code, provided that, in the event of fire or other
emergency or to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, they are authorized
to direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of
this traffic code. Firefighters, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or
assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity.
The direction of traffic may be by word or audible signal, by gesture or
direction of any police officer or firefighter issued pursuant to this section.
(1964 Code, § 303.02) (Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.03 EXCEPTIONS.
   The provisions of this traffic code do not apply to persons, teams, motor
vehicles and other equipment while actually engaged in work upon the surface of
a highway within an area designated by traffic-control devices, but apply to
those persons and vehicles when traveling to or from such work.
(1964 Code, § 303.04) (Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.04 DRIVERS OF GOVERNMENT VEHICLES.
   The provisions of this traffic code do not apply to the drivers of all
vehicles owned or operated by the United States, any state or any political
subdivision thereof, including this village except as may be otherwise provided
by law and subject to such specific exceptions as are set forth with reference
to authorized emergency vehicles.
(1964 Code, § 303.06) (Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 70.05 PARADES AND ASSEMBLAGES.
   (A)   No person, group of persons or organization shall conduct or
participate in any parade, procession or assemblage upon any street or highway,
or block off any street or highway area, without first obtaining a permit from
the Chief of Police.
   (B)   Applications for such permits shall be made on such forms as may be
prescribed and shall contain such information as is reasonable necessary to a
fair determination of whether a permit should be issued. Applications shall be
filed not less than five days before the time intended for such parade,
procession or assemblage.
   (C)   The permit may be refused or canceled if the resultant conditions
would unreasonably hinder the movement of traffic or would require the
diversion of sufficient police officers or firefighters so as to deprive the
village of normal police and fire protection, or would be reasonably likely to
provoke disorderly conduct or create a disturbance.
   (D)   The permit or any order accompanying it may limit or prescribe
reasonable conditions, including the hours, the places or assembly and of
dispersal, the route or march or travel and the streets, highways or portions
thereof which may be used or occupied.
(1964 Code, § 311.02) (Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.06 TOY VEHICLES ON ROADWAY.
   No person riding upon any coaster, roller skates, sled, toy vehicle,
skateboard or other similar device, shall go upon any roadway except while
crossing a street on a crosswalk and when so crossing such person shall be
granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable
to pedestrians.
(1964 Code, § 311.03) (Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.07 PLACING AND MAINTAINING SIGNS AND SIGNALS.
   The Mayor, unless Council shall direct otherwise, or Council by
administration order, is hereby empowered to place and maintain painted or
otherwise marked safety zones, traffic and parking lanes, crosswalks for
pedestrians, “no parking”, “no U-turn”, “no left turn” or “stop” signs or
signals, or such other traffic signs, signals or standards as he, she or it may
deem necessary for the proper control of traffic or the parking of vehicles.
(1964 Code, § 313.09) (Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 70.08 MOTOR VEHICLE LICENSE TAX.
   (A)   There is hereby levied an annual license tax upon the operation of
motor vehicles on the public roads or highways pursuant to R.C. § 4504.172, for
the purposes of paying the costs and expenses of enforcing and administering
the tax provided for in this section; and to provide additional revenue for the
purposes set forth in R.C. § 4504.06 and to supplement revenue already
available for such purposes.
   (B)   Such tax shall be at the rate of $5 per motor vehicle on each and
every motor vehicle the district of registration of which, as defined in R.C. §
4503.10, is in the village.
   (C)   As used in this section the term MOTOR VEHICLE means any and all
vehicles included within the definition of motor vehicle in R.C. §§ 4501.01 and
4505.01.
    (D)   The tax imposed by this section shall apply to and be in effect for
the registration year commencing January 1, 1988, and shall continue in effect
and application during each registration year thereafter.
   (E)   The tax imposed by this section shall be paid to the Registrar of
Motor Vehicles of the State of Ohio or to a Deputy Registrar at the time
application for registration of a motor vehicle is made as provided in R.C. §
4503.10.
   (F)   All monies derived from the tax herein before levied shall be used by
the village for the purposes specified in this section.
(Ord. 87-23, passed 9-14-1987; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
Traffic Regulations
   
71.01   Turning into or emerging from private drive, alley or building
   
71.02   Entering and exiting controlled-access highway
   
71.03   Maximum time limit for trains blocking intersections
   
71.04   Obstructing intersection or crosswalk
   
71.05   Squealing tires; peeling
   
71.06   Driving and parking on sidewalks, street lawns or curbs
   
71.07   Boarding or leaving vehicles
   
71.08   Physical control
   
71.09   Weaving course
   
71.10   Oversize or overweight vehicle operation on local streets
   
71.11   Vehicles exceeding five tons
   
71.12   Route and load information
   
71.13   Mayor may reduce weight limits
   
71.14   Use of engine brakes
Speed Limits
   
71.20   Speed limits
 
   
71.99   Penalty
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
§ 71.01 TURNING INTO OR EMERGING FROM PRIVATE DRIVE, ALLEY OR BUILDING.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn into a private road or
driveway, alley or building from a public street or highway shall be governed
by the following rules.
      (1)   Approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close
as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
      (2)   Upon a roadway where traffic is proceeding in opposite directions,
approach for a left turn and a left turn shall be made from that portion of the
right half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof.
      (3)   Upon a roadway where traffic is restricted to one direction,
approach for a left turn and a left turn shall be made as close as practicable
to the left-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
    (B)   It shall be the duty of the driver of any vehicle entering a private
road or driveway, alley or building to yield the right-of-way to pedestrians
lawfully using the sidewalk or sidewalk area extending across any alleyway.
(1964 Code, § 331.11)
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the driver of any vehicle emerging from a
private road or driveway, alley or building to yield the right-of-way to
pedestrians lawfully using the sidewalk or sidewalk area extending across any
alleyway. When conditions restrict a clear view of any approaching pedestrians,
the driver shall stop the vehicle immediately prior to driving onto such
sidewalk or sidewalk area, sound an audible approach signal and yield the
right-of-way to pedestrians as may be required.
(1964 Code, § 331.23)
(Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.02 ENTERING AND EXITING CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY.
   No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any control-access highway
except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority.
(1964 Code, § 331.34) (Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.03 MAXIMUM TIME LIMIT FOR TRAINS BLOCKING INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   No railroad company shall obstruct, permit, or cause to be obstructed
a public street, a road or highway by permitting a railroad car, locomotive or
other obstruction to remain upon or across it for longer than five minutes, to
the hindrance or inconvenience of travelers or a person passing along or upon
such street, road or highway. No railroad company shall fail, at the end of
each five-minute period of obstruction of a public street, road or highway, to
cause such railroad car, locomotive or other obstruction to be removed for
sufficient time, not less than three minutes, to allow the passage of persons
and vehicles waiting to cross.
   (B)   This section does not apply to obstruction of public street, road or
highway by a continuously moving through train or caused by circumstances
wholly beyond the control of the railroad company, but does apply to other
obstructions, including without limitation those caused by stopped trains and
trains engaged in switching, loading or unloading operations.
   (C)   Upon the filing of an affidavit or complaint for violation of this
section, summons shall be issued to the railroad company in the manner provided
by law which summons shall be served on the regular ticket of freight agent of
the company in the county where the offense occurred.
(Ord. 77-1, passed 1-24-1977; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.04 OBSTRUCTING INTERSECTION OR CROSSWALK.
   No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is
sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicle he or she is operating without obstructing the passage
of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal
indication to proceed.
(1964 Code, § 331.35) (Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.05 SQUEALING TIRES; PEELING.
   No person shall operate any motor vehicle, except when necessary for safe
operation or in compliance with law, in such a manner that the vehicle is so
rapidly accelerated or started from a stopped position that the exhaust system
emits a loud, cracking or chattering noise unusual to its normal operation, or
the rubber tires of such vehicle squeal or leave tire marks on the roadway,
commonly called “peeling”.
(1964 Code, § 331.37) (Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.06 DRIVING AND PARKING ON SIDEWALKS, STREET LAWNS OR CURBS.
   No person shall drive, stand or park a vehicle on a sidewalk, lawn area
adjacent to a street, or over the curb of a street, except when entering or
leaving a permanent or temporary driveway or when lawfully authorized.
(1964 Code, § 331.38) (Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.07 BOARDING OR LEAVING VEHICLES.
   No person shall enter or leave or open the door of a parked or stopped motor
vehicle on the side of such vehicle next to a lane or line of moving traffic
unless such person has exercised due care that the movement can be made without
causing the driver of a passing motor vehicle to suddenly stop or turn or
swerve from a direct course of travel, or to become involved in an accident or
collision due to such movement.
(1964 Code, § 351.08) (Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.08 PHYSICAL CONTROL.
   (A)   No person who is under the influence of alcohol or any drug of abuse
or the combined influence of alcohol or any drug of abuse, shall be in actual
physical control of any vehicle.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.09 WEAVING COURSE.
   No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon any street or highway in a
weaving or zigzag course unless such irregular course is necessary for safe
operation or in compliance with law.
(1964 Code, § 331.36) (Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.10 OVERSIZE OR OVERWEIGHT VEHICLE OPERATION ON LOCAL STREETS.
   (A)   No person shall operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicles
exceeding a gross weight of five tons, upon any street or highway under local
jurisdiction, other than state routes, except pursuant to permission granted by
the Mayor or Police Chief. Permission need not be obtained for any movement
necessitated by an emergency or for the purposes of making deliveries to or
pickups from premises not located on state routes, provided such movement is
conducted by the shortest route possible or by a route designated by the Mayor
or Police Chief.
   (B)   No person granted permission by the Mayor or Police Chief shall be
required to obtain a special permit from the Ohio Director of Highways for the
movement of the vehicle or combination of vehicles on streets or highways under
local jurisdiction.
   (C)   The Mayor or Police Chief may grant permission for a single or round
trip, or for such period of time, not to exceed one year, as the Mayor or
Police Chief in his or her discretion deems advisable, or for the direction of
any construction project. The Mayor or Police Chief may limit or prescribe
terms or conditions of operation for such vehicle or combination of vehicles by
designating the route, hours, speed or such other restrictions as may be
necessary for the preservation of the public peace, property, health and
safety. The Mayor or Police Chief may require the posting of bond or other
security necessary to compensate for any damage to a roadway or road structure.
   (D)   Streets or highways under local jurisdiction shall be posted with
signs indicating “no through trucks - gross weight five tons” or words of
similar import to apprise drivers of the limitations imposed by this section.
No driver shall disobey the instructions indicated on any such sign.
   (E)   Violation of any of the limitations, terms or conditions of the
permission granted by the Mayor or Police Chief shall be cause for immediate
revocation or suspension of such permission and denial of request for any
future permission. Such violation shall also subject the violator to the
penalty prescribed by §
71.99.
(1964 Code, § 339.011) (Ord. 591, passed 1-10-1966; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-
1992) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.11 VEHICLES EXCEEDING FIVE TONS.
   No person shall drive or operate any vehicle used for the transportation of
goods or property, the gross weight of which, with load, exceeds five tons,
upon the streets, bridges and culverts within this village except on designated
and marked “truck routes” or state routes. Drivers of such vehicles whose gross
weight, with load, exceeds weight limits prescribed by this section may deliver
or pick up goods or property at places not located on state or truck routes
provided such vehicles are only operated by the shortest way possible between
the state or truck route and the place of delivery or pickup or as otherwise
directed by a police officer.
(1964 Code, § 339.02) (Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.12 ROUTE AND LOAD INFORMATION.
   Drivers of vehicles described in this chapter shall be required, upon
request by a police officer, to give full and true information as to the route
they are following and the name of the consignor and consignee and place of
delivery or removal and the location of any consignment being hauled or goods
being removed, and upon a designation by such police officer of a route to be
followed, shall immediately adopt and pursue such route.
(1964 Code, § 339.08) (Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.13 MAYOR MAY REDUCE WEIGHT LIMITS.
   (A)   When thaws or excessive moisture render the improved streets of the
village or any section of such streets insufficient to bear traffic thereon, or
when any such streets or sections thereof would be damaged or destroyed by
heavy traffic, the Mayor may reduce the maximum weight of vehicles and loads
allowed thereon. The improved streets or sections thereof which are so
restricted shall be properly posted with conspicuous signs indicating the
maximum loads permitted within the restricted sections.
   (B)   No person shall operate any vehicle over the streets or section
thereof whose weight exceeds the posted limits, except for the purpose of local
delivery or pickup.
(1964 Code, § 339.04) (Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.14 USE OF ENGINE BRAKES.
   (A)   No person shall apply an engine brake when operating a motor vehicle
upon a street or highway within the village in such a manner as to cause
excessive or unusual noise.
   (B)   Emergency vehicles with engine brakes are exempt from the requirements
of this section.
(Ord. 2011-15, passed 7-18-2011) Penalty, see §
71.99
SPEED LIMITS
§ 71.20 SPEED LIMITS.
   For information regarding speed limits, see
Chapter 75, Schedule I.
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Whoever violates §
71.14 shall be deemed guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(Ord. 2011-15, passed 7-18-2011)
CHAPTER 72: VEHICLES AND RECREATIONAL PROPERTY REGULATIONS
Section
   
72.01   Application of title; compliance with traffic regulations
   
72.02   Duty to operate with care
   
72.03   Rules for bicycles, motorcycles and snowmobiles
   
72.04   Lights required
   
72.05   Sidewalk riding
   
72.06   Trick riding prohibited
   
72.07   Bicycle parking
   
72.08   Effect of regulations
   
72.09   Impounding of vehicles and property
§ 72.01 APPLICATION OF TITLE; COMPLIANCE WITH TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   Every person operating a bicycle, automobile, boat, trailer, recreational
vehicle, ATV, scooter, snowmobile, minibike, or similar vehicle or property
shall comply with all traffic signs and signals erected for vehicular and
pedestrian traffic, as well as all applicable laws, ordinances, and
regulations-except for those provisions that, by their nature, do not apply.
(1964 Code, § 373.09) (Ord. 558, passed 11-12-1962; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-
1992; Ord. 2025-15, passed 8-25-2025) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.02 DUTY TO OPERATE WITH CARE.
   Every person operating or using a bicycle, automobile, boat, trailer,
recreational vehicle, ATV, scooter, snowmobile, minibike, or similar vehicle or
property shall do so with due regard for their own safety and the safety of
others lawfully present on streets, sidewalks, and other public ways. Operators
shall always yield the right-of-way to pedestrians.
(1964 Code, § 373.09) (Ord. 558, passed 11-12-1962; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-
1992; Ord. 2025-15, passed 8-25-2025) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.03 RULES FOR BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES AND SNOWMOBILES.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the term SNOWMOBILE shall have the
same definition as provided in R.C. § 4519.01.
   (B)   Any person operating a bicycle, motorcycle, or similar vehicle shall
ride only upon the permanent and regular seat attached to the vehicle. No
person shall carry another individual on such a vehicle unless it is equipped
with an additional firmly attached and properly designed seat. No one shall
ride on any part of the vehicle other than a designated seat.
   (C)   Operators of motorcycles must ride astride the seat, facing forward,
with one leg on each side of the motorcycle.
   (D)   No person operating a bicycle or similar vehicle shall carry any
package, bundle, or article that interferes with their ability to keep at least
one hand on the handlebars and maintain full control of the vehicle.
   (E)   No bicycle, motorcycle, or similar vehicle shall carry more
individuals than the number it is specifically designed and equipped to
accommodate. Additionally, motorcycles shall not be operated on public roadways
if the handlebars or grips rise more than 15 inches above the seat or saddle of
the operator.
   (F)   Operation of snowmobiles or similar off-road vehicles is prohibited on
public highways, streets, or public property within the village limits.
(Ord. 74-3, passed 1-28-1974; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 2025-15,
passed 8-25-2025) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.04 LIGHTS REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate any bicycle, automobile, boat, trailer, recreational
vehicle, all-terrain vehicle (ATV), scooter, snowmobile, minibike, or similar
vehicle or property upon the streets, alleys, sidewalks, or other public ways
of the village during the period of one hour after sunset to one hour before
sunrise, or at any time when visibility is impaired by fog or similar
conditions, unless the vehicle is equipped with a functioning headlight casting
a white light visible for not less than 50 feet to the front and a red
taillight or reflector clearly visible from at least 50 feet to the rear.
(1964 Code, § 373.13) (Ord. 558, passed 11-12-1962; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-
1992; Ord. 2025-15, passed 8-25-2025) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.05 SIDEWALK RIDING.
   (A)   It shall be permissible for any person to ride a bicycle upon the
sidewalks in the village only within the residential district and when riding
on the sidewalks in the residential district, bicycle riders shall use the
right side of the sidewalk.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT means and
includes all parts of the village except the business section, which consists
of all that portion of the village with the boundaries of the following: each
side of Main Street between Church Street and St. Clair Street; each side of
Dodge Street between Main Street and Miller; each side of Zeiter Way between
Main Street and Lincoln Street.
(1964 Code, § 373.11) (Ord. 558, passed 11-12-1962; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-
1992; Ord. 2025-15, passed 8-25-2025) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.06 TRICK RIDING PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in trick riding or to operate
any bicycle, motorcycle, ATV, street bike, dirt bike, or similar vehicle on the
streets, alleys, sidewalks, or other public ways of the village without
maintaining full control of the vehicle, including keeping at least one hand on
the handlebars or grips at all times.
(1964 Code, § 373.17) (Ord. 558, passed 11-12-1962; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-
1992; Ord. 2025-15, passed 8-25-2025) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.07 BICYCLE PARKING.
   Bicycles parked outside the Downtown Business District in an alley, on a
sidewalk or in other public places must be in such a position as not to
interfere with the safety or movements of the vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
In the Downtown Business District, bicycles shall be parked only in designated
"Bicycle Parking" areas.
(1964 Code, § 373.15) (Ord. 558, passed 11-12-1962; Ord. 73-17, passed 10-8-
1973; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 2025-15, passed 8-25-2025) Penalty,
see §
10.99
§ 72.08 EFFECT OF REGULATIONS.
   (A)   It is a misdemeanor for any person to perform any act prohibited or
fail to perform any act required under this chapter while operating or in
possession of a bicycle, automobile, boat, trailer, recreational vehicle, ATV,
scooter, snowmobile, minibike, or similar vehicle or property.
   (B)   The parent or guardian of any minor shall not authorize or knowingly
permit that minor to violate any provision of this chapter related to the use,
operation, or placement of any such vehicle or property.
   (C)   These regulations shall apply to the operation or placement of any
bicycle, automobile, boat, trailer, recreational vehicle, ATV, scooter,
snowmobile, minibike, or similar vehicle or property on any street, alley,
highway, sidewalk, or other public area within the village.
(1964 Code, § 373.12) (Ord. 558, passed 11-12-1962; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-
1992; Ord. 2025-15, passed 8-25-2025) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.09 IMPOUNDING OF VEHICLES AND PROPERTY.
   (A)   Whenever any bicycle, automobile, boat, trailer, recreational vehicle,
ATV, scooter, snowmobile, minibike, or similar vehicle or property is operated,
parked, or placed in violation of the provisions of this chapter, such item may
be seized by any member of the Police Department and impounded at a secure
facility designated by the village for a period not to exceed 60 days.
   (B)   If the item is not claimed by the owner, operator, or in the case of a
minor, the parent or legal guardian, within the specified period, the property
may be sold by the Chief of Police in accordance with procedures established by
law, and the proceeds shall be disposed of as required by statute.
   (C)   Any fees associated with the impounding, storage, or release of such
property shall not exceed the maximum amounts authorized under the Ohio Revised
Code.
(1964 Code, § 373.22) (Ord. 558, passed 11-12-1962; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-
1992; Ord. 2025-15, passed 8-25-2025)
CHAPTER 73: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
   
73.01   Registered owner prima-facie liable for unlawful parking
   
73.02   Police may remove illegally parked vehicle; impounding
   
73.03   Manner of angle parking
   
73.04   Parking in alleys and narrow streets
   
73.05   Vehicle parking when snow exceeds three inches; and removal of vehicles
   
73.06   Storage of inoperative or unlicensed motor vehicles
   
73.07   Selling, washing or repairing vehicle on roadway
   
73.08   Regulation of width and height of vehicle parking on a street in a
residential district
 
   
73.99   Penalty
§ 73.01 REGISTERED OWNER PRIMA-FACIE LIABLE FOR UNLAWFUL PARKING.
   In any hearing on a charge of illegally parking a motor vehicle, testimony
that a vehicle bearing a certain license plate was found unlawfully parked as
prohibited by the provisions of this traffic code, and further testimony that
the record of the Ohio Registrar of Motor Vehicles shows that the license plate
was issued to the defendant, shall be prima facie evidence that the vehicle
which was unlawfully parked, was so parked by the defendant. A certified
registration copy, showing such fact, from the Registrar shall be proof of such
ownership.
(1964 Code, § 351.02) (Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 73.02 POLICE MAY REMOVE ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLE; IMPOUNDING.
   (A)   Police officers are authorized to provide for the removal and
impounding of a vehicle under the following circumstances:
      (1)   When any vehicle is left unattended upon any street and is so
illegally parked so as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the
normal movement of traffic;
      (2)   When any vehicle has been stolen or operated without the consent of
the owner;
      (3)   When any vehicle displays illegal license plates or fails to
display the lawfully required license plates;
      (4)   When any vehicle has been issued in or connected with the
commission of a felony;
      (5)   When any vehicle has been damaged or wrecked so as to be inoperable
or violates equipment provisions of this traffic code whereby its continued
operation would constitute a condition hazardous to life, limb or property;
      (6)   When any vehicle is left unattended due to the removal of an
arrested operator; and
      (7)   When any vehicle is found for which two or more citation tags for
violations of this traffic code have been issued and the owner or operator
thereof has failed to respond to such citation tags as lawfully required.
   (B)   The Police Department shall forthwith notify the registered vehicle
owner of the fact of such removal and impounding, reasons therefor and the
place of storage. Any person desiring to redeem an impounded vehicle shall
appear at the Police Department to furnish satisfactory evidence of identity
and ownership or right to possession. Prior to issuance of a release form, the
claimant, owner or operator shall either pay the amount due for any fines for
violations on account of which such vehicle was impounded or, as the court may
require, furnish written promise or post a bond in an amount set by the court,
to appear to answer to such violations. The pound operator shall release such
vehicle upon receipt of the release form and payment of all towage and storage
charges.
(1964 Code, § 303.07) (Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.03 MANNER OF ANGLE PARKING.
   Upon streets where angle parking is permitted, no person shall stop, stand
or park a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway as
is indicated by appropriate signs or markings.
(1964 Code, § 351.09) (Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.04 PARKING IN ALLEYS AND NARROW STREETS.
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street, other
than an alley, in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available
less than ten feet of width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular
traffic, except that a driver may stop temporarily during the actual loading or
unloading of passengers or when directed to by a police officer or traffic-
control signal.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided by law, no person shall stop, stand or
park a vehicle within an alley except while actually loading or unloading, and
then only for a period not to exceed 30 minutes.
(1964 Code, § 351.09) (Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.05 VEHICLE PARKING WHEN SNOW EXCEEDS THREE INCHES; AND REMOVAL OF
VEHICLES.
   (A)   In order to facilitate the cleaning of streets and alleys and to
expedite the free flow of vehicular traffic, no owner or operator of any
vehicle shall park or permit such vehicle to be parked on any street or alley
at any time when the accumulation of snow upon the roadway exceeds three inches
during any period of 24 hours or less. The accumulation of such snow shall
constitute an emergency requiring notification to local radio, television and
electronic media that emergency parking restrictions are in effect.
   (B)   Any vehicle parked in violation hereof may be immediately removed by
order of the Police Chief or Village Administrator to a place designated by him
or her. Prior to the removal of any vehicle, every effort will be made by the
village to contact the owner or operator of the vehicle and request that the
vehicle be removed in compliance with emergency parking restrictions. If
removed, such vehicle shall be returned to its owner or operator upon
presentation of proof of ownership or right of possession satisfactory to the
Police Chief, Village Administrator or their designee, payment of a towing or
storage charge incurred and payment of any fine imposed as a result of such
violation.
(Ord. 78-39, passed 11-29-1978; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 2014-8,
passed 4-14-2014) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.06 STORAGE OF INOPERATIVE OR UNLICENSED MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person shall store or permit to be stored on any lot or premises an
automobile or motor vehicle which is dismantled, inoperative or unlicensed, for
a period of more than the 15 days, unless the same is kept or stored in a
completely enclosed, authorized and permitted building or garage on such lot or
premises. Any such motor vehicle shall be deemed inoperative when the lack or
failure of the engine, transmission, wheels or other mechanical part results in
the vehicle being not usable for transportation purposes. The Police Department
is authorized to serve written notice either personally or through certified
mail, with return receipt requested, on the property owners or persons in
possession of any such lot or land upon which an unlicensed or inoperative
motor vehicle is stored contrary to the provisions hereof. Such period of 15
days shall commence to run the next day following the service of such notice.
Any person who has been notified or who is the owner of, in charge of or in
possession of any such lot or land on which any such vehicle is stored, and who
shall fail to remove the same after notice, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree and shall be imprisoned for not more than 30 days and fined
not more than $250 with each daily violation of this section constituting a
separate offense.
   (B)   The provision of this section shall be applicable to all districts of
the village, except those districts in which the storage, repair or
rehabilitation of automobiles is expressly permitted under the terms and
provisions of the village zoning ordinance.
(1964 Code, § 351.10) (Ord. 579, passed 5-24-1965; Ord. 88-12, passed 3-14-
1988; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 2004-27, passed 8-23-2004) Penalty,
see §
73.99
§ 73.07 SELLING, WASHING OR REPAIRING VEHICLE ON ROADWAY.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle upon any roadway for the
principal purpose of:
   (A)   Displaying such vehicle for sale; or
   (B)   Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except repairs
necessitated by an emergency.
(1964 Code, § 351.06) (Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.08 REGULATION OF WIDTH AND HEIGHT OF VEHICLE PARKING ON A STREET IN A
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Vehicles of seven feet or more in width are hereby prohibited from
parking on a street in a residential district of the village.
   (B)   Vehicles of eight feet or more in height are hereby prohibited from
parking on a street in a residential district of the village.
   (C)   For purposes of this section, RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT shall have the same
definition and area as set forth in the zoning code of the village.
(Ord. 90-9, passed 6-11-1990; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no penalty is
otherwise provided shall be fined not more than $50.
(1964 Code, § 351.99(a))
   (B)   Whoever violates any provision of §
73.05 is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a first offense; on a second offense
within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor
of the forth degree; on each subsequent offense within one year after the first
offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   Whoever violates the provisions of §
73.05 and
Chapter 74 shall be fined as follows:
      (1)   Five dollars for parking in a restricted zone;
      (2)   Ten dollars for parking in a no-parking zone;
      (3)   Twenty dollars for parking in a fire zone;
      (4)   Thirty-five dollars for parking in violation of the width and
height regulations; and
      (5)   If a parking violation ticket remains unpaid for 72 hours, the
police shall impound the vehicle at the owner’s expense.
   (D)   Whoever violates the disabled parking privileges of R.C. § 4511.69
within the village shall be fined not less than $250 nor more than $500.
   (E)   Whoever violates §
73.06 shall be fined not more than $250. Each daily violation of such section
shall constitute a separate offense.
   (F)   (1)   Any person charged with a violation of any provision of this
chapter for which payment of a prescribed fine may be made, may pay such sum in
the manner prescribed on the issued traffic ticket. Such payment shall be
deemed a plea of guilty, waiver of court appearance and acknowledgment of
conviction of the alleged offense and may be accepted in full satisfaction of
the prescribed penalty for such alleged violation.
      (2)   Payment of the prescribed fine need not be accepted when laws
prescribe that a certain number of such offenses shall require court
appearance.
(1964 Code, § 351.99(b))
(Ord. 78-39, passed 11-29-1978; Ord. 88-15, passed 3-14-1988; Ord. 90-9, passed
6-11-1990; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 95-23, passed 10-23-1995; Ord.
2004-33, passed 10-25-2004; Ord. 2014-8, passed 4-14-2014)
CHAPTER 74: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Parking prohibited at all times
      
II.   Parking prohibited at certain times
      
III.   Parking time limited
SCHEDULE I. PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES.
   No person shall stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic, or for purposes of loading or unloading, or while
obeying the directions of a police officer or a traffic-control device, in any
of the following places:
Street Location Ord. No. Date
Street                       Location                       Ord. No. Date
Airport Highway                                             78-39    11-29-1978
Black Canyon Drive           East side of Black Canyon      2020-30  1-25-2021
                             Drive
                             North side of Brookside Drive
Brookside Drive              (between Hallett Avenue and    2020-21  10-26-2020
                             Crestwood Drive)
Hallett Avenue                                              78-39    11-29-1978
Main Street                  South of St. Clair             78-39    11-29-1978
Waterwood Drive              North side of Waterwood Drive  2020-30  1-25-2021
Any uncurbed streets in the
Business District except in
marked parking spaces as set                                78-39    11-29-1978
forth in
Schedule III
 
(Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 2017-13, passed 5-22-2017; Ord. 2020-21,
passed 10-26-2020; Ord. 2020-30, passed 1-25-2021) Penalty, see §
73.99
SCHEDULE II. PARKING PROHIBITED AT CERTAIN TIMES.
   No person shall stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic, or for purposes of loading and unloading, or while
obeying the directions of a police officer or a traffic-control device, in any
of the following places:
Street Location Time Prohibited Ord. No. Date
Street           Location             Time Prohibited       Ord. No. Date
Broadway         Village parking lot  Between 1:00a.m. and  78-39    11-29-1978
                                      7:30 a.m.
                 South side of
                 Brookside Drive      Between 7:00 a.m. and
Brookside Drive  (between Hallett     4:00 p.m. Monday      2020-21  10-26-2020
                 Avenue and Crestwood through Friday
                 Drive)
                                      Monday through Friday
Chestnut Street                       from 8:00 a.m. to 4:  78-39    11-29-1978
                                      00 p.m.
                                      Monday through Friday
Garfield Avenue                       from 8:00 a.m. to 4:  78-39    11-29-1978
                                      00 p.m.
                 With western border
                 of Lincoln Avenue,
                 northern border of
Industrial zoned Church Street,       Between midnight and  2018-23  8-27-2018
streets          western border of    5:00 a.m. every day
                 Hallett Avenue, and
                 southern border of
                 Zeiter Way
                 East side between
                 the Norfolk Southern
                 Railroad Tracks and
                 Broadway Street;
Main Street      prohibited in order                        2011-5   4-11-2011
                 to accommodate
                 construction traffic
                 for the construction
                 of the Hallett
                 Avenue Overpass
Woodland Avenue  Between Zeiter Way   Between midnight and  2017-13  5-22-2017
                 and Church Street    5:00 a.m. every day
All residential                       Friday from 8:00 a.m. 78-39    11-29-1978
curbed streets                        until 12:00 noon
 
(Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992 ; Ord. 2017-13, passed 5-22-2017; Ord. 2020-21,
passed 10-26-2020)  Penalty, see §
73.99
SCHEDULE III. PARKING TIME LIMITED.
   Parking time is limited in the following location as indicated:
 
Street or Location Time Limit When Effective               Ord. No. Date
Business District, in 90      Monday through Saturday from 78-39    11-29-1978
minutes marked parking spaces 8:00 a.m. until 4:00 p.m.
 
(Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
73.99
CHAPTER 75: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   Speed limits
   
II.   One-way streets
SCHEDULE I. SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   The speed limit on Hallett Avenue is hereby amended and established at
40 mph.
   (B)   Pursuant to R.C. § 723.01, it is hereby established that the speed
limit on Main Street, between Garfield and Church Streets, is 25 mph.
   (C)   The speed limit on Centerville Road (Co. Rd. 1-1) is hereby amended
and established at 40 mph for the junction of Airport Highway south to the
village corporation line on the east side of Centerville Road (Co. Rd. 1-1),
and shall be 50 mph from this point south to the southern edge of the village
corporation line.
(Ord. 99-32, passed 11-23-1999; Ord. 2000-17, passed 6-26-2000; Ord. 2001-12,
passed 2-12-2001)
SCHEDULE II. ONE-WAY STREETS.
   (A)   Crestwood Drive in the village shall be established as a temporary
one-way street in a northerly direction between Church Street and Parkside
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m., and 3:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. on days
Crestwood School is in session.
   (B)   Signs shall be placed allowing this temporary pattern on school days.
   (C)   Violations of these restrictions shall be subject to prosecution under
the village traffic code or the Ohio Revised Code.
(Ord. 2017-39, passed 12-11-2017)
CHAPTER 76: LOW SPEED, UTILITY, AND MINI-TRUCK VEHICLES
Section
   
76.01   Purpose
   
76.02   Definitions
   
76.03   Prohibited operation
   
76.04   Inspection requirements
   
76.05   Registration and titling requirements
   
76.06   Licensing requirements
   
76.07   Financial responsibility
   
76.08   Code application
 
   
76.99   Penalty
§ 76.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to impose certain restrictions on the
operation of low speed, under speed, utility, and mini-truck vehicles in
accordance with R.C. §§ 4511.214 and 4511.215.
(Ord. 2017-43, passed 1-22-2018)
§ 76.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LOW-SPEED VEHICLE. A three- or four-wheeled motor vehicle with an attainable
speed in one mile on a paved level surface of more than 20 m.p.h. but not more
than 25 m.p.h. and with a gross vehicle weight rating less than 3,000 pounds.
   MINI-TRUCK. A vehicle that has four wheels, is propelled by an electric
motor with a rated power of 7,500 watts or less or an internal combustion
engine with a piston displacement capacity of 660 cubic centimeters or less,
has a total dry weight of 900 to 2,200 pounds, contains an enclosed cabin and a
seat for the vehicle operator, resembles a pickup truck or van with a cargo
area or bed located at the rear of the vehicle, and was not originally
manufactured to meet federal motor vehicle safety standards.
   PROOF OF FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY. Has the same meaning as set forth in R.C.
§ 4509.01(K).
   UNDER-SPEED VEHICLE. A three- or four-wheeled vehicle, including a vehicle
commonly known as a golf cart, with an attainable speed on a paved level
surface of not more than 20 m.p.h. and with a gross vehicle weight rating less
than 3,000 pounds.
   UTILITY VEHICLE. A self-propelled vehicle designed with a bed, principally
for the purpose of transporting material or cargo in connection with
construction, agricultural, forestry, grounds maintenance, lawn and garden,
materials handling, or similar activities.
(Ord. 2017-43, passed 1-22-2018)
Statutory reference:
   Related state definitions, see R.C. § 4501.01
§ 76.03 PROHIBITED OPERATION.
   (A)   No person shall operate a low-speed vehicle, a utility vehicle, or a
mini-truck upon any street or highway with an established speed limit of
greater than 25 m.p.h.
   (B)   This section does not prohibit a person operating a low-speed vehicle,
a utility vehicle, or a mini-truck from proceeding across an intersection of a
street or highway having a speed limit greater than 35 m.p.h.
   (C)   A map of the streets on which said vehicles are allowed will be
available at the village offices.
(Ord. 2017-43, passed 1-22-2018) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.04 INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   No person shall operate a low-speed vehicle, a utility vehicle, or a
mini-truck upon any street or highway unless the vehicle has passed an
inspection conducted by the Police Division that complies with inspection
requirements established by the Ohio Department of Public Safety under R.C. §
4513.02.
   (B)   The vehicle inspection shall be prearranged with the Chief of Police
or his designee.
   (C)   Any person desiring to have a low-speed vehicle, a utility vehicle, or
a mini-truck inspected shall pay a one-time inspection fee of twenty-five
dollars ($25.00). This inspection fee shall be deposited into the village’s
General Fund.
   (D)   If the Chief of Police or his designee determines that an inspected
vehicle complies with the inspection requirements established under R.C. §
4513.02, the Chief of Police or his designee shall issue a certificate of
compliance for the vehicle entitling the owner to register and title the
vehicle in accordance with § 76.05 of this chapter. The owner/operator of the
vehicle must show the Chief of Police or his designee a valid motor vehicle
driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or a valid, current driver’s license
issued by another jurisdiction, and proof of financial responsibility for such
vehicle before the certificate of compliance is issued.
   (E)   If a low-speed vehicle, a utility vehicle, or a mini-truck has been
inspected, registered and titled, prior to the effective date of this chapter
or is brought into the village after the effective date of this chapter, but
previously having had such vehicle inspected by an authorized inspection
program, in order to legally operate the vehicle in the village, the owner/
operator must still provide evidence of an inspection in compliance with Ohio
statutory requirements.
   (F)   Vehicles that have been inspected pursuant to this section shall
display a sticker that will be provided by the Police Division on the rear of
the vehicle in a conspicuous location. Officers may stop any low-speed vehicle,
a utility vehicle, or a mini-truck operated on a street or highway of the
village for the purpose of inspecting the vehicle.
(Ord. 2017-43, passed 1-22-2018) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.05 REGISTRATION AND TITLING REQUIREMENTS.
   No person shall operate a low-speed vehicle, a utility vehicle, or a mini-
truck upon any street or highway except as follows:
   (A)   The vehicle has been registered in accordance with R.C. Chapter 4503;
and
   (B)   The vehicle has been titled in accordance with R.C. Chapter 4505.
(Ord. 2017-43, passed 1-22-2018) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.06 LICENSING REQUIREMENTS.
   Any person who does not hold a valid, current motor vehicle driver’s or
commercial driver’s license, or a valid, current driver’s license issued by
another jurisdiction, shall not operate a low-speed vehicle, an under-speed
vehicle, a utility vehicle, or a mini-truck, upon any street or highway.
(Ord. 2017-43, passed 1-22-2018) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.07 FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   No person shall operate a low-speed vehicle, an under-speed vehicle, a
utility vehicle, or a mini-truck upon any street or highway unless that person
is able to show proof of financial responsibility for the vehicle operated.
(Ord. 2017-43, passed 1-22-2018) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.08 CODE APPLICATION.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person operating a low-
speed vehicle, a utility vehicle, or a mini -truck shall comply with this
Traffic Code and all other local and state traffic laws.
(Ord. 2017-43, passed 1-22-2018) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates this chapter is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a first
offense; on a second offense the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree; on each subsequent offense after the second offense the person
is guilty of misdemeanor of the third degree.
(Ord. 2017-43, passed 1-22-2018)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   FIRE PREVENTION; EXPLOSIVES AND FIREWORKS
      
92.   NUISANCES
      
93.   LITTERING
      
94.   PARKS AND RECREATION
      
95.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
96.   EXCESSIVE AND UNNECESSARY NOISE
      
97.   RIGHT-OF-WAY
      
98.   TREES
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
General Regulations
   
90.01   Animals and fowl running at large
   
90.02   Impounding and disposition
   
90.03   Abandoning animals
   
90.04   Killing, injuring or poisoning animals
   
90.05   Cruelty to animals
   
90.06   Farm animals prohibited
   
90.07   Hunting prohibited
   
90.08   Animal bites; quarantine and reporting
   
90.09   Prohibiting the feeding or harboring of wildlife and stray animals
Dogs
   
90.20   Barking or howling dogs
   
90.21   Dog owner liable for damage to public property
   
90.22   Dangerous or vicious dogs
   
90.23   Menacing by dogs
   
90.24   Impoundment; destruction of dogs
   
90.25   Keeping banned dogs
   
90.26   Strict liability
 
   
90.99   Penalty
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 90.01 ANIMALS AND FOWL RUNNING AT LARGE.
   (A)   No person, being the owner of any animal or fowl, or harboring or
having charge or control of the same, shall permit such animal or fowl to run
at large in any street, lane, alley or public ground of the village, or permit
such animal or fowl to go upon or enter any private yard, lot or enclosure
without the consent of the owner of such yard, lot or enclosure.
   (B)   The Mayor may provide for such notice as may be necessary to
adequately and reasonably inform the public of the provisions of this section.
   (C)   The running at large of any such animal or fowl in or upon any of the
places mentioned in this section is prima facie evidence that it is running at
large in violation of this section.
(1964 Code, § 505.01) (Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.02 IMPOUNDING AND DISPOSITION.
   The Police Department may impound every animal or fowl found in violation of
§
90.01. If a dog is found not wearing a valid dog license tag, that Police
Department shall return it over forthwith to an officer charged by law with the
custody and disposal of such dogs. If such dog is wearing a valid dog license
tag or the identity of the owner or custodian is otherwise established, the
Police Department shall immediately give notice to the licensee, owner or
custodian that the dog has been impounded. Such notice may be by telephone or
by ordinary mail to the last known address of such licensee, owner or
custodian. The dog shall not be released except upon the payment of reasonable
expenses for its taking and keeping. Any dog remaining unclaimed shall be sold
or otherwise disposed of as provided by law.
(1964 Code, § 505.02) (Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 90.03 ABANDONING ANIMALS.
   No owner or keeper of a dog, cat or other domestic animal shall abandon such
animal.
(R.C. § 959.01) (1964 Code, § 505.03) (Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty,
see §
90.99
§ 90.04 KILLING, INJURING OR POISONING ANIMALS.
   No person shall maliciously, or willfully and without the consent of the
owner, kill, injure or administer poison to any animal that is the property of
another; and no person shall, willfully and without the consent of the owner,
place any poisoned food where it may be easily found and eaten by children or
animals, either upon his or her own lands or the lands of another. This section
does not apply to a licensed veterinarian acting in an official capacity.
(1964 Code, § 505.04) (Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
90.99
Statutory reference:
   Injuring animals, see R.C § 959.02
   Poisoning animals, see R.C § 959.03
§ 90.05 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.
   (A)   No person shall:
      (1)   Torture an animal, deprive one of necessary sustenance,
unnecessarily or cruelly beat, needlessly mutilate or kill, or impound or
confine an animal without supplying it during the confinement with a sufficient
quantity of good wholesome food and water;
      (2)   Impound or confine an animal without affording it, during the
confinement, access to shelter from wind, rain, snow or excessive direct
sunlight, if it can reasonably be expected that the animal would otherwise
become sick or in some other way suffer. This division (A)(2) does not apply to
animals impounded or confined prior to slaughter. For the purpose of this
section, SHELTER means a human-made enclosure, windbreak, sunshade or natural
windbreak or sunshade that is developed from the earth’s contour, tree
development or vegetation;
      (3)   Carry or convey an animal in a cruel or inhumane manner;
      (4)   Keep animals in an enclosure without wholesome exercise and change
of air, nor feed cows on food that produces impure or unwholesome milk; or
      (5)   Detain livestock in railroad cars or compartments longer than 28
hours after they are so placed without supplying them with necessary food,
water and attention, nor permit the stock to be so crowded as to overlie,
crush, wound or kill each other.
   (B)   Upon the written request of the owner or person in custody of any
particular shipment of livestock, which written request shall be separate and
apart from any printed bill of lading or other railroad form, the length of
time in which the livestock may be detained in any cars or compartment without
food, water and attention may be extended to 36 hours without penalty therefor.
This section does not prevent the dehorning of cattle.
   (C)   All fines collected for violations of this section shall be paid to
the society or association for the prevention of cruelty to animals, if there
is one in the village; otherwise, all fines shall be paid to the General Fund.
(R.C. § 959.13 ) (1964 Code, § 505.05) (Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty,
see §
90.99
§ 90.06 FARM ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall keep or harbor any horses, cows, steer, fowl or swine within
the village.
(1964 Code, § 505.06) (Ord. 88-14, passed 3-14-1988; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-
1992) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.07 HUNTING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The hunting of game animals or wild birds within the village is
prohibited. No person shall hunt, kill or attempt to kill any game animals or
wild birds by the use of firearms or any other means. (1964 Code, § 505.09)
   (B)   Hunting is hereby prohibited at the premises commonly known as the
village water treatment plant and reservoir property.
      (1)   Hunting is defined pursuant to R.C. § 1531.01(Y); and
      (2)   The Village Administrator is hereby instructed and authorized to
post “No Hunting” signs at all means of public ingress and egress to said
premises and other conspicuous locations on said property.
(Ord. 84-29, passed 12-18-1984; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.08 ANIMAL BITES; QUARANTINE AND REPORTING.
   Whenever any animal shall bite any person, the Mayor may order such animal
quarantined for a period extending not longer than ten days from the time of
the biting. Any owner or person in custody or possession of such animal who
shall fail to comply with such quarantine order shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor. All expenses incurred for the keeping of such animal or the
necessary tests to determine whether rabies exists, shall be borne exclusively
by the owner or keeper of such animal. No person having knowledge of the
existence of any rabies, or the fact that any animal has bitten any other
person, shall fail to immediately report such information to the Police
Department.
(1964 Code, § 505.08) (Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.09 PROHIBITING THE FEEDING OR HARBORING OF WILDLIFE AND STRAY ANIMALS.
   (A)   No person shall keep or harbor any animal or fowl in the village so as
to create noxious or offensive odors or unsanitary conditions which are threat
to the public health, safety or welfare of the public.
   (B)   No person shall provide food for dogs, cats, feral cats, deer, geese,
ducks, raccoons, fowl or other wild animals or wildlife by setting food out on
any public property or within a 100-yard radius of any private residence or
public right-of-way. This section does not apply to animals owned by that
person, or song birds fed from a stationary bird feeder.
   (C)   Any cat that is wild, stray or un-owned shall be considered feral. A
domestic cat turned wild shall be considered feral. Feral cats are not
considered pets. Any wild animal or feral cat which is determined to be a
nuisance to the public health, safety or welfare may be abated as provided by
law or trapped and turned over to the proper agency.
(Ord. 2014-17, passed 8-11-2014) Penalty, see §
90.99
DOGS
§ 90.20 BARKING OR HOWLING DOGS.
   (A)   No person shall own, harbor or keep in custody a dog which disturbs
the peace by barking, yelping, howling or making other loud noises to the
annoyance and/or discomfort of any person. Continuous barking, yelping, howling
and/or making other loud noises for 15 consecutive minutes by such dog, whether
confined inside a residence or building or to the outside area, shall be deemed
to have disturbed the peace and to have caused the annoyance and discomfort of
persons; provided, that at the time of the complaint, no person or persons were
trespassing or threatening to trespass upon the private property of the owner,
and provided that the dog was not being teased or provoked in any manner.
   (B)   Any person who shall allow any dog habitually to remain, be lodged or
fed within any dwelling, building, yard or enclosure owned or occupied by such
person shall be considered as harboring or keeping such dog.
   (C)   Upon an initial complaint, an enforcement officer shall warn the
person in writing of the violation. Upon a second such complaint within 30
days, the enforcement officer shall charge the person with a violation of this
section.
   (D)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to owners, operators or
employees of licensed veterinary hospitals, licensed kennels, or licensed
animal boarding establishments, nor does this section apply to blind, deaf or
hearing impaired, or mobility impaired persons when the dog serves as an
assistance dog.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. No
owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog shall permit or allow such dog to annoy or
disturb one or more of the inhabitants of two or more separate residences of
this village by the frequent or habitual howling, yelping, barking, or making
of any other unreasonably loud and disturbing noises of such character,
intensity, and duration as to disturb the peace, quiet and good order of the
village. Any person who shall allow any animal habitually to remain, be lodged
or fed within any dwelling, building, yard or enclosure owned or occupied by
such person shall be considered as keeping or harboring such animal.
(Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 2016-51, passed 10-24-2016) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.21 DOG OWNER LIABLE FOR DAMAGE TO PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   The owner, keeper or harborer of any dog which damages or destroys park or
public property shall be held liable for the full value of the property damaged
or destroyed in addition to any penalty imposed for a violation of this
chapter.
(1964 Code, § 505.10) (Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.22 DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS DOGS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      DANGEROUS DOG. Has the same meaning as set forth in R.C. § 955.11.
      INJURY. Any tear or breaking of an individual’s flesh as a result of a
hostile contact by a dog.
      VICIOUS DOG. Has the same meaning as set forth in R.C. § 955.11 and shall
include in addition any breed of dog that is commonly known as a “pit bull
dog”. This includes any Staffordshire bull terrier, American pit bull terrier,
or American Staffordshire terrier breed of dog or mixed breed of dog which
contains, as an element of its breeding, the breed of Staffordshire bull
terrier, American pit bull terrier or American Staffordshire terrier, and the
Perro De Canario, aka the canary dog.
   (B)   Any person owning, keeping, possessing, harboring, maintaining or
having the care, custody or control of a vicious dog shall:
      (1)   Register the dog with the Police Department annually, between
January 2 and January 20, and within 30 days when a vicious dog is obtained;
      (2)   At the time of registration provide proof of liability insurance as
required by division (F) below;
      (3)   Notify the Police Department within 72 hours if the dangerous or
vicious dog has died or has been sold or donated, and provide the Police
Department with the name, address and telephone number of the new owner;
      (4)   Pay an annual registration fee of $25 to cover the administrative
expenses associated herewith;
      (5)   Have his or her dog spayed or neutered; and
      (6)   Upon moving into the village register his or her dog within 30 days
and have the dog spayed or neutered within 30 days.
   (C)   No owner, keeper or harborer of any female dog shall permit it to go
beyond the premises of the owner, keeper or harborer at any time the dog is in
heat, unless the dog is properly on leash.
   (D)   No owner, keeper or harborer of any dog shall fail at any time to do
the following:
      (1)   Keep the dog either physically confined or restrained upon the
premises of the owner, keeper or harborer by a leash, tether, adequate fence,
secure enclosure or supervision so as to prevent escape; or
       (2)   Have the dog under reasonable control of some person.
   (E)   No owner, keeper or harborer of a dangerous or vicious dog shall fail
to do any of the following.
      (1)   While the dog is on the premises of the owner, keeper or harborer,
securely confine it at all times in a locked pen which has a top, locked fenced
yard or other locked enclosure which has a top, except that a dangerous dog
may, in the alternative, be tied with a leash or tether so that the dog is
adequately restrained.
      (2)   While the dog is off the premises of the owner, keeper or harborer,
keep it on a chain link leash or tether that is no more than six feet in length
and, in addition, do at least one of the following:
         (a)   Keep the dog in a locked pen which has a top, locked fenced yard
or other locked enclosure which has a top;
         (b)   Have the leash or tether controlled by a person who is of
suitable age and discretion or securely attach, tie or affix the leash or
tether to the ground or a stationary object or fixture in such a manner that
the dog is restrained and station the individual aforesaid in such proximity to
that dog so as to prevent the dog from causing injury to any person; or
         (c)   Muzzle the dog.
   (F)   No owner, keeper or harborer of a vicious dog shall fail to obtain
liability insurance with an insurer authorized to write liability insurance in
this state providing coverage in each occurrence subject to a limit, exclusive
of interest and costs, of not less than $100,000 because of damage or bodily
injury to, or death of a person caused by a vicious dog.
(Ord. 2001-35, passed 8-27-2001; Ord. 2003-18, passed 6-4-2003) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.23 MENACING BY DOGS.
   (A)   No person, being the owner or having custody or control of any
dangerous or vicious dog, and while off the premises of the owner, shall
knowingly cause or allow such dog to menace any person, except in defense of
such owner’s person or property.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(Ord. 2001-35, passed 8-27-2001) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.24 IMPOUNDMENT; DESTRUCTION OF DOGS.
   (A)   When any person, being the owner or having custody or control of any
dog is charged with a violation of this chapter, the court may, upon motion of
any party or its own motion, order the seizure and impoundment of the dog
pending trial.
   (B)   In the event that a law enforcement officer has probable cause to
believe that a dangerous or vicious dog is running at large, he or she may
seize and impound the dog without seeking prior court order.
   (C)   Nothing within this section shall be construed to prevent a law
enforcement officer from seizing or destroying any animal which presents an
immediate risk of physical harm to any person or property.
   (D)   Any dog that attacks and injures any person or another dog, cat or
domestic farm animal shall be ordered humanely destroyed when, in the court’s
judgment, such dog represents a continuing threat of serious harm to persons or
other such animals. The Chief of Police may petition a court of competent
jurisdiction for an order to humanely destroy any dog impounded pursuant to
this chapter which represents a threat of harm to any person caring for such
animal. The court shall order any dog that kills or causes serious physical
harm to any person, other than a person then committing a criminal trespass or
other crime of violence upon the premises of the owner of such dog, humanely
destroyed.
(Ord. 2001-35, passed 8-27-2001)
§ 90.25 KEEPING BANNED DOGS.
   (A)   No person shall own, keep, possess, harbor, maintain or have the care,
custody or control of a dog within the village which such dog has been banned
by order of a court of competent jurisdiction from any municipality, county,
township or other political subdivision.
   (B)   Compliance with the requirements of this chapter is not a defense to a
violation of this section.
   (C)   No person shall own, keep, possess, harbor, maintain or have the care,
custody or control of more than one vicious dog within the village.
(Ord. 2001-35, passed 8-27-2001) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.26 STRICT LIABILITY.
   The provisions of §§
90.22 through
90.26 are specifically intended to impose strict liability.
(Ord. 2001-35, passed 8-27-2001)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no penalty is
otherwise provided shall be fined not more than $100. Each daily violation of
any such provision shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   Whoever violates §
90.04 or §
90.05 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Each daily
violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(1964 Code, § 505.99)
   (C)   Whoever violates §
90.09 is guilty of a minor misdemeanor for the first offense, a fourth degree
misdemeanor for the second offense, a third degree misdemeanor for the third
offense and a second degree misdemeanor for the fourth or subsequent offense.
   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates §
90.22(C) or (D) shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor and may be fined not
more than $100 for each offense.
      (2)   Whoever violates §
90.22(B) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of a misdemeanor of the third degree
and may be filed not more than $500 and may be incarcerated for a period of
time not to exceed 60 days.
      (3)   Whoever violates §
90.22(E) or (F) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall
be fined not less than $500 nor more than $1,000 and may be incarcerated for a
period of up to six months.
      (4)   In the event an owner, keeper or harborer of any dangerous or
vicious dog has violated any of the requirements set forth in §
90.22(E) and provided further that such vicious dog has caused serious injury
or death to any individual, the court shall order, in addition to any other
penalties, that the dog be removed from the village within ten days of the date
of conviction, or three days after completion of any quarantine period ordered
by any agency, whichever is greater, and that the dog be humanly destroyed by a
licensed veterinarian, the County Dog Warden or the County Humane Society at
the owner, keeper or harborer’s expense.
      (5)   The court shall order, in addition to any other penalties set forth
herein, the owner, keeper or harborer of any dog who, while off premises,
causes injury (other than serious injury or death) to any individual, to enroll
such dog in a dog obedience training school within seven days of conviction of
any offense under §
90.22. If the owner, keeper or harborer fails to enroll such dog in a dog
obedience training school within the prescribed time limit or fails to complete
the dog obedience training within any time limit set by the court, the dog
shall be humanely destroyed by a licensed veterinarian, the County Dog Warden
or the County Humane Society at the owner, keeper or harborer’s expense.
Whoever fails to comply with any provision of §
90.22(B) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. Each and every day
during such period of noncompliance with this section shall be deemed a
separate offense.
(Ord. 88-11, passed 3-14-1988; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 2001-35,
passed 8-27-2001; Ord. 2003-18, passed 6-4-2003; Ord. 2014-17, passed 8-11-
2014)
CHAPTER 91: FIRE PREVENTION; EXPLOSIVES AND FIREWORKS
Section
Fire Prevention Code
   
91.01   Adoption of Fire Prevention Code
   
91.02   Fire Prevention and Education Bureau established
Fire Prevention Regulations
   
91.20   Fire inspections
   
91.21   Removal of flammables or obstructions
   
91.22   Protective appliances
   
91.23   Compliance with orders
   
91.24   Waste receptacles for combustibles
   
91.25   Fires to be confined in receptacles
   
91.26   Fires producing smoke or odors
Explosives
   
91.40   Storage of explosives
   
91.41   Sale of explosives to minors
   
91.42   Blasting; permit and bond
Fireworks
   
91.55   Fireworks Trust Fund
 
   
91.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Littering, see
Chapter 93
   Nuisances, see
Chapter 92
FIRE PREVENTION CODE
§ 91.01 ADOPTION OF FIRE PREVENTION CODE.
   The Ohio Fire Code and all current and future appendices are hereby adopted
as the Fire Code of the village.
(Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 2015-22, passed 8-10-2015)
§ 91.02 FIRE PREVENTION AND EDUCATION BUREAU ESTABLISHED.
   The Village Fire Department Fire Prevention and Education Bureau is hereby
established with the current rules and regulations adopted as contained in
attached Exhibit A and are adopted by reference and made a part of this code,
the same as if set out in full.
(Ord. 2015-22, passed 8-10-2015)
FIRE PREVENTION REGULATIONS
§ 91.20 FIRE INSPECTIONS.
   The Fire Chief or any deputy designated by him or her is hereby authorized
and empowered, at any and all reasonable times and upon complaint or
information, shall be required to enter and inspect any premises, building or
structure within the village with regard to the presence, arrangement or
deposit of materials or matter which may constitute a fire hazard or create
danger in case of fire. He or she is further authorized, empowered and required
to inspect the condition, size, arrangement and efficiency of all appliances on
or in such premises for protection against fire.
(1964 Code, § 549.01) (Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 91.21 REMOVAL OF FLAMMABLES OR OBSTRUCTIONS.
   All flammable or combustible materials not arranged or stored in such a
manner as to afford reasonable safety against the danger of fire, or any matter
stored or arranged in such a manner as to impede or prevent access to or exit
from such premises in case of fire, shall be ordered by the Fire Chief to be
removed or rearranged in such a manner as to eliminate any fire hazard. Such
order shall be in writing and delivered to the owner, lessee or occupant of the
premises.
(1964 Code, § 549.02) (Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 91.22 PROTECTIVE APPLIANCES.
   If the Fire Chief shall find upon inspection that the appliances mentioned
in §
91.20 are wholly wanting or are inadequate in number, condition, size,
arrangement or efficiency for the reasonable protection of such premises
against fire, he or she shall cause an order, in writing, to be delivered to
the owner, lessee or occupant, requiring the installation, replacement or
repair of appliance adequate for the reasonable protection of such premises in
case of fire.
(1964 Code, § 549.03) (Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 91.23 COMPLIANCE WITH ORDERS.
   Such order herein before mentioned shall be directed to the owner, lessee or
occupant of such premises, building or structure, or to the person in control
of the articles, materials, goods, wares or merchandise herein referred to, or
to the owner thereof, as the circumstances may require. It is hereby made the
duty of such person to whom an order is directed to comply with such order with
all reasonable dispatch and diligence. In the event such person shall fail or
refuse to comply with any order made pursuant to §§
91.21 and
91.22, or in case of emergency, the matter therein referred to may be removed
or rearranged by the Fire Department.
(1964 Code, § 549.04) (Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 91.24 WASTE RECEPTACLES FOR COMBUSTIBLES.
   Waste paper, ashes, oil rags, waste rags, excelsior or any material of a
similar hazardous nature shall not be accumulated in any cellar or any other
portion of any building of any kind. Proper fireproof receptacles shall be
provided for such hazardous materials.
(1964 Code, § 549.05) (Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.25 FIRES TO BE CONFINED IN RECEPTACLES.
   No person shall kindle any fire in or upon any of the streets, lanes, parks
or any of the public places within the limits of the village, unless the same
is confined within a proper and safe receptacle.
(1964 Code, § 549.06) (Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.26 FIRES PRODUCING SMOKE OR ODORS.
   No person shall burn any garbage, refuse, rubbish, wet leaves or other
material of any kind in such a manner as to produce dense smoke, fumes or odors
which are offensive or injurious to any person or property.
(1964 Code, § 549.08) (Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
91.99
EXPLOSIVES
§ 91.40 STORAGE OF EXPLOSIVES.
   No person shall store at any time, in any powder house or magazine within
the village limits, a quantity of gunpowder or other similar explosive weighing
in excess of 100 pounds.
(1964 Code, § 545.09) (Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.41 SALE OF EXPLOSIVES TO MINORS.
   No person shall sell, give away or otherwise dispose of or deliver to any
person under 21 years of age any explosives, as defined in the state statutes,
whether such person is acting for himself, herself or for any other person.
(1964 Code, § 545.08) (Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.42 BLASTING; PERMIT AND BOND.
   (A)   No person shall cause a blast to occur within the village without
making prior application in writing, setting forth the exact nature of the
intended operation, and receiving a permit to blast from the Mayor.
   (B)   The Mayor, before granting such permit, may require the applicant to
provide a bond to indemnify the village and all other persons against injury or
damages which might result from the proposed blasting.
(1964 Code, § 545.10) (Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
91.99
FIREWORKS
§ 91.55 FIREWORKS TRUST FUND.
   As provided for under R.C. § 5705.09, a Fireworks Trust Fund is hereby
established to accept annual donations from Soaring Software Solutions
Incorporated to be used solely to support the village’s annual Fourth of July
fireworks display and that these donations will be provided under the
conditions enumerated and contained in attached Exhibit A and are adopted by
reference and made a part of this code, the same as if set out in full.
(Ord. 2011-33, passed 12-12-2011)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the Fire
Prevention Code adopted in §
91.01 or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with
any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed
statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any
certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been
taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified
by the Village Council or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time
fixed herein, shall severally for each and every such violation and
noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable be a fine of
not less than $10 and not more than $500. The imposition of one penalty for any
violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue and all such
persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects
within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified, each ten days that
prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§
91.20 through
91.26, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $50.
(1964 Code, § 549.99)
   (C)   Whoever violates any provision of §§
91.40 through
91.42 shall be fined not more than $100 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or
both.
(1964 Code, § 545.99)
(Ord. 76-14, passed 10-25-1976; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
CHAPTER 92: NUISANCES
Section
   
92.01   Application of chapter
   
92.02   Nuisance prohibited; defined
   
92.03   Complaints; inspections of premises
   
92.04   Abatement of nuisances-standard abatement
   
92.05   Abatement of nuisances-abatement by demolition
   
92.06   Emergency abatement
   
92.07   Abatement by village; costs and assessment
   
92.08   Annual order to clean up premises
   
92.09   Authority of village
   
92.10   Unlawful interference prohibited
   
92.11   Demolition and lien agreement; costs
   
92.12   Fire damaged structure
   
92.13   Administrative liability
 
   
92.99   Penalty
§ 92.01 APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be enforceable within the village
concurrently with the state and federal laws relative to sanitation and health,
and the ordinances or orders of the County Health District relative thereto,
and shall not be construed as modifying, repealing, limiting or affecting in
any manner such laws, ordinances or orders.
(Ord. 2018-14, passed 5-14-2018)
§ 92.02 NUISANCE PROHIBITED; DEFINED.
   (A)   Prohibited. No person or entity shall cause or permit a public
nuisance to be or remain in or upon any structure, premises or other place, of
which that person or entity is the owner, lessee, tenant or occupant.
   (B)   Definitions.    For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      PUBLIC NUISANCE. A condition that exists when:
         (a)   Any structure is so out of repair and dilapidated that, if it
were permitted to remain, would endanger the life, limb, or property of persons
or property upon the public streets or public ways adjacent thereto by reason
of the collapse of such building or structure or by the falling of objects
therefrom;
         (b)   Any tree, smoke stack, light pole, flag pole, or other object
standing upon property is in such condition that, if it were permitted to
remain, would endanger the life, limb or property of persons or property upon
the public streets or public ways adjacent thereto by the falling of objects
therefrom or by the objects themselves falling;
         (c)   Any excavation or cellar upon property is unguarded or remains
in such condition that, if it were permitted to remain, would endanger the
life, limb or property of persons or property upon the public streets or public
ways adjacent thereto, by falling or being cast therein;
         (d)   Any accumulation of earth, rubbish, brush, or other materials
which attract and propagate vermin, rodents, or insects that endanger the
public health;
         (e)   Any accumulation of rubbish, refuse or waste materials,
including tires and portable water tanks, that, by reason of its location and
character, is unsightly and interferes with the reasonable enjoyment of
property by neighbors, detrimentally affects property values in the surrounding
neighborhood or community, or materially interferes with the prevention or
suppression of fire upon the premises;
         (f)   Any structure is so out of repair that it constitutes a fire
hazard because of its condition. For purposes of this division (f), a building
that is vacant, unguarded or open at doors or windows, shall be deemed a fire
hazard;
         (g)   There is accumulation in any structure or on any property of
rubbish or other materials in an amount and in a condition that constitutes a
fire hazard by reason of the likelihood of its catching on or communicating
fire;
         (h)   Any structure that has been damaged by a fire and is allowed to
remain in such condition for at least 90 days, unless the Fire Chief has
approved, in writing, a plan and timeline for reconstruction of the structure;
         (i)   The conduct of any activity on any property which by reason of
noxious odors generated thereby, or of smoke, dust and dirt being cast
therefrom, is harmful to the public health, welfare or safety, or materially
interferes with the peaceful and lawful use, comfort and enjoyment of owners or
occupants of a proximate property;
         (j)   The presence of noxious weeds or invasive plants as those terms
are defined in the Ohio Administrative Code on any premises in the Village at a
height that exceeds ten inches;
         (k)   Any structure that becomes so out of repair and dilapidated
that, due to lack of adequate maintenance or neglect, it becomes unsafe for
occupancy, endangers the public health, welfare, or safety of occupants, or
causes such a condition of blight that it materially interferes with the
peaceful enjoyment and lawful use of owners or occupants of a proximate
property;
         (1)   The presence on any premises of turf grasses exceeding ten
inches in height;
         (m)   The conduct of any activity on any property that generates loud,
unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which either annoys, disturbs,
injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others;
         (n)   There is an accumulation of any dirt, construction or demolition
debris, containers from industrial use, inoperable motorized vehicles, campers,
filth, rubbish, garbage, waste, leaves or clippings, straw, hay bales, tree
stumps, boxes, or any other matter of an unsightly or unsanitary nature, in
such a manner that such matter could become dangerous to the public health,
comfort and safety of others, that such matter could be blown into any street,
alley, park, public ground, sidewalk, or property of another, or such matter
could be deposited into any plumbing fixture that it may obstruct or render
unwholesome any sanitary sewer or watercourse;
         (o)   Any structure, fence, wall, shed, house, swimming pool, any part
of any of the foregoing; or any pole or smoke stack; or any excavation,
basement, cellar, sidewalk subspace, wharf or dock, which in its entirety or in
any part thereof, by reason of the condition in which the same is permitted to
be or remain, shall or may endanger the health, life, limb or property, or
cause any hurt, harm, inconvenience, discomfort, depreciation, damage, or
injury to any one or more persons or to any other property in the village;
         (p)   Any swimming pool, pond or other body of water that is
abandoned, unattended, unfiltered, or otherwise not maintained, resulting in
the water becoming polluted by bacterial growth, algae, remains of insects,
remains of deceased animals, reptiles, rubbish, refuse, debris, or any other
material, which, because of its location, becomes an unhealthy, unsafe or
unsightly condition;
         (q)   Any appliance, such as refrigerators and freezers, with a
capacity of one and one-half cubic feet or more and an opening of 50 square
inches and which has a door or lid equipped with hinge, latch or other
fastening device capable of securing such door or lid, which is abandoned,
discarded or knowingly permitted to remain on premises in a place accessible to
children;
         (r)   Leaving any putrid substances on any lot or land, or failing to
remove all obstructions from culverts, covered drains or natural watercourses
as provided in R.C. § 715.47;
         (s)   Failing to keep sidewalks in repair and free from snow, ice, or
other obstructions;
         (t)   Any dangerous structure which, because of its condition, is
unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general
welfare of the people of the village;
         (u)   The storage of any junk car on any premises.
            1.   As used in this division (u), “junk car” means any unlicensed
motor vehicle or any used vehicle propelled or intended to be propelled by
power other than human power and which is in an inoperative or partially
dismantled condition.
            2.   As used in this division (u), “inoperative condition” means
incapable of being propelled under its own power in its present condition, and
“partially dismantled condition” means that some part of a motor vehicle is
missing, which part is ordinarily an essential component of the motor vehicle.
            3.   This division shall not apply to vehicles in an enclosed
building, to commercial garages, repair shops or used car dealers or to
operators of junkyards appropriately licensed and in compliance with the
village ordinances and the Ohio Revised Code; or
         (v)   Any condition exists which has been declared a public nuisance
by common law or the Ohio Revised Code.
      STRUCTURE. Shall have the same definition as stated in Chapter 150,
Appendix A, §
150.902.
(Ord. 2018-14, passed 5-14-2018) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.03 COMPLAINTS; INSPECTIONS OF PREMISES.
   (A)   Whenever a complaint is made or visual inspection discloses to the
Village Administrator or designee of the existence of a public nuisance as
defined in §
92.02, the Village Administrator or designee shall promptly inspect, or cause
to be inspected by the Fire Chief, the premises on which it is alleged such
public nuisance exists.
   (B)   For the purpose of enforcing this chapter, the Village Administrator
or designee is authorized, at any reasonable time, to enter upon and inspect
any premises or property within the village when there is a reasonable cause to
believe that a public nuisance, as defined in this chapter, exists.
   (C)   If either the Village Administrator or designee, or the Fire Chief,
find that a public nuisance exists and that it should be abated, abatement of
such nuisance shall proceed in accordance with the provisions of §§
92.04 or
92.05 below.
(Ord. 2018-14, passed 5-14-2018)
§ 92.04 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES—STANDARD ABATEMENT.
   (A)   Should the Village Administrator or designee, or the Fire Chief, find
that a public nuisance as defined in §
92.02 exists, the Village Administrator or a designee shall cause photographs
of such nuisance to be made. The Village Administrator or designee shall then
determine from the records of the Lucas or Fulton County Auditor’s Office any
owner, mortgagee, lienholder, tenant, or person that possesses an interest of
record in the property and immediately send a standard notice of violation
pursuant to division (D) below. The Village Administrator or designee may also
send the standard notice of violation to the lessee, tenant or occupant of the
premises.
   (B)   The standard notice of violation shall:
      (1)   Describe with reasonable certainty the premises determined to be a
public nuisance;
      (2)   Describe the conditions constituting the public nuisance;
      (3)   Specify that the owner or lessee, tenant or occupant has seven
calendar days in which to take one of the actions described in division (C)
below;
      (4)   State whether the Village Administrator or designee, or the Fire
Chief, finds the public nuisance to constitute an emergency;
      (5)   Describe the remediation necessary to abate the public nuisance,
which may include repair, rehabilitation and/or vacation of the premises; and
      (6)   Specify the actions to be taken by the village pursuant to this
chapter upon failure of an owner or lessee, tenant or occupant to take one of
the actions described in division (C) below within the seven-day time
limitation.
   (C)   Standard notice of violation.
      (1)   In cases in which demolition is not required for abatement, an
owner shall have seven calendar days from receipt of the notice of violation to
take one of the following actions:
         (a)   Fully and completely abate the public nuisance;
         (b)   Work out a schedule, satisfactory to the Village Administrator
or designee, for the nuisance abatement, with sufficient surety acceptable to
the village to guarantee completion on schedule; or
         (c)   Appeal the determination of the Village Administrator or
designee of the existence of a public nuisance and/or the remedy required to
the Board of Zoning Appeals by filing a written notice of appeal with the
Village Administrator or designee.
      (2)   If an owner appeals the standard notice of violation to the Board
of Zoning Appeals in accordance with this division, the Board shall affirm,
reverse, or modify the determinations made by the Village Administrator or
designee. For purposes of this subsection, “sufficient surety acceptable to the
village to guarantee completion on schedule” affords the village the sole
discretion to select the necessary surety, which may include but not be limited
to a cash bond or letter of credit.
   (D)   The standard notice of violation may be served by any of the following
methods:
      (1)   Hand delivery;
      (2)   Posting a notice of violation on the subject premises;
      (3)   Sending certified and ordinary U.S. Mail, addressed to the usual
place of residence of the persons entitled to receive the notices of violation,
as indicated by current tax records of the Fulton or Lucas County Treasurer’s
Office or the real property records of the Fulton or Lucas County Recorder’s
Office.
   (E)   If an owner, lessee, tenant or occupant fails to appeal a standard
notice of violation within seven calendar days of receipt of the standard
notice of violation, and fails to take one of the other steps described in
division (C) above, the Village Administrator or designee is authorized to take
immediate action to abate the nuisance. Action by the Village Administrator or
designee, shall be through such legal or administrative channels as are deemed
most appropriate or through use of either village or private labor to effect
the necessary nuisance abatement.
(Ord. 2018-14, passed 5-14-2018)
§ 92.05 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES—ABATEMENT BY DEMOLITION.
   (A)   Should the Village Administrator or designee, or the Fire Chief, find
that a public nuisance as defined in §
92.02 exists, and that abatement by demolition may be required, the Village
Administrator or a designee shall cause photographs of such nuisance to be
made. As otherwise permitted in the village’s ordinances or the Ohio Revised
Code, the Village Administrator or designee shall have the express authority to
engage any engineers or consultants to evaluate the need for demolition in a
particular case. The Village Administrator or a designee shall then determine
from the records of the Lucas County or Fulton County Auditor’s Office any
owner, mortgagee, lienholder, tenant, or person that possesses an interest of
record in the property and immediately send a demolition notice of violation to
the owner and, as applicable, to the lessee, tenant or occupant of the
premises, as provided in division (C) below.
   (B)   Contents of a demolition notice of violation.
      (1)   The demolition notice of violation shall:
         (a)   Describe with reasonable particularity the premises deemed to be
a public nuisance;
         (b)   Describe the conditions constituting the public nuisance;
         (c)   Specify that an owner has 30 calendar days within which to
either fully and completely abate the nuisance via demolition or work out a
schedule, satisfactory to the Village Administrator or designee, or the Fire
Chief, for the demolition, with sufficient surety acceptable to the village to
guarantee timely completion of the abatement according to schedule; and
         (d)   Inform the interested parties of the date and time of the pre-
scheduled adjudicatory hearing date before the Board of Zoning Appeals. The
hearing date shall be set no less than 30 calendar days after the date of the
demolition notice of violation. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall affirm,
reverse, or modify the determinations made by the Village Administrator or
designee, or Fire Chief, in the demolition notice of violation, including the
existence of the public nuisance and the demolition remedy deemed necessary by
the Village Administrator or designee, or Fire Chief.
      (2)   For purposes of this division (B), “sufficient surety acceptable to
the village to guarantee completion on schedule” affords the village the sole
discretion to select the necessary surety, which may include but not be limited
to a cash bond or letter of credit.
   (C)   The demolition notice of violation shall be served by either hand
delivery, or both the posting of a notice of violation on the subject premises
and via certified and ordinary U.S. Mail, addressed to the usual place of
residence of the persons entitled to receive the notices of violation, as
indicated by current tax records of the Lucas or Fulton County Treasurer’s
Office or the real property records of the Lucas or Fulton County Recorder's
Office. This shall include all owners, mortgagees, lienholders, tenants or
other persons possessing an interest of record in the property.
   (D)   The final decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals regarding demolition
shall be delivered to the property owner via hand delivery, or via certified
and ordinary U.S. mail, and posted on the subject premises. Upon the decision
of the Board of Zoning Appeals determining that demolition is required for
abatement of a nuisance, the Village Administrator is authorized to abate the
nuisance via demolition through such legal or administrative channels as are
deemed most appropriate or through use of either village or private labor to
effect the necessary nuisance abatement.
(Ord. 2018-14, passed 5-14-2018)
§ 92.06 EMERGENCY ABATEMENT.
   (A)   Whenever a public nuisance exists as defined in §
92.02 and the nature thereof constitutes an emergency as defined in division
(B) below, the Village Administrator or designee may take immediate action to
abate the nuisance and such abatement may take place without prior notice to
the titled owner of the premises on which the public nuisance exists. Notice of
the action taken to abate the nuisance shall immediately be sent to the titled
owner by certified mail with a return receipt requested and posted on the
premises.
   (B)   As used in this section, EMERGENCY means an unforeseen combination of
circumstances that calls for immediate action in order to preserve the public
health, safety, welfare, or property against an imminent risk of physical harm.
   (C)   In any proceeding pursuant to this section, the determination that a
public nuisance exists and constitutes an emergency as defined in division (B)
hereof shall be made solely by the Village Administrator or the Fire Chief. As
otherwise permitted in the village ordinances and the Ohio Revised Code, the
Village Administrator or designee shall have the express authority to engage
any engineers or consultants to evaluate the need for emergency abatement.
(Ord. 2018-14, passed 5-14-2018)
§ 92.07 ABATEMENT BY VILLAGE; COSTS AND ASSESSMENT.
   (A)   Should the public nuisance not be abated as provided in the notice
given pursuant to §
92.04 or §
92.05, the Village Administrator or designee shall have the right to enter upon
the premises to abate such public nuisance. In abating any public nuisance, the
Village Administrator or designee may take such action as is necessary to
complete the abatement of the same and should it be practicable to sell or
salvage any material resulting from such abatement, the Village Administrator
may cause the same to be sold at public or private sale at the best price
obtainable and keep an account of the proceeds thereof. Such proceeds shall be
deposited in the General Fund of the village and any difference in the amount
so received and the cost of the abatement shall be reported to Council, which
shall levy an assessment against the premises upon which such nuisance was
abated and cause such assessment to be certified and collected as other
assessments by the village.
   (B)   Should the proceeds of the sale of any material salvaged in the course
of such abatement exceed the cost thereof, the amount of such excess shall be
paid to the owner of the premises upon filing a claim thereof and proof of
title and right to such surplus.
   (C)   The Village Administrator or designee may utilize any labor or
equipment of the village in making such abatement or the Village Administrator
may contract privately for the abatement of the nuisance provided that Council
authorizes the expenditures of such funds.
   (D)   Any and all expenses or costs incurred under this chapter for the
abatement, including removal, repair, alteration, securing, boarding, or
demolition of a building or structure shall be paid by the owner of the land
and/or responsible person as provided in R.C. § 715.261. If the owner and/or
other responsible person fails to pay for the costs within 30 days after
receipt of notice from the Village Administrator of a statement of the charges
and costs incurred, the Village Administrator may certify such amount to the
Fiscal Officer. The Fiscal Officer shall promptly make a written return to the
Fulton or Lucas County Auditor of the action under this section with a
statement of the total costs and expenses, the amount credited for salvage, if
any, and a proper legal description of the premises. Certification to the
County Auditor is for the purpose of making such costs and expenses a lien upon
the property, to be collected as other taxes and returned to the village with
accounting thereof in accordance with R.C. § 715.261.
(Ord. 2018-14, passed 5-14-2018)
§ 92.08 ANNUAL ORDER TO CLEAN UP PREMISES.
   Prior to May 10 and September 10 of every year, the Mayor shall cause a
notice or proclamation to be inserted in one or more newspapers of general
circulation within the village, ordering all persons to thoroughly clean and
provide proper drainage for all lands, yards, lots, premises or structures and
to cause all trash and other unclean and unsightly matter to be removed
therefrom within 30 days of the publication of the proclamation.
(Ord. 2018-14, passed 5-14-2018) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.09 AUTHORITY OF VILLAGE.
   This chapter shall be deemed to be an enlargement and not a limitation or
restriction on the power or authority of the village or any officer thereof to
take action or bring any suit or proceeding in respect to public nuisances
otherwise provided for by law or ordinance of the village.
(Ord. 2018-14, passed 5-14-2018)
§ 92.10 UNLAWFUL INTERFERENCE PROHIBITED.
   No person shall interfere with any municipal officer, designee, assistant,
subordinate, employee or agent while they are engaged in or carrying out the
inspection of an alleged nuisance or the abatement of a nuisance as set forth
in this chapter.
(Ord. 2018-14, passed 5-14-2018) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.11 DEMOLITION AND LIEN AGREEMENT; COSTS.
   (A)   Notwithstanding and in addition to all sections of this chapter, the
Village Administrator is authorized to enter into an abatement, demolition and
lien agreement with the approval of a property owner or other responsible
person to abate any public nuisance as defined in §
92.02.
   (B)   In the event an abatement, demolition and lien agreement is executed
by the Village Administrator and the property owner under this section, no
further notice is required to be given to the property owner regarding the
nuisance and its abatement.
   (C)   Any and all expenses or costs incurred under this chapter for nuisance
abatement, including the removal, repair, altercation, securing or boarding of
a building or structure shall be paid by the owner of the land and/or other
responsible person as provided in R.C. § 715.261, which amount shall be
included in the abatement, demolition and lien agreement. The village is then
authorized to certify the costs described herein to the Fulton or Lucas County
Auditor for the purpose of making such costs and expenses a lien upon the
property, to be collected as other taxes and returned to the village with
accounting thereof in accordance with R.C. § 715.261.
(Ord. 2018-14, passed 5-14-2018)
§ 92.12 FIRE DAMAGED STRUCTURE.
   (A)   The village adopts the provisions of R.C. § 3929.86 where applicable
and shall follow the procedures established herein and whereby in certain
specified situations insurance proceeds recoverable for fire-damaged structures
shall be deposited with the village to secure the cost and expenses incurred by
the village for removal, repairs or securing of fire-damaged buildings or
structures on the property pursuant to the Ohio Revised Code.
   (B)   The Fiscal Officer is hereby designated as the officer of the village
authorized to carry out duties of municipal officers under R.C. § 3929.86 and
shall perform all duties in compliance therewith, including the establishment
of a special fund known as the Fire Damaged Structures Account, Insurance
Proceeds, and shall receive therein and disburse therefrom funds in accordance
with the provisions of R.C. § 3929.86.
(Ord. 2018-14, passed 5-14-2018)
§ 92.13 ADMINISTRATIVE LIABILITY.
   No officer, agent or employee of the village shall be rendered personally
liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any
act required or permitted in the discharge of duties under this chapter. Any
suit brought against any officer, agent or employee as a result of any act
required or permitted in the discharge of duties under this chapter shall be
defended by the Village Solicitor or the insurance carrier until the final
determination of the proceedings therein.
(Ord. 2018-14, passed 5-14-2018)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   The owner, tenant, business, or person in control of property that is
deemed a public nuisance, as defined in this chapter, who fails or refuses to
comply with any notice or order to repair, vacate or demolish the public
nuisance given by any person authorized by this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $150 for each offense. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day that such public nuisance is
permitted to exist after the time specified for the abatement thereof by the
owner or occupant in any notice as provided for in this chapter.
   (B)   Any owner, tenant, business, or person who has pleaded guilty or been
convicted of an offense under any provision of this chapter, or a substantially
equivalent offense in another jurisdiction, within the previous five years
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree, punishable as provided in
§
130.01.
   (C)   Whoever violates the provisions of § 92.10 shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree, punishable as provided in §
130.01.
(Ord. 2018-14, passed 5-14-2018)
CHAPTER 93: LITTERING
Section
   
93.01   Short title
   
93.02   Definitions
   
93.03   Litter prohibited
   
93.04   Placing litter in receptacles to prevent scattering
   
93.05   Sweeping litter into gutters prohibited
   
93.06   Merchants’ duty to keep sidewalks free of litter
   
93.07   Litter thrown by persons in vehicles
   
93.08   Truck loads causing litter
   
93.09   Litter in parks
   
93.10   Litter in lakes and fountains
   
93.11   Dropping litter from aircraft
   
93.12   Posting notices prohibited
   
93.13   Litter on occupied private property
   
93.14   Owner to maintain premises free of litter
   
93.15   Litter on vacant lots
   
93.16   Clearing litter from open private property by village
 
   
93.99   Penalty
§ 93.01 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Anti-Litter Ordinance”.
(1964 Code, § 515.01) (Ord. 582, passed 8-23-1965; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-
1992)
§ 93.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIRCRAFT. Any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used or designed
for navigation or for flight in the air. The word AIRCRAFT includes helicopters
and lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons.
   AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE. A litter storage and collection receptacle
which prevents litter deposited therein from being carried or removed therefrom
by the elements.
   COMMERCIAL HANDBILL. Any printed or written matter, any sample or device,
dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or
otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature which:
      (1)   Advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing;
      (2)   Directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales;
      (3)   Directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is
charged for the purpose of private gain or profit; the terms of this division
(3) shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is taken
up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such meeting,
theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, when either of the
same is held or given or takes place in connection with the dissemination of
information which is not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency, good
morals, public peace, safety and good order, provided, that nothing contained
in this division (3) shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking
place of any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind
without a license, where such license is or may be required by any law of this
state or under any ordinance of this village; or
      (4)   While containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is
predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or
circulated for advertising purposes, or for the private benefit and gain of any
person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
   GARBAGE. Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
   LITTER. Garbage, refuse and rubbish, as defined herein, and all other waste
material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create a
danger to public health, safety, and welfare.
   NEWSPAPER. Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law,
any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office Department of the United
States, in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper
filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law, and,
in addition thereto, means and includes any periodical or current magazine
regularly published with not less than four issues per year, and sold to the
public.
   NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL. Any printed or written matter, any sample or device,
dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper, booklet or any
other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of
literature not included in the definitions herein of a commercial handbill or
newspaper.
   PARK. A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any other
public area in the village owned or used by the village and devoted to active
or passive recreation.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
   PRIVATE PREMISES. Any dwelling, house, building or other structure, designed
or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether
inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and includes
any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging
or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other structure.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other
public ways, and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and
buildings.
   REFUSE. All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, except body wastes,
including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned
automobiles and solid market and industrial wastes.
    RUBBISH. Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and
noncombustible wastes, such as papers, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin
cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar
materials.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively upon
stationary rails or tracks.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Swanton.
(1964 Code, § 515.02) (Ord. 582, passed 8-23-1965; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-
1992)
§ 93.03 LITTER PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street,
sidewalk or other public place within the village except in public receptacles,
in authorized private receptacles for collection, or in official village dumps.
(1964 Code, § 515.03)
   (B)   No person shall without lawful authority, place or dispose of in any
manner, upon any public property or upon any premises of another, any paper,
trash, garbage, waste, rubbish, refuse, junk or any substance or material which
is or may become noxious, offensive, injurious or dangerous to the public
health, comfort or safety.
   (C)   No person shall cause or allow trash, garbage, waste, rubbish, refuse
or any other noxious or offensive materials or substances to be collected or
remain in any place to the damage or prejudice of others or of the public, or
unlawfully obstruct, impede, divert, corrupt or render unwholesome or impure,
any natural watercourse.
(1964 Code, § 517.13) (Ord. 582, passed 8-23-1965; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-
1992) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.04 PLACING LITTER IN RECEPTACLES TO PREVENT SCATTERING.
   Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or
deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or
upon private property.
(1964 Code, § 515.04) (Ord. 582, passed 8-23-1965; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-
1992)
§ 93.05 SWEEPING LITTER INTO GUTTERS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public
place within the village the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or
from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying
property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter.
(1964 Code, § 515.05) (Ord. 582, passed 8-23-1965; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-
1992) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.06 MERCHANTS’ DUTY TO KEEP SIDEWALKS FREE OF LITTER.
   No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or
deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the village the
accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private
sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business within the
village shall keep the sidewalk in front of their business premises free of
litter.
(1964 Code, § 515.06) (Ord. 582, passed 8-23-1965; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-
1992) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.07 LITTER THROWN BY PERSONS IN VEHICLES.
   No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit
litter upon any street or other public place within the village, or upon
private property.
(1964 Code, § 515.08) (Ord. 582, passed 8-23-1965; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-
1992) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.08 TRUCK LOADS CAUSING LITTER.
   No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the village
unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load,
contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or
other public place. No person shall drive or move any vehicle or truck within
the village, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any street
or alley, or other public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or
foreign matter of any kind.
(1964 Code, § 515.08) (Ord. 582, passed 8-23-1965; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-
1992) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.09 LITTER IN PARKS.
   No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the village
except in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be
prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the
park or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles are not
provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person
responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided
herein.
(1964 Code, § 515.09) (Ord. 582, passed 8-23-1965; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-
1992) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.10 LITTER IN LAKES AND FOUNTAINS.
   No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream,
bay or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the village.
(1964 Code, § 515.10) (Ord. 582, passed 8-23-1965; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-
1992) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.11 DROPPING LITTER FROM AIRCRAFT.
   No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within the village
any litter, handbill or any other object.
(1964 Code, § 515.16) (Ord. 582, passed 8-23-1965; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-
1992) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.12 POSTING NOTICES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall post or affix any notice, poster or other paper or device,
calculated to attract the attention of the public, to any lamp post, public
utility pole or shade tree, or upon any public structure or building, except as
may be authorized or required by law.
(1964 Code, § 515.17) (Ord. 582, passed 8-23-1965; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-
1992) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.13 LITTER ON OCCUPIED PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property
within the village, whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner
or person in control of private property may maintain authorized private
receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from
being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other
public place or upon any private property.
(1964 Code, § 515.18) (Ord. 582, passed 8-23-1965; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-
1992) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.14 OWNER TO MAINTAIN PREMISES FREE OF LITTER.
   The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times
maintain the premises free of litter. However, this section shall not prohibit
the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for collection.
(1964 Code, § 515.19) (Ord. 582, passed 8-23-1965; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-
1992) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.15 LITTER ON VACANT LOTS.
   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private
property within the village whether owned by such person or not.
(1964 Code, § 515.20) (Ord. 582, passed 8-23-1965; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-
1992) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.16 CLEARING LITTER FROM OPEN PRIVATE PROPERTY BY VILLAGE.
   (A)   Notice to remove. The Mayor is hereby authorized and empowered to
notify the owner of any open or vacant private property within the village, or
the agent of such owner, to properly dispose of litter located on such owner’s
property which is dangerous to public health, safety or welfare. Such notice
shall be by registered mail, addressed to such owner at his or her last known
address.
   (B)   Action upon noncompliance. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any
owner or agent so notified to properly dispose of litter dangerous to the
public health, safety or welfare within ten days after receipt of written
notice provided for in division (A) above, or within 30 days after the date of
such notice in the event the same is returned to the Village Post Office
Department because of its inability to make delivery thereof, provided the same
was properly addressed to the last known address of such owner or agent, the
Mayor is hereby authorized or empowered to pay for the disposing of such litter
or to order its disposal by the village.
   (C)   Recorded statement constitutes lien. Where the full amount due the
village is not paid by such owner within 30 days after the disposal of such
litter, as provided for in divisions (A) and (B) above, then the Fiscal Officer
shall cause to be recorded in the office of the County Auditor and County
Treasurer a sworn statement showing the cost and expense incurred for the work,
the date the work was done and the location of the property on which such work
was done. The recordation for such sworn statement shall constitute a lien and
privilege on the property, and shall remain in full force and effect for the
amount due in principal and interest, plus costs of court, if any, for
collection, until final payment has been made. Such costs and expenses shall be
collected in the manner fixed by law for the collection of taxes, and further
shall be subject to the delinquent penalty of 10% in the event the same is not
paid in full on or before the date the tax bill upon such charge appears
becomes delinquent. Sworn statements recorded in accordance with the provisions
hereof shall be prima facie evidence that all legal formalities have been
complied with and that the work has been done properly and satisfactorily, and
shall be full notice to every person concerned that the amount of the
statement, plus interest, constitutes a charge against the property designated
or described in the statement and that the same is due and collectible as
provided by law.
(1964 Code, § 515.21) (Ord. 582, passed 8-23-1965; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-
1992)
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter for which another penalty is not provided shall be guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
(1964 Code, § 515.99) (Ord. 582, passed 8-23-1965; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-
1992)
CHAPTER 94: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
Joint Parks and Recreation Department
   
94.01   Establishment
   
94.02   Composition
   
94.03   Terms; compensation; vacancies
   
94.04   Annual budget
Park Rules and Regulations
   
94.15   Park hours
   
94.16   Concession stand
   
94.17   Alcoholic beverages and narcotics
   
94.18   Traffic regulations
   
94.19   Control of animals and pets
 
   
94.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Fees for rental of pavilion at Memorial Park and the Swanton Community
Center, see §
36.09
   Litter in parks, see §
93.09
JOINT PARKS AND RECREATION DEPARTMENT
§ 94.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is established a joint parks and recreation department with the
village and the Village School District as the Joint Parks and Recreation Board
members, pursuant to R.C. § 755.14(B), and R.C. § 755.16, hereinafter referred
to as the Village Parks and Recreation Department, with the power to equip,
operate and maintain all parks, playgrounds, play fields, gymnasiums, public
bath, swimming pools and recreation centers and facilities and shall possess
all the powers and be subject to all the responsibilities as set forth in R.C.
§ 755.12 through 755.181.
(Ord. 86-7, passed 4-14-1986; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 94.02 COMPOSITION.
   The Parks and Recreation Department shall consist of nine members, four of
whom shall be members of the Board of Education of the Swanton Local School
District or members appointed by such Board of Education and the other five
members of the Village Parks and Recreation Department shall be appointed by
the Mayor with consent of Council.
(Ord. 86-7, passed 4-14-1986; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 94.03 TERMS; COMPENSATION; VACANCIES.
   (A)   All members of the Parks and Recreation Department shall serve for
terms of five years, except that the members first appointed shall be appointed
for such terms that the term of two members shall expire annually thereafter,
with the exception that one member’s term shall expire on every fifth year. All
members of the Parks and Recreation Department shall be residents of the
village or the Swanton Local School District.
   (B)   The members of the Parks and Recreation Department shall serve without
pay.
   (C)   Vacancies in the Parks and Recreation Department occurring otherwise
than by the expiration of a term shall be for the unexpired term and shall be
filled in the same manner as the original appointments.
(Ord. 86-7, passed 4-14-1986; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 94.04 ANNUAL BUDGET.
   (A)   Members of the Parks and Recreation Department shall submit an annual
budget to the Village Council and the Board of Education of the Swanton Local
School District for the coming year by November 31, of the prior year.
   (B)   After receiving approval of appropriate budgets, the Parks and
Recreation Department shall have the authority to authorize and approve
expenditures within the limits of that budget, or the funds approved and
appropriated by the Village Council and the Swanton Local School District, and
subject to approval of the Village Council or Board of Education.
   (C)   The Recreation Fund will be maintained through its fiscal agent,
Treasurer of the Swanton School District, and, the Park Fund will be maintained
through its fiscal agent, the Fiscal Officer of the village.
   (D)   All budgets and expenditures will be maintained in separate funds and
accounting procedures.
(Ord. 86-7, passed 4-14-1986; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
PARK RULES AND REGULATIONS
§ 94.15 PARK HOURS.
   Memorial Park will close at sunset; with the exception that all village
parks may be used for community or sporting events after sunset with the prior
approval of the Village Council. Memorial Park will open at 7:00 a.m. The hours
of operation for Pilliod and Rotary Parks are 5:00 a.m. to 12:00 a.m.
(Ord. 77-11, passed 6-27-1977; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 2010-26,
passed 9-27-2010; Ord. 2011-16, passed 7-18-2011)
§ 94.16 CONCESSION STAND.
   (A)   The concession stand will be open for the first game of the softball
season and on all evenings on which there are activities scheduled in the park.
   (B)   Established dates of operation of the concession stand shall be May 15
through July 31. Opening date may be later in the event there are no softball
games scheduled. For dates other than these, special permission may be granted
by the Parks and Recreation Department. Hours of operation will be: 6:30 p.m.
until 15 minutes following completion of the last game.
   (C)   The concession stand and the immediate area must be cleaned up each
night at closing.
   (D)   Operations of the concession stand must be under adult supervision at
all times.
(Ord. 77-11, passed 6-27-1977; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.17 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND NARCOTICS.
   (A)   Absolutely no alcoholic beverages shall be permitted in the park,
except as provided in division (C) below.
   (B)   No illegal narcotics shall be allowed in the parks at any time.
   (C)   Beer may be sold in the parks after prior approval of the Village
Council. This approval will only be given after careful consideration and in
cases where the Department feels it would be appropriate and serve a worthwhile
purpose. Permission shall be granted only after a satisfactory agreement
concerning the control of sales and cleanup after sales has been reached and
after the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The sponsoring organization shall enter into a written lease with
the village and provide proof of liquor liability insurance;
      (2)   All profits shall go to charitable purposes;
      (3)   Sales and consumption of beer must be confined to a limited area
and restricted from minors;
      (4)   The appropriate license or permit shall be obtained by the group to
which permission has been granted;
      (5)   The park shall be cleaned up at no expense to the Parks and
Recreation Department or the village, which shall include a daily cleanup as
well as a good final cleanup at the conclusion of the event; and
      (6)   Stands, tents, fencing and the like, must be removed from the
premises within 24 hours after the completion of the event.
(Ord. 77-11, passed 6-27-1977; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.18 TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The speed of all vehicles within the parks shall be limited to ten
mph.
   (B)   No parking shall be allowed on the north side of the drive from South
Main Street to the Little League Diamond and on the east side from the Little
League Diamond to West Garfield, nor on grass areas (excepting the parking area
at the old tennis courts).
   (C)   No bicycles shall be ridden in the parks off the roadways and must be
walked when off roadways.
   (D)   No unlicensed motor vehicles, such as motorbikes, snowmobiles, ATV
vehicles and the like, shall be allowed within any village park.
(Ord. 77-11, passed 6-27-1977; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.19 CONTROL OF ANIMALS AND PETS.
   No horses or unleashed dogs shall be allowed on village owned properties,
rights-of-way and any other property not owned, rented or leased by the
animal’s owner. Horses or other animals are permitted in village parks or
rights-of-way for special events, parades or festivals only with the prior
approval of and under conditions established by the Village Council. No person
shall permit any animal or pet to run at large or remain unattended at any time
while on village owned properties, rights-of-way and any other property not
owned, rented or leased by the animal’s owner. Animals are not permitted in any
playground area or on any athletic fields. The owner of such a pet or animal
shall remove animal waste from any areas not under their ownership, rent or
lease and must carry at all times a visible means of collecting and disposing
of waste properly in designated areas.
(Ord. 77-11, passed 6-27-1977; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 2012-11,
passed 7-16-2012) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter for which another penalty is not provided shall be fined not more than
$100. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
(Ord. 77-11, passed 6-27-1977; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
CHAPTER 95: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
   
95.01   Conditions precedent to improving streets
   
95.02   Street opening and tunneling; permit and fee
   
95.03   Curb cutting; permit and fee
   
95.04   Permit application
   
95.05   Bond for opening or tunneling required
   
95.06   Pavement restoration
   
95.07   Barricades and warning lights
   
95.08   Sidewalk construction, supervision and contracts
   
95.09   Protection of pavement prior to unloading
   
95.10   Fences or buildings obstructing streets or sidewalks
   
95.11   Materials on streets or sidewalks
   
95.12   Duty to keep sidewalks in repair and free from obstruction; and fire
hydrants free from obstruction
   
95.13   Unimproved streets and alleys
 
   
95.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Right-of-Way, see
Chapter 97
§ 95.01 CONDITIONS PRECEDENT TO IMPROVING STREETS.
   No department of the village shall accept, lay out, open, improve, grade,
pave, curb or light any street or other way, unless such street or way shall
have been accepted, opened or otherwise received the legal status of a public
street or way prior to the effective date of this chapter, or unless such
street or way corresponds in location and extent with a street or way shown on
a recorded plat which shall have been legally accepted by Council.
(1964 Code, § 901.01) (Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 95.02 STREET OPENING AND TUNNELING; PERMIT AND FEE.
   (A)   No person other than the Public Works Supervisor or other authorized
village employees shall make any opening or excavation in, or tunnel under, any
street, alley, sidewalk or public way of the village unless a permit to do so
shall have been obtained prior to commencement of the work.
   (B)   A permit fee of $30 shall be charged to cover the costs of
supervision, inspection and restoration of any opening, excavation or tunnel.
Such fee shall be collected at the time the permit is issued.
(1964 Code, § 901.02) (Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 97-27, passed 10-27-
1997) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.03 CURB CUTTING; PERMIT AND FEE.
   No person shall cut any curb on any of the streets, alleys or public ways
within the village without first having obtained a permit to do so. The permit
shall be issued by the Village Administrator and shall be conditioned that the
permittee shall restore the curb to its former condition in the event that the
driveway or other use for which the curb was cut is abandoned or discontinued.
A permit fee of $20 shall be charged for the cutting of any curbs, which fee
shall be collected at the time the permit is issued.
(1964 Code, § 901.03) (Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 97-27, passed 10-27-
1997) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.04 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   Each permit for making a street opening, excavation, tunnel or curb cut
shall be confined to a single project and shall be issued by the Village
Administrator only. Application shall be made on a form prescribed by Council
giving the exact location of the proposed opening, excavation, tunnel or curb
cut, the kind of paving, the area and depth to be excavated or cut and such
other facts as may be provided for.
(1964 Code, § 901.04) (Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 95.05 BOND FOR OPENING OR TUNNELING REQUIRED.
   (A)   Prior to obtaining a permit for the opening in or tunneling under of
any street, alley, sidewalk or public way, the applicant shall furnish the
village with a bond guaranteeing that the work shall be done to the full
satisfaction of the village (represented by the Public Works Supervisor) and
that the area affected by the work shall be restored, as nearly as possible, to
its original condition and such condition maintained, at the cost of the permit
holder, for a period of one year after the completion of the work. However,
such bond may be released at an earlier period if, in the opinion of the Public
Works Supervisor, such release is warranted. The amount of such bond shall be
commensurate by the extent of the work and shall be determined by the Public
Works Supervisor, but in no event shall the amount be less than $1,000 for any
one project.
   (B)   Applicants who because of their operations find it necessary to enter
the village streets, alleys or public ways at recurring intervals shall be
permitted to furnish a blanket bond with the same conditions as set forth
herein. The amount of such bond shall be determined by the Public Works
Supervisor, but in no event shall it be less than $1,000. However, any project
of an extensive nature may be covered by a specific bond subject to the
discretion and approval of the Public Works Supervisor as to amount and
conditions.
(1964 Code, § 901.05) (Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.06 PAVEMENT RESTORATION.
   (A)   The opening and restoration of a pavement or other surface shall be
performed under the direction and to the satisfaction of the Public Works
Supervisor and in accordance with the rules, regulations and specifications
approved by the Mayor and Council.
   (B)   Upon failure or refusal of the permittee to satisfactorily fill the
excavation, restore the surface and remove all excess materials within the time
specified in the permit or, where not specified therein, within a reasonable
time after the commencement of the work, the village may proceed without notice
to make such fill and restoration and the bond referred to in §
95.05 shall be deemed forfeited. If the amount of such services performed by
the village shall exceed the amount of the bond, the Village Solicitor and
Fiscal Officer shall proceed to collect the remainder due from the permittee.
(1964 Code, § 901.06) (Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.07 BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS.
   (A)   Any person engaged in or employing others in excavating or opening any
street, sidewalk, alley or other public way shall have such excavation or
opening fully barricaded at all times to prevent injury to persons or animals.
(1964 Code, § 901.07)
   (B)   Any person engaged in or employing others in excavating, or otherwise
in any manner obstructing a portion or all of any street, sidewalk, alley or
other public way, at all times during the night season shall cause at least two
illuminated amber lamps to be securely and conspicuously posted on, at or near
each end of such obstruction of excavation, and if the space involved shall
exceed 50 feet in extent, then at least one additional lamp for each added 50
feet or portion thereof excavated or obstructed shall be so posted.
(1964 Code, § 901.08)
   (C)   No person shall abandon or knowingly permit to remain on public or
private property, any excavation, well, cesspool or structure which is in the
process of construction, reconstruction, repair or alteration unless the same
is adequately protected by suitable barricades and guarded by warning devices
or lights at night so that the condition will not reasonably prove dangerous to
life or limb.
(1964 Code, § 517.04)
(Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.08 SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION, SUPERVISION AND CONTRACTS.
   It shall be the duty of the Public Works Supervisor to supervise
construction or repair of sidewalks within the village. He or she shall cause
specifications to be prepared for the construction of the various kinds of
pavements and transmit the same to Council for approval. When approved, Council
shall advertise for proposals to do all the work which may be ordered by the
village in construction and repair of sidewalks, and shall contract therefor,
for a period not exceeding one year, with the lowest responsible bidder, who
shall furnish good and sufficient sureties for the faithful performance of the
work. Council, if it deems it advisable, may make separate contracts for the
different kinds of work with different parties.
(1964 Code, § 901.09) (Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 95.09 PROTECTION OF PAVEMENT PRIOR TO UNLOADING.
   No person shall unload any heavy material on the streets of the village, by
throwing or letting the same fall upon the pavement of any street, alley,
sidewalk or other public way, without first placing some sufficient protection
over the pavement.
(1964 Code, § 901.10) (Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.10 FENCES OR BUILDINGS OBSTRUCTING STREETS OR SIDEWALKS.
   No person shall obstruct any street, alley, sidewalk or other public way in
the village by erecting thereon any fence or building or by permitting any such
fence or building to remain thereon. Each day that any such fence or building
is permitted to remain upon such public way, shall be deemed a separate
offense.
(1964 Code, § 901.11) (Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.11 MATERIALS ON STREETS OR SIDEWALKS.
   No person shall encumber any street or sidewalk or, being the owner,
occupant or person having the care of any building or lot of land bordering on
any street or sidewalk, permit the same to be encumbered with barrels, boxes,
cans, articles or substances of any kind so as to interfere with the free and
unobstructed use thereof.
(1964 Code, § 901.12) (Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.12 DUTY TO KEEP SIDEWALKS IN REPAIR AND FREE FROM OBSTRUCTION; AND FIRE
HYDRANTS FREE FROM OBSTRUCTION.
   No person who is the owner or occupant of any residential, commercial or
industrial property or of any unoccupied or unimproved property abutting upon a
public sidewalk or fire hydrant shall fail to clear such sidewalk or fire
hydrant of snow, ice, dirt or any other debris within 24 hours of its
accumulation. No owner or occupant of land abutting a public sidewalk shall
fail to keep the sidewalk in repair and free from obstructions, including
encroachments by bushes, trees and other living plants. No owner or occupant of
land abutting a public fire hydrant shall fail to keep the fire hydrant free
from obstructions, including encroachments by bushes, trees and other living
plants.
(Ord. 2014-7, passed 4-14-2014) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.13 UNIMPROVED STREETS AND ALLEYS.
   No person or entity shall, without the permission of Village Council, use an
unimproved street or alley for vehicular travel or parking nor obstruct an
unimproved street or alley in the village.
(Ord. 2019-37, passed 11-11-2019) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined not more
than $100. Any such violation shall constitute a separate offense on each
successive day continued.
(1964 Code, § 901.99)
   (B)   (1)   If such area of the sidewalk or around the fire hydrant is not
cleared within the 24-hour period, the village may cause such snow, ice, dirt
or any other debris to be removed. Upon such action, the village may charge
such occupant or owner an amount equal to its cost plus 100%. However, in no
case shall the charge be less than $20. Such charge is due and payable to the
village by the owner or occupant upon presentation by the village of an invoice
for its services. In the event such invoice is not paid within 30 days, the
matter may be referred to village legal counsel for collection or may be
certified to the County Auditor for collection with real estate taxes.
      (2)   The remedy provided for in division (B)(1) above is in addition to
the penalty provided in division (A) above.
(Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 2014-7, passed 4-14-2014)
CHAPTER 96: EXCESSIVE AND UNNECESSARY NOISE
Section
   
96.01   Excessive and unnecessary noise prohibited
   
96.02   Exemptions
   
96.03   Definitions
 
   
96.99   Penalty
§ 96.01 EXCESSIVE AND UNNECESSARY NOISE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall make, cause or permit to be made or caused any
unnecessary, excessive or offensive noise which injures or otherwise endangers
the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of other persons within the limits
of the village.
    (B)   For the purposes of this section, the following shall be presumed to
be unnecessary, excessive or offensive noise and in violation of the provisions
of division (A) above:
      (1)   No person operating or occupying a motor vehicle on a street,
highway, alley, park, parking lot or driveway shall operate or permit the
operation of any sound amplification system from within the vehicle so that the
sound is plainly audible at a distance of 50 or more feet from the vehicle; and
      (2)   The operation, playing or permitting the operation or playing of
any electronic device or musical instrument which produces, reproduces or
amplifies sound so as to be audible and disturbing to surrounding properties,
particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
(Ord. 97-36, passed 1-12-1998) Penalty, see §
96.99
Cross-reference:
   Barking or howling dogs, see §
90.20   
§ 96.02 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Noises resulting from sports and recreational events authorized by
public or private schools, the village or other governmental agency;
   (B)   Noises resulting from authorized public activities such as parades,
fireworks, sports events, musical productions and other activities which have
the approval of the village;
   (C)   Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle, when
responding to an emergency call or acting in time of emergency; and
   (D)   Noises resulting from moving vehicles operating on the Ohio Turnpike,
railways within the village, or air traffic arriving or departing from Toledo
Express Airport, or successor facility.
(Ord. 97-36, passed 1-12-1998) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUDIBLE. Any sound that can be heard by a person using his or her normal
faculties.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Includes, but is not limited to, automobiles, recreational
vehicles, and trucks with or without trailers, motorcycles, motorized bicycles,
go-carts, snowmobiles, locomotives and watercraft.
   PERSON. Any person, person’s firm, association, copartnership, joint
venture, corporation or any entity, public or private.
   PLAINLY AUDIBLE. Any sound produced by a sound amplification system which
can be heard at a distance of 50 feet or more. Measurement standards shall be
by the auditory senses, based upon direct line of sight. Words or phrases need
not be discernible and base reverberations are included.
   PROPERTIES. An imaginary line along the ground surface, and its vertical
extension, which separates the real property owned by one person from that
owned by another person.
   SOUND AMPLIFICATION SYSTEM. Any radio, tape player, compact disc player,
loudspeaker or other electronic device used for the amplification of the human
voice or sound.
(Ord. 97-36, passed 1-12-1998)
§ 96.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor on a first offense; on a second offense within one year after the
first offense, such person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on
each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, such person is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(Ord. 97-36, passed 1-12-1998)
CHAPTER 97: RIGHT-OF-WAY
Section
   
97.01   Definitions
   
97.02   Requirement for a right-of-way permit
   
97.03   Application for a right-of-way permit
   
97.04   Duration and suspension of right-of-way permit
   
97.05   Requirement for a construction permit
   
97.06   Fees and expenses
   
97.07   Management of the rights-of-way
   
97.08   Construction standards
   
97.09   Liability and indemnification
   
97.10   Reporting requirements
   
97.11   Sale or transfer of rights of permit holder
   
97.12   Performance bond
   
97.13   Termination
   
97.14   Removal
   
97.15   Police powers
   
97.16   Equal application
 
   
97.99   Penalty
§ 97.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICANT. The person who has applied for a right-of-way permit or a
construction permit.
   APPLICATION. The form prescribed by the village which the applicant must
complete in order to obtain a right-of-way permit.
   CONSTRUCTION. The building, erection, or installation in, on or under a
right-of-way. It does not include maintenance or repair of equipment in a
right-of-way or a single line extension from equipment in the right-of-way.
   CONSTRUCTION PERMIT. The document that must be obtained before a person may
perform construction in a right-of-way.
   EMERGENCY. An interruption of service or a condition that poses a clear and
immediate danger to life or health, or significant loss of property.
   EQUIPMENT. Any tangible property located or proposed to be located in a
right-of-way, including, but not limited to, wires, lines, cables, conduits,
pipes, supporting structures or other facilities.
   IN. When used in conjunction with rights-of-way means over, above, in,
within, on or under a right-of-way.
   MAINTENANCE. Work of a minor nature that will keep an existing condition
from failure to decline.
   PERMIT HOLDER. The person obtaining a right-of-way permit.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company
or other business entity.
   RESTORE or RESTORATION. The process by which a right-of-way is returned to a
state that is as good or better as its condition before construction.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT or PERMIT. A written agreement granted by the village to
an applicant for use of the rights-of-way in the village for wires, lines,
cables, conduits, pipes, supporting structures and other facilities.
   RIGHTS-OF-WAY. The surface and space in, on, above and below any real
property in which the village has an interest in law or in equity, including,
but not limited to, any public street, boulevard, avenue, road, highway,
easement, freeway, lane, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, river, tunnel,
viaduct, bridge, park, green space or any other place.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES. The services offered to customers involving the
transmission of video, data and/or voice communications and/or content, both
active and interactive, and associated usage.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM. A system used or to be used to provide
telecommunication services.
   UNDERGROUND EQUIPMENT. All equipment that is located wholly or partially
underneath a right-of-way.
(Ord. 2016-63, passed 12-12-2016)
§ 97.02 REQUIREMENT FOR A RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT.
   (A)   No person shall enter upon or occupy any right-of-way for the purpose
of installing constructing, maintaining or operating a telecommunications
system without first having obtained a right-of-way permit. Any person
maintaining or operating a telecommunications system as of the effective date
of this chapter shall also obtain a right-of-way permit.
   (B)   Before a right-of-way permit is issued, the holder of or applicant for
a right-of-way permit shall have applied for any and all regulatory approvals,
permits or authorizations from the appropriate federal, state and local
authorities, if required. Upon the request of the village, the applicant shall
submit written evidence of its applications for or receipt of all such
approvals, permits or authorizations.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a waiver of any
ordinances or regulations of the village or the village's right to require
prospective or current right-of-way permit holders to secure and remit payment
for any and all required permits or authorizations.
(Ord. 2016-63, passed 12-12-2016)
§ 97.03 APPLICATION FOR A RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT.
   (A)   A right-of-way permit shall only be granted after an applicant has
completed an application in the form that has been prescribed by the village,
which form may be revised from time to time. Upon request, an applicant shall
be provided with a copy of the then current application for a right-of-way
permit. The application shall request information regarding the applicant's
proposed or actual physical use and occupation of the rights-of-way.
      (1)   Specifically, the application shall request:
         (a)   A brief description of the telecommunications service or
services to be offered or provided in or through the village;
         (b)   Specific information regarding the equipment it proposes to
place or currently maintains in the rights-of-way;
         (c)   The expected physical burden that such equipment will place or
does place on the rights-of-way; and
         (d)   Whether the equipment will or does have a detrimental effect on
public safety as it relates to the rights-of-way.
      (2)   If the completed application does not fully provide such requested
information, the village may request such additional information as is
necessary to enable it to make a determination regarding the physical use and
occupation of the rights-of-way by the applicant. The application may request
less information from a permit holder applying for a renewal of a right-of-way
permit.
   (B)   Upon submission of a fully completed application to the village and
the accompanying fee, the village shall review the application as follows: for
new applicants, the village shall grant or deny such applications within 60
business days. For existing permit holders applying to a renewal of their
permits, who are not under suspension in accordance with § 97.04, the village
shall grant or deny such applications within 30 business days. If the village
fails to grant or reject such application within the time periods specified
above, the application shall be deemed approved. In each case, the village
shall review the application to determine whether such use would have a
detrimental effect on public safety as it relates to the rights-of-way or would
place an undue physical burden on the rights-of-way.
   (C)   In considering an application, the village may use such outside
experts as it deems necessary. In the event the village deems it necessary to
employ an outside expert to advise the village with respect to a particular
application, the reasonable costs of such expert shall be borne by the
applicant.
(Ord. 2016-63, passed 12-12-2016)
§ 97.04 DURATION AND SUSPENSION OF RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT.
   (A)   The right-of-way permit shall be issued for a period of one year.
Permit holders may apply for a renewal of a right-of-way permit prior to its
expiration. The village may suspend such right-of-way permit in the event
anyone or more the following has occurred:
      (1)   The permit holder shall have caused damage to village property or
the right-of-way without the prior consent of the village (except in the case
of an emergency) and without completing proper restoration;
      (2)   The permit holder or the permit holder's equipment in the right-of-
way has had a detrimental effect on public safety as it relates to the rights-
of-way;
      (3)   The permit holder failed to pay any of the fees required under this
chapter;
      (4)   The permit holder failed to comply with construction standards in
accordance with the provisions contained in § 97.08;
      (5)   The permit holder failed to indemnify, hold harmless and insure the
village in accordance with the provisions contained in § 97.09.
   (B)   If the village has reason to believe that one or more of the above
events has occurred, it shall notify the permit holder in writing. The permit
holder shall have 20 business days to cure the violation, unless the village
reasonably determines that the event is an emergency, in which case the village
may impose a shorter time period to cure the violation.
   (C)   If the permit holder fails to cure the violation within the specified
time period, the village shall be permitted to immediately suspend the right-
of-way permit. A suspension shall be brought to the attention of the Village
Council at its next meeting at which time the Village Council shall be
permitted to uphold or withdraw the suspension. The permit holder shall be
provided an opportunity to be heard at such meeting.
(Ord. 2016-63, passed 12-12-2016)
§ 97.05 REQUIREMENT FOR A CONSTRUCTION PERMIT.
   (A)   Except in the case of an emergency, before commencing any construction
in the rights-of-way, a person shall submit to the village detailed plans of
the proposed construction activity. Such plans shall include the type of
construction activity, the equipment proposed to be installed or erected, the
specific locations of the construction activity and the scheduled beginning and
ending dates of all planned construction. Such plans shall also include the
name(s), address(es) and experience of any and all subcontractors whom
applicant intends to utilize. Such information may be submitted concurrently
with an application for a right-of-way permit.
   (B)   Upon submission of all such information required in division (A)
above, the village shall review such information and either grant or deny a
construction permit within 20 business days. If the village fails to grant or
deny the construction permit within such time period, the permit shall be
deemed granted. In each such case, the village shall review the information
provided herein to determine whether such construction would have a detrimental
impact on public safety as it relates to the rights-of-way. The village may
impose conditions on the construction permit regulating the times, locations,
and manner of construction to preserve effective traffic flow, prevent
hazardous road conditions and/or minimize noise impacts.
(Ord. 2016-63, passed 12-12-2016)
§ 97.06 FEES AND EXPENSES.
   (A)   The required right-of-way permit(s) is to ensure that all activities
within the right-of-way are properly managed and maintained. The associated
fees cover the costs of inspection, administration, maintenance, and any
necessary repairs to the streets and right-of-way property due to usage. These
permits help us maintain the safety and integrity of public infrastructure
while ensuring that all parties are held accountable for their impact on the
right-of-way. Additionally, the application fees support the resources required
to review and process each permit, ensuring compliance with local regulations
and minimizing disruptions to the community.
   (B)   Each applicant for a construction permit shall include with its
application an application fee in the amount of $2,000. This fee is directly
related to the village's costs in reviewing the application and determining
time, place and manner restrictions on the construction activity. If the
application for a construction permit is denied, this fee shall not be
refunded. If the application is granted, then the applicant shall pay, within
30 days of the presentation of a statement, the village's actual costs based on
the hourly rate established by the Village Administrator. Such actual costs
include, but are not limited to, costs of disruption and rerouting of traffic,
inspection costs and administrative costs.
   (C)   Extraordinary expenses. In addition to the fees set forth above, a
permit holder shall pay, within 30 days of the presentation of a statement, any
extraordinary or unusual expenses reasonably incurred by the village as a
result of the permit holder's use of the rights-of-way, provided that the
village notifies the permit holder of the expected expenses prior to them being
incurred and provides the permit holder with an opportunity to mitigate such
expenses. Examples of extraordinary or unusual costs include, but are not
limited to, the cost of obtaining and operating a backhoe, dump truck or other
heavy equipment used to repair the right-of-way, overtime or special pay for
police officers or other emergency services. The statement of such expenses
presented to the permit holder shall be directly related to the village's
actual costs.
   (D)   In the event that payment of any of the fees identified above is not
made upon submission of the application or by the date due, the applicant or
permit holder shall pay a late payment penalty of simple interest at 10% annual
percentage rate of the total amount past due. Such a penalty shall be in lieu
of any other monetary penalty. Acceptance of payment under this section shall
not in any way limit or waive the village's right to suspend or terminate the
permit according to the terms of this chapter.
(Ord. 2016-63, passed 12-12-2016; Ord. 2025-02, passed 1-27-2025; Ord. 2025-06,
passed 2-10-2025)
§ 97.07 MANAGEMENT OF THE RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   (A)   The village shall have the right to limit the placement of new or
additional equipment in the right-of-way if there is insufficient space to
reasonably accommodate all requests for occupy and use the rights-of-way. The
village shall consider requests for occupying and using the rights-of-way in
the order of receipt of fully completed applications for right-of-way permits.
The village shall strive, to the extent possible, to accommodate all requests,
but shall be guided by the physical condition of the right-of-way and whether
such use would have a detrimental effect on public safety as it relates to the
right-of-way.
   (B)   The village shall have the right to monitor the telecommunications
systems and the equipment related thereto located in the rights-of-way in order
to prevent interference between and among such systems and equipment.
   (C)   A permit holder shall allow the village to make inspections of any
part of the permit holder's telecommunications system located in the rights-of-
way at any time upon three days’ notice, or, in case of an emergency, upon
demand.
(Ord. 2016-63, passed 12-12-2016)
§ 97.08 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   (A)   Whenever a permit holder or any of its subcontractors shall disturb
any pavement, sidewalk or other public property in order to perform any
underground activities, the permit holder will fully comply by registering with
and/or complying with the Ohio Utilities Protection Service. Each permit holder
shall perform construction activity in a manner consistent and in compliance
with the detailed plans it submitted to the village and all applicable federal,
state and local laws and regulations.
   (B)   Whenever a permit holder or any of its subcontractors shall cause
damage to the right-of-way or to the village property in the right-of-way, the
permit holder shall restore such a right-of-way or property within 20 business
days, weather permitting.
   (C)   The telecommunications system shall not endanger or interfere with the
safety of persons or property within the village. All operating, maintenance,
construction and repair personnel shall be thoroughly trained in the safe use
of all equipment and in the safe operation of vehicles. Such personnel shall
follow all safety procedures required by applicable federal, state and local
laws and regulations. The permit holder shall routinely inspect and maintain
all areas of the telecommunication system so that conditions that could develop
into safety hazards shall be corrected before they become a hazard. No system
shall exceed 75 feet in height and no system shall be placed within 300 feet of
a residential district or in any residential district. Systems shall only be
allowed in areas zoned for industrial use.
   (D)   Except in the case of an emergency, at least three days prior to the
commencement of any construction activity, permit holder shall notify nearby
residents and property owners of such construction activity in a manner which
is satisfactory to the village. The name of the permit holder shall be clearly
disclosed to such residents.
   (E)   All construction activity shall be performed in an orderly and
workmanlike manner, and in close coordination with public utilities serving the
village following accepted industry construction procedures and practices.
   (F)   All wires, cables and other equipment shall be installed, where
possible, parallel with electric and telephone lines, and multiple cable
configurations shall be arranged in parallel and bundles with due respect for
engineering considerations.
   (G)   All wires, cables and other equipment shall be installed underground
where required by municipal ordinance or regulation consistent with the same
requirement being imposed on all other similarly situated companies, including
public utilities.
(Ord. 2016-63, passed 12-12-2016)
§ 97.09 LIABILITY AND INDEMNIFICATION.
   (A)   A permit holder shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify and
hold harmless the village, its elected and appointed officials, employees and
agents, at all times against any and all claims for personal injury, including
death, and property damage arising out of the permit holder's use or occupancy
of the rights-of-way. A permit holder shall defend any actions or proceedings
against the village in which it is claimed that personal injury, including
death, or property damage was caused by the permit holder's use or occupancy of
the rights-of-way. The obligation to indemnify, hold harmless and defend shall
include, but not be limited to, the obligation to pay judgments, injuries,
liabilities, damages, attorneys' fees, reasonable expert fees, court costs and
all other costs of indemnification. A permit holder shall not be required to
indemnify and hold the village harmless for claims caused by the village's
negligence, gross negligence or willful misconduct.
   (B)   A permit holder shall at all times during the life of a permit carry
and require its subcontractors to carry liability, property damage, worker's
disability, and vehicle insurance in such form and amount as shall be
determined by the village as set forth in the permit. A permit holder shall
name the village as an additional insured on its liability insurance policies.
All required insurance coverage shall provide for 30 days’ notice to the
village in the event of material alteration or cancellation of such coverage
prior to the effective date of such material alteration or cancellation.
(Ord. 2016-63, passed 12-12-2016)
§ 97.10 REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   A permit holder shall annually provide the village, upon application
renewal of the permit, or upon request, the current maps of the horizontal and
vertical locations of its existing installations and a summary of all additions
and deletions of equipment in the rights-of-way, unless no changes have
occurred in the previous year if no charges have occurred in the previous year,
permit holder shall so inform the village.
   (B)   A permit holder shall submit to the village such reasonable
information directly related to the permit holder's use and occupation of the
rights-of-way as the village may request. All information provided to the
village shall be maintained by the village as proprietary and confidential if
such information is designated in good faith as such prior to the time it is
provided to the village.
(Ord. 2016-63, passed 12-12-2016)
§ 97.11 SALE OR TRANSFER OF RIGHTS OF PERMIT HOLDER.
   A right-of-way permit may be transferred or assigned, upon 30 days written
notice to the village, provided that the transferee/assignee agrees in writing
to comply with all the obligations and requirements contained in this chapter.
(Ord. 2016-63, passed 12-12-2016)
§ 97.12 PERFORMANCE BOND.
   A permit holder may be required, prior to construction, to obtain a
performance bond in a reasonable amount set by the village based upon the
construction cost of the equipment to be installed in the rights-of-way and the
extent of the disturbance of such rights-of-way. The performance bond shall
ensure the permit holder's faithful performance of its construction
obligations. The village may reduce or cancel the bond requirement when
construction is completed.
(Ord. 2016-63, passed 12-12-2016)
§ 97.13 TERMINATION.
   (A)   In addition to all other rights and powers reserved by the village,
the village reserves the right to terminate a permit and all rights and
privileges of a permit holder for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   A permit holder fails, after 30 days prior written notice, to
comply with any of the provisions of the permit or this chapter;
      (2)   A permit holder becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its
debts, or is adjudged bankrupt;
      (3)   All or part of a permit holder's facilities are sold under an
instrument to secure a debt and are not redeemed by the permit holder within 90
days from such sale;
      (4)   A permit holder attempts to, or does practice any fraud or deceit
in its conduct or relations with the village under the permit;
      (5)   The village condemns all of the property of a permit holder within
the village by the lawful exercise of eminent domain;
      (6)   The permit holder abandons the telecommunication system.
   (B)   No termination shall be effective unless and until the village shall
have adopted a resolution setting forth the cause and reason for their
termination and the effective date, which resolution shall not be adopted
without 30 days prior notice to permit holder and an opportunity for the permit
holder to be heard before the Board of Supervisors on the proposed resolution.
(Ord. 2016-63, passed 12-12-2016)
§ 97.14 REMOVAL.
   (A)   Upon expiration or termination of the permit, if the permit is not
renewed, the permit holder shall, upon 60 days prior written notice to the
permit holder, remove its equipment from the rights-of-way and shall restore
said areas. If such removal is not completed within six months of such notice,
the village may deem any property not removed as abandoned and the village may
remove it at the former permit holder's expense. In the event that the permit
holder installed and/or operated any underground conduit or pipe which is six
inches or more in diameter, permit holder shall fill said conduit or pipe with
material in a manner satisfactory to the village.
   (B)   During the term of the permit, if the permit holder decides to abandon
or no longer use all or part of its telecommunications system, it shall provide
the village with written notice of its decision at least 30 days prior to such
decision, which notice shall describe the equipment and its location. The
village shall have the right to require the permit holder to remove the
equipment upon 60 days prior written notice to the permit holder. If such
removal is not completed within six months of such notice, the village may
remove it at the permit holder's expense.
(Ord. 2016-63, passed 12-12-2016)
§ 97.15 POLICE POWERS.
   The village, by granting any permit under this chapter, does not waive,
lessen, impair or surrender the lawful police powers vested in the village
under applicable federal, state and local laws pertaining to the regulation or
use of the rights-of-way.
(Ord. 2016-63, passed 12-12-2016)
§ 97.16 EQUAL APPLICATION.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be imposed upon and enforced against
all persons requiring a permit from the village.
(Ord. 2016-63, passed 12-12-2016)
§ 97.99 PENALTY.
   If the village has reason to believe that the permit holder violated any of
the terms of this chapter, it shall notify the permit holder in writing of the
nature of the violation and the section of this chapter which it believes has
been violated. The permit holder shall have 20 business days to cure the
violation. If the nature of the violation is such that it cannot be fully cured
within such time period, the village may, in its reasonable judgment, extend
the time period to cure. If the violation has not been cured within the time
period allowed, it shall be subsequently punishable by a fine of up to $100 per
day until the violation is cured.
(Ord. 2016-63, passed 12-12-2016)
CHAPTER 98: TREES
Section
   
98.01   Definitions
   
98.02   Control of trees; village personnel
   
98.03   Privately owned trees
   
98.04   Care of trees on public property
   
98.05   Abuse or mutilation of public trees and treelawns
   
98.06   Protecting trees on public property
   
98.07   Tree planting in treelawns
   
98.08   Certain trees prohibited
   
98.09   Trees in new subdivisions
   
98.10   Special plantings
   
98.11   Unlawful interference
 
   
98.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Tree Commission, see §
33.22
§ 98.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EASEMENT. The right to cross or otherwise use someone else's land for a
specified purpose.
   FRONTAGE PROPERTY LINE. The outer edge of a street or highway.
   HAZARD. Tree that is determined through the ISA Tree Risk Assessment Process
as being high or extreme risk.
   LION'S TAILING. Severe act of trimming a tree by removing all the interior
branches and foliage, leaving a limited amount of foliage at the end of each
branch or limb so as to resemble the tail of a lion.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or
organization of any kind.
   PROPERTY OWNER. The person owning such property as shown by the County
Auditor's Plat of the Village of Swanton, Fulton and Lucas Counties, Ohio,
including the executor, administrator, or beneficiary of the estate of a
deceased owner.
   PUBLIC PLACES. Shall include all other grounds owned or controlled by the
Village of Swanton.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. Any portion of the public way, street, alley, or sidewalk.
   SHRUB. A low growing woody plant with one or several perennial main stems
producing branches, shoots, or multiple stems from or near the base of the
plant and incapable of being pruned to provide at least six feet of clear
branchless trunk within five years of planting.
   STREET OR HIGHWAY. The entire width of every public way, easement or right-
of-way when any part thereof is open to the public, as a matter of right, for
the purpose of vehicular and or pedestrian traffic, and shall include alleys.
   TREE. A tall growing woody plant with one of more perennial main stems or
trunks which develop branches from the aerial section of the stem rather than
from the base; capable of being pruned to at least six feet of clear branchless
trunk below the crown within five years of planting.
   TREELAWN. The right-of-way parallel to any village street, highway, or
alley. That part of a street or highway, lying between the property line and
that portion of the street or highway usually used for vehicular traffic.
   TREES, PRIVATE. Shall include all trees now or hereafter growing on any
private property.
   TREES, PUBLIC. Shall include all trees now or hereafter growing on any
public places.
   TREE SIZE. (Small, medium, large) shall be determined by the tree's height
at maturity.
   TREE TOPPING. The severe cutting back of limbs to stubs of three inches or
more in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree as to remove the
normal canopy and disfigure the tree.
   URBAN FOREST. The trees and other woody plants growing within the Village of
Swanton.
   URBAN FORESTER. Is the person charged with professionally managing the urban
forest.
   URBAN FORESTRY. Is the planting, maintenance, care, and protection of tree
populations in the Village of Swanton.
(Ord. 2022-15, passed 6-13-2022)
§ 98.02 CONTROL OF TREES; VILLAGE PERSONNEL.
   (A)   The Village Administrator shall serve as the Village Urban Forester
and is given full jurisdiction, authority, control, supervision, and direction
of all trees that now, or may hereafter exist upon any public place in the
village; and over all trees that exist upon any private property when, in the
Village Urban Forester's opinion, such trees constitute a hazard to public
property, to public safety, or public welfare of the village.
   (B)   The Village Urban Forester shall work and consult with Swanton Tree
Commission to develop and implement Urban Forest Management Plan, facilitate
meetings and training opportunities for Tree Commission and staff, and
participate in Village Urban Forest management activities and outreach.
   (C)   The Village Urban Forester is also given full jurisdiction, authority,
and control in connection with the issuing of permits hereinafter provided for.
In the exercise of any of the powers herein granted, the Village Urban Forester
shall have the authority to delegate all or such part of his or her power and
duties with respect to supervision and control of trees to the Public Service
Superintendent.
(Ord. 2022-15, passed 6-13-2022)
§ 98.03 PRIVATELY OWNED TREES.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of any property owner owning or occupying
property bordering on a right-of-way, whether front, side, or rear yard, upon
which property there may be trees or shrubs, to prune or cause to be pruned any
tree or shrub which shades or obstructs streetlights, street signs, or
obstructs pedestrian or vehicular traffic on sidewalks or streets.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of any person bordering on a right-of-way,
whether front, side, or rear yard, upon which property there are any trees or
shrubs which are designated by the Village Urban Forester as dead, dying,
diseased, and hazardous to the public health, safety, and welfare, or property
of the people of Swanton, to remove or cause to be removed said tree(s) and/or
shrub(s).
   (C)   If in the opinion of the Village Urban Forester in consultation with
the Tree Commission a tree located on private property constitutes a hazard,
requiring the tree to be removed or pruned, the Village Urban Forester shall
issue a written justification to the property owner by USPS Certified Mail.
Said notice shall provide no less than 30 days for the private property owner
to remove or prune the tree. If the private property owner does not remove or
prune the tree in the timeframe established, the Village Urban Forester may
cause the tree to be removed or pruned at the initial expense of the village.
   (D)   Thereupon, the expense of removal, pruning, and all related
administrative costs shall be billed at the cost to remove tree plus 10%
administrative costs, to the property owner by USPS Certified mail. Upon
failure to reimburse the village this amount within 30 days thereafter, Village
Council shall make written return to the County Auditor along with a request
that such amount be entered upon the tax duplicate, to become a lien upon such
lands from and after the date of entry, and to be collected as other taxes and
returned to the village according to law.
(Ord. 2022-15, passed 6-13-2022)
§ 98.04 CARE OF TREES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall prune, remove, move, brace, cable, spray, or otherwise
perform work on a tree in a tree lawn or other public place without the
property owner first obtaining a permit from the village. The person obtaining
the permit shall abide by the standards as set forth by the Village Urban
Forester and Swanton Tree Commission.
   (B)   The village shall keep all trees standing upon any public place in the
village properly pruned so that the branches of such trees projecting over any
public sidewalk, private driveway, or into any public street beyond the curb
line shall not conflict with the public safety.
   (C)   The village shall have the right and duty to properly prune, water,
mulch, and perform any necessary work to any tree existing on any public place
in the village to ensure the public safety or to preserve the function or
beauty of such public place. The village shall further have the right to remove
any such tree or any part thereof which is hazardous or that, by reason of its
location or nature, is injurious or detrimental to other public improvements in
the village, is injured, or infected with any fungus, insect, pest, or disease
which cannot otherwise be controlled.
   (D)   All tree care practices shall conform to all village tree care
specifications developed and implemented by the Village Urban Forester and
Swanton Tree Commission. Work shall conform to the latest version of OSHA and
ANSI standards for tree planting, establishment, and worker safety.
(Ord. 2022-15, passed 6-13-2022)
§ 98.05 ABUSE OR MUTILATION OF PUBLIC TREES AND TREELAWNS.
   (A)   No person shall intentionally damage, cut, carve, top, lion's tail,
transplant, or remove any tree; attach any device such as but not limited to
rope, wire, nails, advertising posters, or other contrivance to any public tree
or shrub; allow any gaseous, liquid, or solid substance to come in contact with
them; set fire or permit fire to burn when the fire or heat thereof shall
injure any portion of any tree or shrub.
   (B)   No person shall excavate any ditches, tunnels, trenches, alleys, or
driveways within a radius of twenty feet from the trunk of any public tree or
shrub without obtaining approval via written permit from the village.
   (C)   No person shall permit any natural or artificial gas, salt, brine,
water, oil, liquid dye or any other substances deleterious to trees to come in
contact with the soil surrounding the roots of any tree upon any public place
in the village in such a manner as to kill, injure, deface, destroy, or affect
the growth of such trees.
   (D)   No person shall deposit, drive, place, store, or maintain upon any
public place of the village, any stone, brick, sand, concrete, or other
materials which may impede the free passage of water, air, or nutrients to the
roots of any public tree growing therein, except by written permit of the
village.
(Ord. 2022-15, passed 6-13-2022)
§ 98.06 PROTECTING TREES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (A)   Village personnel shall explore tree protection options during the
early planning stages of construction projects in consultation with the Village
Urban Forester and Swanton Tree Commission.
   (B)   Whenever it is necessary to remove a tree(s) or shrub(s) from a
treelawn or other public place in connection with the construction of a
sidewalk, or the paving or widening of a portion of a street, alley, or highway
used for vehicular traffic, or any other reason, the village shall remove and
replant such trees or shrubs, and plant trees where public property is
available per the Village Master Planting Design. Trees may be removed without
replanting in the same vicinity in like numbers should said trees be deemed by
the Tree Commission to be too densely planted or in violation of distance
requirements.
   (C)   No person shall remove a tree(s) or shrub(s) from a treelawn or other
public place, as defined, for the purpose of construction or for any other
reason without first requesting and obtaining a permit from the village. The
person shall bear the cost of the removal of all trees or shrubs removed.
Permit shall require a fee set annually by the Village Urban Forester and Tree
Commission to cover the replacement, planting, and establishment cost for each
tree removed.
   (D)   All work performed around existing trees shall conform to all village
tree protection specifications developed and implemented by the Village Urban
Forester and Swanton Tree Commission. Work shall conform to the latest version
OSHA and ANSI standards for tree protection, maintenance, and worker safety.
(Ord. 2022-15, passed 6-13-2022)
§ 98.07 TREE PLANTING IN TREELAWNS.
   (A)   No person shall plant any tree in a treelawn or other public place
without first obtaining a written permit from the village.
   (B)   All tree planting and establishment shall conform to all village tree
planting and establishment specifications developed and implemented by the
Village Urban Forester and Swanton Tree Commission. Work shall conform to the
latest version of OSHA and ANSI standards for tree planting, establishment, and
worker safety.
   (C)   All tree selection will follow the village's Master Planting Design as
developed and maintained by the Swanton Tree Commission and the Village Urban
Forester.
   (D)   Tree spacing. The spacing of public trees will be in accordance with
the three species size classes at maturity. No trees may be planted closer
together than the following (except in special plantings designed or approved
by the Village Urban Forester and Swanton Tree Commission.
      (1)   Small trees (15 to 25 feet tall at maturity): 20 feet apart.
      (2)   Medium trees (25 to 45 feet tall at maturity): 30 feet apart.
      (3)   Large trees (50 plus feet tall at maturity): 45 feet apart.
   (E)   Distance from curb and sidewalk. No trees may be planted contrary to
the following (except in special plantings designed or approved by the Village
Urban Forester and Swanton Tree Commission).
      (1)   Small trees: two feet (four to six feet wide treelawn).
      (2)   Medium trees: three feet (six to eight feet wide treelawn).
      (3)   Large trees: four feet (eight plus feet wide treelawn and no
overhead primary or transmission electric lines).
   (F)   The village shall, utilizing the Master Planting Design process,
always planting the largest size class that will survive and thrive on said
treelawn or public property.
   (G)   Distance from other public infrastructure. No trees may be planted
closer to these items than the following (except in special plantings designed
or approved by the Village Urban Forester and Swanton Tree Commission.)
 Small Trees Medium and Large Trees
                                          Small Trees Medium and Large Trees
Street intersections measured from inside 35 feet     35 feet
curb radius
Alley intersections                       20 feet     20 feet
Driveway aprons from widest point         20 feet     20 feet
Underground gas, water, or sewer laterals 10 feet     15 feet
Water shut off or gas valves              10 feet     15 feet
Fire hydrants                             10 feet     10 feet
Streetlights and utility poles            10 feet     15 feet
 
(Ord. 2022-15, passed 6-13-2022)
§ 98.08 CERTAIN TREES PROHIBITED.
   Please see current list of prohibited trees maintained by the Village Urban
Forester and Swanton Tree Commission. Prohibited trees are based on their
invasive tendencies as recognized by the Ohio Invasive Plants Council, Ohio
Department of Agriculture, and the Ohio Department of Natural Resources.
(Ord. 2022-15, passed 6-13-2022)
§ 98.09 TREES IN NEW SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   The Village Urban Forester and Swanton Tree Commission shall develop
the planting design for all newly developed village treelawns. Tree selection
will tie into the rest of the Village Master Planting Design.
   (B)   It shall be the intent of the village to approve only subdivisions
with minimum eight-foot- wide treelawns.
   (C)   Developer shall pay village the tree, planting, and establishment cost
for each treelawn tree estimated to be in the subdivision. Estimated number of
trees will be determined by Village Urban Forester and Swanton Tree Commission
based on design plan. Cost of tree, planting, and establishment shall be
determined annually by the Village Urban Forester and Swanton Tree Commission
based on market prices. Tree costs include the purchase and delivery of the
tree. Planting costs include all costs associated with planting the tree
including labor and equipment. Establishment costs include watering, young tree
training, and mulching for the first ten years post planting.
(Ord. 2022-15, passed 6-13-2022)
§ 98.10 SPECIAL PLANTINGS.
   Village personnel and officials shall explore and utilize modern
construction techniques and technologies in public business and commercial
districts that allow for long-term tree growth and their subsequent benefits.
Consultation shall occur during the early planning stages of such projects in
consultation with the Village Urban Forester and Swanton Tree Commission.
(Ord. 2022-15, passed 6-13-2022)
§ 98.11 UNLAWFUL INTERFERENCE.
   No person shall interfere with the Village Urban Forester, their
subordinates, or assistants while engaged in or about the carrying out of the
provisions of this chapter or the doing of any of the work ordered by the
Village Urban Forester to be done hereunder.
(Ord. 2022-15, passed 6-13-2022)
§ 98.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating or failing to comply with any provision of this chapter
shall be, upon conviction or a plea of guilty, subject to a fine not less than
$25 nor more than $10,000 per violation in addition to any required restitution
for damages incurred by the village or any special assessments levied as
provided for herein.
(Ord. 2022-15, passed 6-13-2022)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   INTOXICATING LIQUORS
      
111.   PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
CHAPTER 110: INTOXICATING LIQUORS
Section
   
110.01   Adoption of state law by reference
§ 110.01 ADOPTION OF STATE LAW BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   The village does hereby adopt the exact wording and terminology
(excepting, however, all references to the establishment of state boards,
bureaus and licenses, and the administration thereof, and also excepting all
references to felonies) of R.C. Title 43, and aforesaid sections are
incorporated herein and made a part hereof as though fully rewritten herein.
    (B)   The village also adopts any changes, amendments or additions, which
may be made in said R.C. Title 43 and said changes, amendments or additions
shall become effective as of the effective date of said changes, amendments or
additions.
   (C)   The penalty for the violation of any section of R.C. Title 43 shall be
the penalty provided by the various sections of the Ohio Revised Code which are
made a part hereof.
   (D)   The various sections of this code shall be designated by the number of
the enacting ordinance of the within codification and the individual number of
the section of the Ohio Revised Code herein adopted. For example: Ordinance 92-
4301.
(Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 2010-16, passed 6-28-2010)
CHAPTER 111: PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Section
   
111.01   Soliciting without advance invitation prohibited
 
   
111.99   Penalty
§ 111.01 SOLICITING WITHOUT ADVANCE INVITATION PROHIBITED.
   The practice of going in and upon private residences in the village by
solicitors, peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants or transient vendors of
merchandise who have not been requested or invited to do so by the owner or
occupant of such private residence, for the purpose of soliciting orders of the
sale of goods, wares and merchandise, and/or disposing of, peddling or hawking
the same, is declared to be a nuisance punishable as a misdemeanor.
(1964 Code, § 717.01) (Ord. 544, passed 7-25-1960; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-
1992) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and fined not more than $100 for each offense. Each individual
solicitation shall constitute a separate offense.
(1964 Code, § 717.99) (Ord. 544, passed 7-25-1960; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-
1992)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   OFFENSES AGAINST VILLAGE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 130: OFFENSES AGAINST VILLAGE REGULATIONS
Section
   
130.01   Adoption of state law by reference
   
130.02   Negligently passing bad checks
   
130.03   Curfew
   
130.04   Assault on teacher, student or school employee; disrupting school
activity
   
130.05   Throwing missiles
   
130.06   Pointing and discharging firearms
   
130.07   Medical marijuana
 
   
130.99   Penalty
§ 130.01 ADOPTION OF STATE LAW BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   Adoption of General Offenses Code.
      (1)   Title XIII of this code of ordinances embodies and prescribes
penalties for offenses, against the village, not classifiable in previous
titles and chapters. The word MISDEMEANORS as used in Title XIII is not
exhaustive, and does not imply that offenses found elsewhere in this code of
ordinances are not also misdemeanors and punishable as such.
      (2)   Each act or omission for which a penalty of fine or imprisonment,
or both, is provided under Title XIII or elsewhere in this code of ordinances
is declared a violation of ordinance and unlawful, and is made a misdemeanor,
upon conviction whereof, the penalty or penalties so provided shall be imposed
by the court.
      (3)   The village does hereby adopt for its General Offenses Code the
exact wording and terminology (excepting, however, all references to the
establishment of state boards, bureaus and licenses, and the administration
thereof, and also excepting all references to felonies) the following sections
of the Ohio Revised Code: R.C. §§ 2901.01 through and including R.C. § 2967.29,
inclusive; R.C. §§ 3719.01 through and including R.C. § 3719.99, inclusive;
R.C. §§ 3743.01 through and including R.C. § 3743.99, inclusive; R.C. §§
3761.01 through and including R.C. § 3761.99, inclusive; R.C. §§ 3767.01
through and including R.C. § 3767.99, inclusive; R.C. §§ 3773.06 through and
including R.C. § 3773.99, inclusive; and aforesaid sections are incorporated
herein and made a part hereof as though fully rewritten herein.
      (4)   The village also adopts as a part of its General Offenses Code any
changes, amendments or additions, which may be made in said R.C. §§ 2901.01
through 2967.29, inclusive; R.C. §§ 3719.01 through 3719.99, inclusive; R.C. §§
3743.01 through 3743.99, inclusive; R.C. §§ 3761.01 through 3761.99, inclusive;
R.C. §§ 3767.01 through 3767.99, inclusive; R.C. §§ 3773.06 through 3773.99,
inclusive of the Ohio Revised Code and said changes, amendments or additions
shall become effective as of the effective date of said changes, amendments or
additions.
      (5)   The penalty for the violation of any section of the General
Offenses Code of the village shall be the penalty provided by the various
sections of the Ohio Revised Code which are made a part hereof.
   (B)   The various sections of this code shall be designated by the number of
the enacting ordinance of this codification and the individual number of the
section of the Ohio Revised Code herein adopted. Example: Ord. 92-20-4511.19.
(Ord. 83-29, passed 8-22-1983; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 2010-16,
passed 6-28-2010)
§ 130.02 NEGLIGENTLY PASSING BAD CHECKS.
   (A)   No person shall negligently issue or transfer or cause to be issued or
transferred a check or other negotiable instrument, knowing that it will be
dishonored.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, a person who issues or transfers a
check or negotiable instrument is presumed to know that it will be dishonored,
if either of the following occurs:
      (1)   The drawer had no account with the drawee at the time of issue or
the stated date, whichever is later; or
      (2)   The check or instrument was properly refused payment for
insufficient finds upon presentment within 30 days after issue or the stated
date, whichever is later, and the liability of the drawer, endorser or any
party who may be liable thereon is not discharged by payment or satisfaction
within ten days after receiving notice of dishonor.
(Ord. 85-41, passed 10-28-1985; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.03 CURFEW.
   (A)   Generally. It is a curfew violation for any person under the age of 18
to be in a motor vehicle in, or otherwise, upon, or about the public streets,
sidewalks, parks, public buildings and grounds, and public places of amusement
and establishment in the village between the hours for the respective ages as
set forth below.
      (1)   Under 12 years: from darkness to dawn;
      (2)   12, 13, 14 and15 years: from 11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.; or
      (3)   16, 17 years: from 12:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m.
   (B)   Responsibilities of parent or guardian. No parent or guardian having
the care and custody of any person under 18 years of age shall knowingly permit
such person to violate the curfew of this section or neglect to restrain or
prevent such person from violating the curfew of this section.
   (C)   Responsibilities of establishment operator. No operator of any
establishment or his or her agent or employee shall knowingly permit any person
under the age of 18 to remain in or upon any public place of any establishment
in violation of the curfew section.
   (D)   Exceptions. This section does not apply to a person under 18 years of
age who is:
      (1)   Accompanied by his or parent, guardian or custodian;
      (2)   Accompanied by an adult over the age of 18 specified by the
parents, guardian or custodian of the juvenile considered to be in violation of
division (A);
      (3)   Attending any school or church, lodge, meeting, or entertainment in
which it would require persons to be out at a letter hour than that called for
in this section shall be required to be off the public streets, alleys, or
highways, one hour after said function has ended;
      (4)   Performance of an emergency errand or legitimate business as
directed by such person’s parent, guardian or custodian having the care and
custody of such person; or
      (5)   Participating in or returning from lawful employment.
(Ord. 85-1, passed 1-14-1985; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 97-16, passed
6-9-1997; Ord. 2016-50, passed 10-24-2016) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.04 ASSAULT ON TEACHER, STUDENT OR SCHOOL EMPLOYEE; DISRUPTING SCHOOL
ACTIVITY.
   No person shall assault, strike, threaten or menace a teacher, instructor,
person in charge of a class of students or any employee of any school in the
performance of his or her duties, or disrupt, disturb or interfere with any
activity conducted in a school building, or upon the grounds thereof, or in any
public place, or improperly and unlawfully assault, strike, threaten, menace,
follow, pursue or lay hands upon a student or other person in a school
building, or upon the grounds thereof, or upon the way to or from any school,
or on the way to and from any school sponsored activity.
(Ord. 88-31, passed 8-8-1988; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.05 THROWING MISSILES.
   No person shall maliciously or recklessly, by hand or by means of slingshot,
bow, air gun or other similar device throw, shoot, cast or sling any stone,
arrow, pellet or other similar missile.
(1964 Code, § 545.05) (Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.06 POINTING AND DISCHARGING FIREARMS.
   (A)   No person shall discharge any cannon, air gun, rifle, shotgun,
revolver, pistol or other firearm, or any device discharging blanks, within the
corporate limits of the municipality.
    (B)   This section does not extend to cases in which firearms are used in
self defense, in the discharge of official duty, in justifiable homicide or
when lawfully authorized by the Mayor or Police Chief.
(1964 Code, § 545.04(a), (c)) (Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.07 MEDICAL MARIJUANA.
   The cultivation, processing, or retail dispensing of medical marijuana, even
under a license issued under R.C. Chapter 3796, is prohibited within the
Village of Swanton. The violation of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(Ord. 2017-04, passed 1-23-2017)
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Whoever violates §
130.02 is guilty of negligently passing bad checks, a minor misdemeanor.
   (C)   (1)   Any person under the age of 18 years found to be in violation of
the provisions of §
130.03(A) shall be adjudicated a delinquent or unruly child and subject to the
penalties and disposition as set forth in R.C. Chapter 2151:
         (a)   Reasonable effort shall be made to contact a parent, guardian or
custodian to whom any minor so apprehended shall be released in lieu of
continued detention; and
         (b)   Any juvenile so apprehended may be detained in the juvenile
detention facility pursuant to the procedures of the appropriate County Court
of Common Pleas, Juvenile Division.
      (2)   Whoever violates the provisions of §
130.03(B) and (C), is guilty of the following:
         (a)   First offense within one year shall be a minor misdemeanor
(maximum fine of $100);
         (b)   Second offense within one year shall be a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree (maximum fine of $250, maximum imprisonment of 30 days); and
         (c)   Third offense within one year shall be a misdemeanor of the
third degree (maximum fine of $500, maximum imprisonment of 60 days).
   (D)   Whoever violates §
130.04 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Ord. 85-1, passed 1-14-1985; Ord. 85-41, passed 10-28-1985; Ord. 88-31, passed
8-8-1988; Ord. 92-20, passed 9-28-1992; Ord. 97-16, passed 6-9-1997; Ord. 2016-
50, passed 10-24-2016)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   ZONING CODE
      
151.   SUBDIVISION AND SITE CONSTRUCTION CODE
      
152.   FLOOD DAMAGE REDUCTION CODE
      
153.   BUILDINGS
CHAPTER 150: ZONING CODE
Section
   
150.01   Zoning Code adopted
   
Appendix A: Zoning Code
§ 150.01 ZONING CODE ADOPTED.
   The village adopts in full the Zoning Code found in Appendix A to this
chapter, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
APPENDIX A: ZONING CODE
ARTICLE 150.11
GENERAL PROVISIONS
   
150.111   Title.
   
150.112   Purpose and Intent.
   
150.113   Relation to Other Laws.
   
150.114   Rules of Interpretation.
   
150.115   Validity.
   
150.116   Form of Code.
   
150.117   Compliance with Regulations.
   
150.118   Rules Governing Transition from Prior Regulations.
§ 150.111 TITLE.
   This chapter is the Zoning Code for the Village of Swanton.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.112 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   The purpose of the Zoning Code and the intent of the legislative
authority in its adoption is to promote and protect to the fullest extent
permissible under state laws, the public health, safety, convenience, comfort,
prosperity and the general welfare of the village; by regulating the use of
buildings, other structures and land for residences, public facilities,
business, services, industry or other purposes; by regulating and restricting
the bulk, height, design, percent of lot coverage and location of buildings; by
regulating and limiting population density; and, for the aforesaid purposes, to
divide the land within the corporation limits of the village into districts of
such number and dimension in accordance with the objectives of the Zoning Code;
and to provide procedures for the administration and amendment of said Zoning
Code.
   (B)   This Zoning Code is intended to achieve, among others, the following
objectives:
      (1)   To protect the character and values of residential, institutional
and public use, business, commercial and manufacturing uses; and to ensure
their orderly and beneficial development;
      (2)   To provide adequate open spaces for light, air and outdoor use;
      (3)   To prevent overcrowding of the land;
      (4)   To prevent excessive concentration of population; and, on the other
hand, to prevent sparse and uncoordinated development;
      (5)   To regulate and control the location and spacing of buildings on
the lot and in relation to the surrounding property so as to maintain the
public health and the village;
      (6)   To regulate the location of buildings and intensity of uses in
relation to streets according to plans so as to cause the least interference
with, and be damaged least by traffic movements, hence result in lessened
street congestion and improved safety;
      (7)   To establish zoning patterns that ensure economical extensions for
sewers, water supply, waste disposal and other public utilities as well as
development of recreation, schools and other public facilities; and
      (8)   To accomplish the specific intent and goals set forth in the
introduction to the respective sections.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.113 RELATION TO OTHER LAWS.
   (A)   The provisions of this Zoning Code shall supplement any and all laws
of the state, ordinances of the Village or any and all rules and regulations
promulgated by authority of such law or ordinance relating to the purpose and
scope of such Zoning Code.
   (B)   The provisions of the Zoning Code shall not annul or in any way
interfere with existing deed or plat restrictions, easements or other
agreements between persons, codes, laws, rules, regulations or permits
previously adopted or issued except those ordinances or sections thereof which
are contrary to and in conflict with this Zoning Code.
   (C)   Whenever this Zoning Code imposes greater restrictions upon the use of
buildings or land, the heights or bulk of buildings, or requires larger land or
building areas, yards or other open spaces than are otherwise required or
imposed by other deed or plat restrictions, codes, laws, ordinances, rules or
regulations, this Zoning Code shall control; and conversely, other regulations
shall control where they impose greater restrictions than this code. The
Village of Swanton cannot enforce deed or plat restrictions. Only property
owners can enforce such requirements.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.114 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   Minimum Requirements. In interpreting and applying the provisions of
this Zoning Code, such provisions shall be held to be the minimum requirements
of the promotion of public health, safety, convenience, comfort, prosperity and
general welfare and to accomplish the objectives set forth throughout this
code. Except as specifically provided herein, it is not intended by the Zoning
Code to repeal, abrogate or annul any existing provision of any law or
ordinance or any rule or regulation previously adopted or issued pursuant to
law relating to the use of structures and land and the design, erection,
alteration or maintenance of structure thereon.
   (B)   Conflicts or Inconsistency. Unless otherwise specifically stated
within this Zoning Code, and unless the context clearly indicates the contrary,
if two or more provisions of this Zoning Code are in conflict or are
inconsistent with each other, then the most restrictive provision shall apply.
   (C)   Text to Govern. In case of any difference of meaning or implication
between the text of this Zoning Code and any caption, illustration, figure, or
illustrative table, the text shall control.
   (D)   Illustrations. All illustrations in this Zoning Code are intended to
help the reader understand terminology and concepts used in this Zoning Code,
unless otherwise indicated. Illustrations are not drawn to scale and are not to
be interpreted as examples of character or design that must be matched.
   (E)   Time Frames. Any time frames stated within this Zoning Code shall be
calculated to include weekdays, weekends, and holidays, unless stated
otherwise. If a time frame ends on a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday on which the
city offices are closed, the time frame will be extended to the end of the next
business day unless specifically stated otherwise within this Zoning Code.
   (F)   Delegation of Authority. If a provision in this Zoning Code requires
the Zoning Administrator or other village official to perform an act or duty,
such provision shall also include designated subordinates unless specified
otherwise.
   (G)   Fractions. Where application of a numerical standard results in a
fraction, the fraction shall be rounded as follows:
      (1)   Where the standard is a minimum requirement, the fraction shall be
rounded up the nearest whole number; and
      (2)   Where the standard is a maximum allowed or permitted under this
Zoning Code, the fraction shall be rounded down to the nearest whole number.
   (H)   Defined Terms. Terms used in this Zoning Code are generally used in
their ordinary English usage. Certain terms are, however, specifically defined
in
Article 150.90 and whenever used in this Zoning Code, they shall have the
meaning as set forth in
Article 150.90, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
   (I)   Rules of Word Usage. The following rules of word usage apply to the
text of this Zoning Code:
      (1)   The particular shall control the general.
      (2)   The words “shall” and “must” are always mandatory and not
discretionary. The words “may” and “should” are permissive.
      (3)   Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, words used in a
specific tense (past, present or future) shall be construed to include all
tenses, and words used in the singular number shall include the plural, and the
plural the singular.
      (4)   A “structure” includes a “building” and any part thereof unless the
context clearly indicates otherwise.
      (5)   Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a
regulation involves two or more items, conditions, provisions, or events
connected by the conjunction “and,” “or,” or “either...or,” the conjunction
shall be interpreted as follows:
         (a)   “And” indicates that all the connected items, conditions,
provisions, or events shall apply.
         (b)   “Or” indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions,
or events may apply singly or in any combination.
         (c)   “Either...or” indicates that the connected items, conditions,
provision, or events shall apply singly but not in combination.
      (6)   The word “includes” shall not limit a term to the specified
examples but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or
circumstances of like kind or character.
      (7)   Terms not defined herein or in
Article 150.90 shall have the meanings customarily assigned to them in common,
ordinary usage, except that legal or technical terms shall be interpreted in
their legal or technical sense.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.115 VALIDITY.
   Should any section or provision of this Zoning Code be declared invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of
the Zoning Code as a whole, or any part thereof, other than the section or
provision so declared to be invalid. Nor shall the decision affect its
application to different facts or circumstances.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.116 FORM OF CODE.
   This Zoning Code is included as
Chapter 150 under “Village of Swanton, Ohio Code of Ordinances”.
Chapter 150 is subdivided into articles and sections. The article and section
headings herein have been inserted for convenience in reference and are not
intended to define or limit the scope of, or otherwise affect, any provision of
this Zoning Code.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.117 COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No structure shall be located, erected, constructed, reconstructed,
moved, converted, or enlarged; nor shall any structure or land be used or be
designed to be used, nor shall any land be subdivided within the limits of the
village except in full compliance with all the provisions of this Zoning Code
and, when required, after the lawful issuance of the permit(s) required by this
Zoning Code.
   (B)   Lawfully existing lots, buildings, structures and uses of land that do
not comply with the regulations of this Zoning Code are subject to the
regulations set forth in
Article 150.41, Nonconforming Uses, Lots, Buildings and Sites.
   (C)   No lot, setback, parking area, open space, or other space shall be
reduced in area or dimensions so as to make such area or dimension less than
the minimum required by this Zoning Code.
   (D)   No part of a setback, parking area, open space or other space provided
about or for any building or structure for the purpose of complying with the
provisions of this Code shall be included as part of a required setback,
parking area, or other space required under this Code for another building or
structure.
   (E)   In computing the area of a lot, no portion of the street right of way
shall be included, regardless of whether or not the owner holds title to the
same.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.118 RULES GOVERNING TRANSITION FROM PRIOR REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Repeal of Former Zoning Code. 
Chapter 150: Zoning Code of the Village of Swanton, Ohio, adopted January 25,
1988, and as subsequently amended together with the Zoning Map, is hereby
repealed. The adoption of this chapter, however, shall not affect nor prevent
any pending or future prosecution of, or action to abate, an existing violation
of prior regulations.
   (B)   Effective Date. This Zoning Code shall become effective from and after
the date of its approval and adoption, as provided by law.
   (C)   Approved Permits.
      (1)   All buildings, structures, and land uses for which a permit has
been obtained and the construction or a portion of which has begun, prior to
the effective date of this Zoning Code, may be completed and used in accordance
with the plans for which the permit was granted.
      (2)   If the building, structure, or use is not completed within the time
allowed under the original permit or any extension granted thereof, then the
building, structure, or use may be constructed, completed, or occupied only in
compliance with this Zoning Code.
      (3)   Any application for which the zoning permit has expired and
construction has not begun shall meet the standards in effect at the time the
application is resubmitted.
   (D)   Vested Rights. The provisions of §
150.118(A) through §
150.118(C) of this Zoning Code are subject to Ohio’s vested rights laws.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
ARTICLE 150.15
ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS AND ZONING MAP
   
150.151   Purpose.
   
150.152   Establishment of districts.
   
150.153   Establishment of regulations.
   
150.154   Establishment of zoning map.
   
150.155   District boundary lines.
   
150.156   Annexed territory.
   
150.157   Subdivisions and parcel splits.
§ 150.151 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish zoning districts in order to
realize the general purposes set forth in this Code, to provide for orderly
growth and development, and to protect the property rights of all individuals
by assuring the compatibility of uses and practices within districts.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.152 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS.
   (A)   In order to carry out the purpose of this zoning code, the village is
hereby divided into the following districts, all of which are designated on the
zoning map by symbols and boundaries, said districts shall be known as:
Base Zoning Districts Abbreviation
Base Zoning Districts                  Abbreviation
Residential Districts
One-Family Estate (15,000 sq. ft. lot) R-E
One-Family (9,600 sq. ft. lot)         R-1
One-Family (8,400 sq. ft. lot)         R-2
One-Family (6,000 sq. ft. lot)         R-3
Multi-Family (low density)             R-4
Multi-Family (high density)            R-5
Manufactured Home Park                 MH
Base Zoning Districts Abbreviation
Base Zoning Districts                   Abbreviation
Business/Industrial Districts
Neighborhood Business                   B-1
Downtown Business                       B-2
General Business                        B-3
Light Industrial                        M-1
Other Districts
Public/Open Space                       P/OS
Overlay Zoning Districts
Planned Residential Development Overlay PRDO
Airport Highway Corridor Overlay        AHCO
Floodplain Overlay                      FPO
 
   (B)   Whenever the abbreviated terms, such as R-1, R-2, B-1, M-1 and the
like, are used in this zoning code, they shall be construed as referring to
their corresponding district titles.
   (C)   The above classification of districts shall not be construed as an
enumeration of most restrictive to less restrictive districts.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.153 ESTABLISHMENT OF REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Base Zoning Districts. Each of the base zoning districts listed in §
150.152(A) above lists the land uses allowed for that base district, subject to
the development standards applicable to that type of development and the
requirements for development approval. On the Official Zoning Map, a standard
zoning district shall be labeled using the two-character abbreviation shown in
§
150.152(A).
   (B)   Overlay Zoning Districts.
      (1)   The overlay zoning districts shown in §
150.152(A) supplement, but do not replace, the base zoning district regulations
in the areas where the overlay zoning districts are applied.
      (2)   An overlay zoning district may add restrictions on the use of
property in the underlying base zoning district or may remove restrictions on
the use of property in the underlying zoning district, or both.
      (3)   In the event of an inconsistency between the overlay zoning
district regulations and the base zoning district regulations, the overlay
zoning district regulations shall apply.
      (4)   The Official Zoning Map designates where overlay zoning districts
apply.
   (C)   Compliance with Regulations.
      (1)   Any building, structure or parcel of land may be used; and the use
of any building, structure or parcel of land may be changed or extended; and
any existing building or structure may be altered, converted, enlarged,
reconstructed, moved or maintained, only for the principal and accessory uses
specifically enumerated in the district in which the building, structure or
parcel of land is located and for no other use, except as may otherwise be
specifically authorized in this Code.
      (2)   The use, change, extension, alteration, conversion, enlargement,
reconstruction, relocation or maintenance of buildings, structures and land
shall be subject to all area, yard, height, off-street parking and all other
regulations set forth for the district in which the building, structure or
parcel of land is located and to all other applicable regulations of this
zoning code.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.154 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING MAP.
   (A)   The aforesaid districts are designated by symbols and the locations
and boundaries of said districts are established on a map entitled, “Zoning Map
of the Village of Swanton, Ohio”, on file in the office of the Village
Administrator. All notations, schedules and other information shown thereon are
hereby made a part of this zoning code as enacted on January 25, 1988 or
subsequently amended in the same manner as other parts of this zoning code.
   (B)   No changes of any nature shall be made to the Zoning Map or matter
shown thereon except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this Zoning
Code.
   (C)   Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the Zoning Map,
which may from time to time be made or published, the official Zoning Map shall
be the Zoning Map located in the office of the Village Administrator, which
shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of land, buildings
and other structures.
   (D)   In the event that the official Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed
or lost, Village Council may, by ordinance, adopt a new Zoning Map which shall
supersede the prior official Map. The new official Zoning Map may correct
drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior official Zoning Map but no
such corrections shall have the effect of amending the original Zoning Map or
subsequent amendments thereof.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.155 DISTRICT BOUNDARY LINES.
   (A)   The district boundary lines of the Zoning Map enclose an area of a
designated district, and generally follow recorded lot lines, the centerline of
streets, railroad rights-of-way or their extensions, provided, however:
      (1)   Where boundaries apparently follow lot lines and are not more than
ten feet therefrom, the lot lines shall be construed to be such boundaries;
      (2)   Where the district boundary line is shown by dimension or
relationship as being located a specific distance from and/or parallel to a
street line, said distance shall control;
      (3)   Where a district boundary line is shown as adjoining a railroad, it
shall be determined by scale, and each part of the parcel shall comply with the
regulations of the district in which it is located; or
      (4)   Where a district boundary line does not coincide with any of the
previously mentioned lines, and where it is not located by dimensions or fixed
points shown on the Zoning Map, it shall be determined by the scale appearing
thereon.
   (B)   Vacation of Public Ways. Whenever any street or public way is vacated
by official action of Council, the zoning district adjoining each side of the
street or public way shall be automatically extended to the center of such
vacation and all area included in the vacation shall thereafter be subject to
all regulations of the extended districts.
   (C)   Where physical features existing on the ground are at variance with
those shown on the Zoning Map, or in other circumstances not covered by any of
the above statements on District Boundaries, or if there is a dispute
concerning the exact location of zoning district boundaries, the Village
Planning Commission shall interpret the district boundaries.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.156 ANNEXED TERRITORY.
   All territory, which may hereafter be annexed to Swanton Village and is
already zoned, shall be continued in its existing zone classification until
amended in conformance with the amendment procedures outlined in this Zoning
Code and the Ohio Revised Code.
   (A)   The Planning Commission may make a zoning recommendation to Council
when land outside the village limits is to be annexed to the village. Zoned
areas that are proposed for annexation shall be compatible with or similar to
the zoning district located within the village.
   (B)   Land annexed to the village shall be in conformity with the village
zoning classifications and with the Comprehensive Plan.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.157 SUBDIVISIONS AND PARCEL SPLITS.
   Proposed subdivisions, including parcel splits and lot consolidations, shall
be reviewed and approved in accordance with the procedures set forth in
Chapter 151 Subdivision Regulations.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
ARTICLE 150.21
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS
   
150.211   Intent.
   
150.212   Use Regulations.
   
150.213   General Provisions For Development Standards.
   
150.214   Development Standards For Detached One-Family Dwellings.
   
150.215   Development Standards For Dwellings in R-4 and R-5 Districts.
   
150.216   Floor Area Requirements For Dwelling Units.
   
150.217   Permanently Sited Manufactured Homes.
   
150.218   General Provisions For Accessory Uses And Structures.
   
150.219   Family Day Care Home, Type B.
   
150.220   Home Occupations.
   
150.221   Outdoor Parking and Storage of Trucks and Recreational Vehicles.
   
150.222   Private Swimming Pools.
   
150.223   Landscaping, Screening, Fencing, And Lighting Regulations.
   
150.224   Requirements for Owners Associations.
   
150.225    Development Plan Review.
§ 150.211 INTENT.
   Residential districts and their regulations are established herein in order
to achieve, among others, the following purposes:
   (A)   To regulate the bulk and location of buildings in relation to the land
in order to obtain proper light, air, privacy and usable open spaces on each
lot appropriate for the district;
   (B)   To regulate the density and distribution of population to avoid
congestion and to maintain adequate services;
   (C)   To provide protection from noxious fumes, odors, dust excessive
noises, invasion of abnormal vehicular traffic and other objectionable
influences; and
   (D)   To protect the desirable characteristics of existing residential
development; the promotion of stability and the most desirable and beneficial
use of the land.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.212 USE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Use Schedule Summary. 
Schedule 150.212(D) below sets forth the uses allowed in residential districts.
The abbreviations used in the Schedule indicate the following:
      (1)   Uses Permitted By Right. A “P” in a cell indicates that the use is
allowed by-right as a principal use in the respective district.
      (2)   Conditional Uses. A “C” in a cell indicates that the use is
regulated as a conditional use. The use is permitted in the respective district
only after an applicant receives Conditional Use approval pursuant to
Article 150.67.
      (3)   Accessory Uses. An “A” in a cell indicates that the use is a
permitted accessory use, provided it is clearly incidental and subordinate to a
permitted principal or conditional use listed in
Schedule 150.212(D).
      (4)   Conditional Accessory Uses. A “CA” in a cell indicates that the use
is permitted only as an accessory use and only after an applicant receives
Conditional Use approval pursuant to
Article 150.67.
      (5)   Uses Not Permitted. The letters “NP” in a District column indicate
that the use is not allowed in that zoning district.
      (6)   Use-Specific Standard Cross-Reference. An “*” in a cell indicates
that a Use-Specific Standard cross-referenced in the right-hand column of the
Schedule applies to the use in that zoning district.
   (B)   Compliance with Standards. Although a use may be indicated as a
permitted use in a particular district, it shall not be approved on a lot
unless it can be located thereon in full compliance with all of the standards
and other regulations of this Code applicable to the specific use and lot in
question, including but not limited to any supplemental use-specific standards
cross-referenced in
Schedule 150.212(D).
   (C)   Organization of Use Table. In the Use Table, land uses are classified
into general use categories and specific uses based on common physical or
functional characteristics, such as type of dwelling unit, amount of activity
generated by the use, and site conditions. Whenever a standard or reference is
made to a general use category throughout this code, it shall include the
specific uses in that category.
   (D)   Schedule 150.212(D) Permitted Uses. 
Schedule 150.212(D) sets forth the uses allowed in the Residential Districts.
SCHEDULE 150.212(D) PERMITTED USES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
SCHEDULE 150.212(D) PERMITTED USES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
As defined in
150.212(A): P = permitted use; C = conditional use; A = accessory use;
CA = conditional accessory use; NP = not permitted; *= subject to use-specific
standards as cross-referenced
                               R-E R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5 *Use-Specific Standards
Residential/Lodging
Dwelling, multi-family          NP  NP  NP  NP  P   P   --
Dwelling, one-family (attached) NP  NP  NP  NP  P   P   --
Dwelling, one-family (detached) P   P   P   P   NP  NP  --
Dwelling, two-family            NP  NP  NP  C*  NP  NP  §
                                                        150.333(E)
Manufactured home, permanently  P*  P*  P*  P*  NP  NP  §
sited                                                   150.217
Bed & breakfast inn             NP  NP  NP  C*  NP  NP  §
                                                        150.333(B)
Congregate care facility/       NP  NP  NP  C*  C*  C*  §
nursing home                                            150.333(C)
Family day care, Type “B”   P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  §
                                                        150.219
Group home, large (max 16       NP  NP  NP  NP  C*  C*  §
residents)                                              150.333(F)
Group home, small (max 8        P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  §
residents)                                              150.333(F)
Short-term rental               C*  C*  C*  C*  NP  NP  §
                                                        150.333(B)
Civic Uses
Cemetery                        C*  C*  C*  NP  NP  NP  §
                                                        150.334(A)
Community facility, building,                           §
recreation amenity privately    C*  C*  C*  C*  C*  C*  150.334(B)
operated by HOA
Country club (public, private/                          §
semi- private), including golf  C*  C*  NP  NP  NP  NP  150.334(C)
course
Day care center, adult or child                         §
(accessory to a principal use   CA* CA* CA* CA* NP  NP  150.334(D)
such as place of worship)
Government office building      C*  C*  C*  C*  P*  P*  §
                                                        150.334(E)
   SCHEDULE 150.212(D) PERMITTED USES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
   SCHEDULE 150.212(D) PERMITTED USES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
As defined in
150.212(A): P = permitted use; C = conditional use; A = accessory use;
CA = conditional accessory use; NP = not permitted; *= subject to use-specific
standards as cross-referenced
                               R-E R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5 *Use-Specific Standards
Place of worship                C*  C*  C*  C*  NP  NP  §
                                                        150.334(E)
Public library                  C*  C*  C*  NP  NP  NP  §
                                                        150.334(E)
Public parks and playgrounds    P   P   P   P   P   P   --
Public sports fields and active C*  C*  C*  C*  NP  NP  §
recreation facilities                                   150.334(B)
School, elementary/secondary    C*  C*  C*  C*  NP  NP  §
(public or private)                                     150.334(E)
Utilities, Communication and Other Uses
Agriculture (crops)             C*  NP  NP  NP  NP  NP  §
                                                        150.336(B)
Electric vehicle charging       A*  A*  A*  A*  A*  A*  §
station                                                 150.336(C)
Essential services              P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  §
                                                        150.336(D)
Plant nursery or greenhouse,    C*  NP  NP  NP  NP  NP  §
commercial                                              150.335(N)
Solar collector system, ground- CA* CA* CA* NP  NP  NP  §
mounted                                                 150.336(F)
Solar collector system, roof-   A*  A*  A*  A*  A*  A*  §
mounted                                                 150.336(F)
Utility substation and          P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  §
transmission facility                                   150.336(G)
Small wind energy system        C*  C*  C*  C*  C*  C*  §
                                                        150.336(H)
Wireless telecommunication      CA* CA* CA* CA* CA* CA* §
facility                                                150.336(I)
Accessory Uses/Structures
Accessory living suite          CA* CA* CA* CA* NP  NP  §
                                                        150.333(A)
Carport                         A   A   A   A   A   A   --
Detached private garage and     A   A   A   A   A   A   --
parking area
   SCHEDULE 150.212(D) PERMITTED USES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
   SCHEDULE 150.212(D) PERMITTED USES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
As defined in
150.212(A): P = permitted use; C = conditional use; A = accessory use;
CA = conditional accessory use; NP = not permitted; *= subject to use-specific
standards as cross-referenced
                              R-E R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5 *Use-Specific Standards
Detached storage/utility       A   A   A   A   A   A   --
building
Detached storage/utility       CA* CA* CA* NP  NP  NP  --
building, oversized
Fences, walls                  A   A   A   A   A   A   --
Greenhouse, noncommercial      A   A   A   NP  NP  NP  --
Home occupation                A*  A*  A*  A*  A*  A*  §
                                                       150.220
Private garden, associated
garden structures, gazebo, and A   A   A   A   A   A   --
recreational uses
Private swimming pool          A*  A*  A*  A*  A*  A*  §
                                                       150.222
Signs                          A   A   A   A   A   A   Article 150.35
Noncommercial antenna          A   A   A   A   A   A   §
                                                       150.336(I)
Similar Use                    P   P   P   P   P   P   §
                                                       150.635
 
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.213 GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Minimum Lot Area. The area of a lot or development site shall not be
less than the area set forth in
Schedules 150.214 and
150.215 or as modified in subsequent sections.
   (B)   Minimum Lot Width.
      (1)   The width of a lot shall be not less than the width set forth in
Schedules 150.214 and
150.215, or as modified in subsequent sections.
      (2)   Each lot shall abut upon a dedicated street for the required lot
width, except for one-family lots fronting on a cul-de-sac or curved street,
which shall comply with the lot frontage requirement as set forth in
Schedule 150.214.
      (3)   The width of a corner lot shall be sufficient to comply with the
side yard requirements. An alley shall not be considered a street for the
purposes of determining a corner lot.
   (C)   One Principal Building per Lot. There shall not be more than one
principal building constructed on a residential lot in an R-E, R-1, R-2, and R-
3 District.
   (D)   Minimum Front Setback.
      (1)   The minimum required front setback on a lot shall not be less than
the depth set forth in
Schedules 150.214 and
150.215 or as modified in subsequent sections.
      (2)   Where 50% or more of the aggregate street frontage between two
successive intersecting streets is occupied by buildings of the type and use
permitted in the district before the effective date of this zoning code, or any
amendments thereto, the minimum required front setback for new principal
buildings shall be the average setback of existing buildings located within 100
feet on either side of a given lot; provided, however, the depth of the front
yard resulting there from shall be not less than one-half of the minimum
dimension, specified in
Schedules 150.214 and
150.215.
   (E)   Minimum Side Setbacks.
      (1)   A side setback shall be provided for each side lot line on a one-
family dwelling lot. The width of each minimum required side setback shall not
be less than the dimension specified in
Schedule 150.214.
      (2)   Where an existing side setback does not comply with the required
side setback for the district in which the lot is located and which was owned
separately from all other tracts of land on the effective date of this zoning
code or any amendment thereto, and is still so owned, the principal building
may be maintained or altered but shall not be enlarged unless the total width
of the side setback complies with the regulations of this zoning code.
   (F)   Minimum Side Setback on Corner Lots. Where new construction or an
addition to an existing building is proposed for a corner lot, such building or
building addition shall maintain a corner side setback that complies with the
following:
      (1)   When the rear lot line of a corner lot coincides with the side lot
line of an interior lot, the corner side setback shall comply with the minimum
front setback requirements.
      (2)   When the rear lot line of a corner lot coincides with the rear lot
line of another corner lot, or is separated from such lot by an alley, the
corner side setback shall comply with the minimum side setback set forth in
Schedules 150.214 and
150.215 for the district in which it is located.
   (G)   Minimum Rear Setback. The rear setback of a lot for a one-family
dwelling shall not be less than the depth set forth in
Schedule 150.214 for the district in which it is located, or not less than 25%
of the depth of the lot, whichever is the lesser.
   (H)   Minimum Setback from Project Boundary. In the R-4 and R-5 Districts,
the setback of a dwelling from any project boundary shall be not less than the
distance set forth in
Schedule 150.215. The project boundary shall include all lot lines that divide
the development site from adjacent lots not included in the development and
shall be the boundaries of the minimum area set forth in
Schedule 150.215.
   (I)   Projections into Setbacks. A projection is that part or feature of a
building that extends beyond the enclosing walls of the dwelling. Certain
building features may project into the minimum required setback as noted below:
      (1)   Architectural features. A belt course, balcony, cornice, gutter,
chimney or similar architectural feature may project into the minimum front,
side or rear setback for a maximum distance of two (2) feet.
      (2)   Entrance features and unenclosed shelters. An entrance hood, or an
open platform, landing, steps, terrace or other feature not extending above the
first floor level of the principal building, or an open but roofed porch, patio
or deck, shall not extend more than six (6) feet into the minimum front setback
and three (3) feet into the minimum side setback. Unenclosed shelters are
roofed but unenclosed projections from the main wall of a building, which may
or may not use columns or other ground supports for structural purposes, and
which do not meet the definition of enclosed shelter in §
150.213(I)(3) below.
      (3)   Enclosed porches and other shelters. An enclosed entry, porch,
patio or other shelter that is covered by a roof attached to the dwelling, and
enclosed on two or more sides with walls, siding, windows or other material
including, but not limited to, screening shall be considered an integral part
of the principal building and shall meet the setback requirements for principal
buildings in the applicable zoning district.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.214 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR DETACHED ONE-FAMILY DWELLINGS.
   Detached one-family dwellings in the R-E, R-1, R-2, and R-3 Districts shall
be erected, altered, moved, and maintained only in accordance with the
development standards set forth in
Schedule 150.214.
SCHEDULE 150.214 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR DETACHED ONE-FAMILY DWELLINGS
 R-E Residential Estate R-1 One-Family R-2 One-Family R-3 One Family
SCHEDULE 150.214 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR DETACHED ONE-FAMILY DWELLINGS
                   R-E Residential R-1 One-Family R-2 One-Family R-3 One Family
                   Estate
(A) Minimum lot    15,000 sq. ft   9,600 sq. ft.  8,400 sq. ft.  6,000 sq. ft.
area
(B) Minimum lot
width at minimum   90 feet         80 feet        70 feet        50 feet
front setback line
(1)
(C) Minimum lot
frontage on curved 50 feet         45 feet        40 feet        40 feet
street and cul-de-
sac
(D) Minimum front
setback (from      40 feet         40 feet        25 feet        25 feet
public street
right-of-way)(2)
(E) Minimum side   12 feet         10 feet        7 feet         5 feet
setback(3)
(F) Minimum corner (4)             (4)            (4)            (4)
side setback
(G) Minimum rear   40 feet         30 feet        25 feet        25 feet
setback(5)
(H) Maximum number 2.5 stories     2 stories      2 stories      2 stories
of stories(6)
(I) Maximum height
of principal       35 feet         35 feet        35 feet        35 feet
building
Notes to Schedule 150.214:
(1) See §
150.213(B)
(2) See §
150.213(D)
(3) See §
150.213(E)
(4) See §
150.213(F)
(5) See §
150.213(G)
(6) But in no case shall the height of the dwelling exceed the maximum height
set forth in Schedule 150.214(I)
 
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.215 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR DWELLINGS IN R-4 AND R-5 DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Dwellings shall be erected, altered, moved or maintained in the R-
4 and R-5 Districts only in accordance with the development standards set forth
in Schedule 150.215(A).
SCHEDULE 150.215(A) DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR DWELLINGS IN R-4 AND R-
5 DISTRICTS
 R-4 Multi-family (Low Density) R-5 Multi-family (High Density)
SCHEDULE 150.215(A) DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR DWELLINGS IN R-4 AND R-
5 DISTRICTS
                              R-4 Multi-family (Low R-5 Multi-family (High
                              Density)              Density)
(1) Minimum development area  2 acres               3 acres
(2) Minimum lot width at
minimum front building        200 feet              300 feet
setback line 200 feet
(3) Maximum density (du/ac -
dwelling units per acre)
   (a) One-family attached 8 du/ac               12 du/ac
dwellings
   (b) Multi-family dwellin12 du/ac              20 du/ac
(4) Maximum lot coverage(a)   65%                   65%
(5) Minimum front building
and parking setback (from     40 feet               40 feet
public street right-of-way)
(6) Minimum building setback
from project boundary         20 feet               20 feet
abutting an R-4, R-5 or
nonresidential district
(7) Minimum building setback
from project boundary         30 feet               40 feet
abutting an R-E, R-1, R-2 or
R-3 District
(8) Minimum parking setback
from project boundary         10 feet               10 feet
abutting an R-4, R-5 or
nonresidential district
(9) Minimum parking setback
from project boundary         20 feet               20 feet
abutting an R-E, R-1, R-2 or
R-3 District
(10) Minimum building         15 feet               15 feet
separation
(11) Maximum height of        38 feet               50 feet
principal building
Notes to Schedule 150.215(A):
(a) Defined as the maximum coverage by impervious surface (e.g. building,
parking, sidewalks)
 
   (B)   Maximum Dwelling Units.
      (1)   Maximum Density. The residential density of a multi-family
development shall not exceed the number of dwelling units per acre set forth in
Schedule 150.215(A) for the district in which the development is located.
      (2)   Calculating Units. The total number of dwelling units permitted
shall be calculated by multiplying the total land area, exclusive of public
rights-of-way existing at the time the development plan is submitted, by the
number of dwelling units permitted per acre.
      (3)   Maximum Number of Attached One-Family Units. A building comprised
of attached one-family units shall have not more than six such units attached.
   (C)   Maximum Coverage. The maximum coverage of the development site,
including all areas covered by buildings, vehicular drives, and parking areas
shall not exceed the percentage of the total area of the development project
set forth in
Schedule 150.215(A).
   (D)   Multi-family District Location Guidelines. The purpose of these Multi-
family District Location Guidelines is to provide evaluation criteria for
reviewing applications requesting rezoning of a property to an R-4 or R-
5 Multi-Family District.
      (1)   Located along a collector or arterial street;
      (2)   Located along a local street when it serves as a transition between
an existing one-family neighborhood and a more intense use/development;
      (3)   Adjacent to a business or industrial district.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.216 FLOOR AREA REQUIREMENTS FOR DWELLING UNITS.
   In order to provide healthful living conditions and to preserve the
character of neighborhoods, dwellings shall be erected, altered, moved,
maintained or occupied only in accordance with the following standards
establishing minimum areas of dwelling units.
   (A)   Area of a dwelling unit shall be the sum of the gross floor area above
the basement level, and not more than three feet below finished grade; rooms
above the first floor may be included which are directly connected by a
permanent stairs and hall, and spaces under pitched roofs having a minimum knee
wall height of four feet is one-half of the room area and has a minimum ceiling
height of seven feet.
   (B)   The area for frame buildings shall be measured from the exterior face
of the enclosed walls at the respective floor line. For brick veneer buildings
no more than four inches of exterior wall thickness may be included in the area
calculation. For two-family and multi-family dwellings, where applicable,
measurements will be made to the centerline of party walls. All areas within
garages, porches, public halls and general storage rooms in multi-family
dwellings shall be excluded in this measurement.
   (C)   Minimum floor area for One-Family Dwelling Units (detached and
attached) shall be not less than established in Schedule 150.216(C).
SCHEDULE 150.216(C) FLOOR AREA REQUIREMENTS FOR ONE-FAMILY DETACHED AND
ATTACHED DWELLING UNITS
Dwelling Type 1 Story(a) 1-1/2 Story(a) 2 Story(a)
SCHEDULE 150.216(C) FLOOR AREA REQUIREMENTS FOR ONE-FAMILY DETACHED AND
ATTACHED DWELLING UNITS
Dwelling Type                         1 Story(a) 1-1/2 Story(a) 2 Story(a)
(1) One-family Detached Dwelling
   (a) Ground floor area (sq. ft.) 1,000      780            600
   (b) Total floor area (sq. ft.)  1,000      1,200          1,200
(2) One-family Attached Dwelling Unit
   (a) Ground floor area (sq. ft.) 750        450
   (b) Total floor area (sq. ft.)  750        900
Notes to Schedule 150.216(C):
(a) The floor area is the minimum square footage required for a dwelling
unit with a basement. An additional 100 square feet shall be required for a
dwelling unit without a basement.
 
   (D)   Minimum floor area for Multi-Family Dwelling Units shall be not less
than established in Schedule 150.216(D):
 
SCHEDULE 150.216(D)
FLOOR AREA REQUIREMENTS FOR MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING UNITS
Dwelling Unit Type         Minimum Floor Area Per Multi-family Dwelling Unit
(1) Unit with no bedroom   500 square feet
(2) 1 bedroom unit         600 square feet
(3) 2 bedroom uni          750 square feet
(4) 3 or more bedroom unit 850 square feet plus 100 sq. ft. for each bedroom
                           over 3
 
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.217 PERMANENTLY SITED MANUFACTURED HOME STANDARDS.
   Permanently sited manufactured homes shall be permitted where they meet the
following provisions:
   (A)   The structure complies with all zoning requirements for a one-family
dwelling.
   (B)   The structure is affixed to a permanent masonry or concrete foundation
and is connected to appropriate facilities.
   (C)   The structure, excluding any addition, has a minimum width of at least
twenty-two feet, a minimum length of at least twenty-two feet, and a total
living area, excluding garages, porches, or attachments, equal to or greater
than the minimum floor area required for any dwelling within a Residential
District.
   (D)   The structure has a minimum 3:12 residential roof pitch, conventional
residential siding, and a six-inch minimum eave overhang, including appropriate
guttering.
   (E)   The structure was manufactured after January 1, 1995.
   (F)   The structure is not located in a manufactured home park as defined by
R.C. §
4781.01, or as amended. Travel trailers, park trailers, and mobile homes, as
defined in R.C. §
4501.01, or as amended, do not qualify as a permanently sited manufactured
home.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.218 GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   An accessory use shall not be established nor an accessory building or
structure constructed in a residential district without a prior existing or
concurrent construction of a principal building, structure or use.
   (B)   Any accessory use permitted in a residential district may occupy a
part of the principal building or occupy a separate accessory building or
constitute an accessory land use.
   (C)   Accessory buildings and structures in an R-E, R-1, R-2, and R-
3 District shall comply with the location requirements in Schedule 150.218(C).
SCHEDULE 150.218(C)
PERMITTED ACCESSORY STRUCTURES IN FRONT, SIDE AND REAR YARDS
IN R-E, R-1, R-2 AND R-3 DISTRICTS
Use Yard Permitted Minimum Setback from Lot Line
                   Front Side Rear
SCHEDULE 150.218(C)
PERMITTED ACCESSORY STRUCTURES IN FRONT, SIDE AND REAR YARDS
IN R-E, R-1, R-2 AND R-3 DISTRICTS
Use                    Yard Permitted      Minimum Setback from Lot Line
                                           Front Side     Rear
(1) Attached accessory
buildings and          (a)                 (a)   (a)      (a)
structures, including
porches
(2) Detached accessory
buildings such as      Rear                NA    5 ft.    5 ft.
garages, carports and
storage sheds
(3) Driveways          Front, corner side, NA    0 ft.(b) 0 ft.(b)
                       side, rear
(4) Patios and         Front, corner side, (c)   (c)      NA
unattached, uncovered  side
decks, not exceeding   Rear                NA    5 ft.    5 ft.
two feet above grade
(5) Fences, walls(d)   Corner side, side,  0 ft. 0 ft.    0 ft.
                       rear
(6) Outdoor storage of
a recreation vehicle,  Rear, Side(e)       See §
or a storage or work                       150.221
trailer
(7) Outdoor swimming   Rear                NA    5 ft. and requirements in §
pool                                             150.222
(8) Noncommercial      Rear, Side          NA    5 ft.
antenna, freestanding
Notes to Schedule 150.218(C):
(a)   Shall comply with the setback requirements for principal buildings set
forth in
Schedule 150.214 except as permitted for projections into setbacks in §
150.213(I).
(b)   A driveway shall be located wholly on the lot to which it is accessory
and shall comply with the construction standards in §
151.608 of the Subdivision & Site Construction Code.
(c)   Shall comply with the requirements for projections into setbacks in §
150.213(I).
(d)   As further regulated by §
150.402.
(e)   The recreational vehicle or trailer may be parked or stored in the side
yard if the side yard is too narrow to allow access to the rear yard provided
that the no portion of the stored recreational vehicle extends in front of the
principal residential building and that the recreational vehicle is parked or
stored a minimum of five feet from the side lot line
NA Not Applicable
 
   (D)   Accessory Buildings and Structures on Corner Lots. On corner lots, an
accessory building or structure shall be set back from the side street line not
less than required for the adjacent principal building on the abutting lot.
   (E)   Maximum Height of Accessory Buildings and Structures.
      (1)   The height of accessory buildings and structures shall not exceed
fifteen feet or the height of the principal building, whichever is lower,
except as otherwise permitted below.
      (2)   Exception to Height Regulations. Noncommercial antennas for
individual, private use, including but not limited to, amateur radio antennas,
shall be permitted as an accessory use in all residential districts provided
the height of the noncommercial antenna shall not exceed 50 feet, whether the
antenna is freestanding or mounted on the roof.
   (F)   Additional Development Standards for Accessory Buildings in the R-E,
R-1, R-2, and R-3 Districts. An accessory building including but not limited to
a detached garage, shed, carport, or pole barn shall comply with the following:
      (1)   No more than one accessory building shall be permitted per
residential address in an R-E, R- 1, R-2 or R-3 District.
      (2)   Maximum Area of an Accessory Building. An accessory building shall
not exceed 20% of the ground floor area of the principal building or 600 square
feet whichever is greater, unless the Planning Commission approves a
conditional use permit for an oversized detached accessory building according
to §
150.218(G).
      (3)   Required Distance from Dwelling. An accessory building shall be
located not less than ten feet from any dwelling on the same lot or an adjacent
residential lot.
   (G)   Oversized Detached Storage/Utility Building, Permitted as a
Conditional Use. An oversized, detached storage/utility building may be
constructed on a lot in the R-E, R-1, and R-2 Districts with a minimum lot size
of 15,000 square feet, when authorized as a conditional use approved by the
Planning Commission in compliance with the following minimum requirements.
      (1)   Permitted Location: An oversized detached storage/utility building
shall only be located in the rear yard and shall comply with the minimum side
and rear setbacks for detached one-family dwellings in the applicable zoning
district.
      (2)   Permitted Size: The area of an oversized, detached storage/utility
building shall not exceed four (4) percent of the lot area.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.219 FAMILY DAY CARE HOME, TYPE B.
   The Code recognizes that the availability of safe, affordable, high quality
child day care is needed by parents and is important to the wellbeing of
children. In accordance with R.C. § 5104.054, any type B family day care home,
whether certified by the county director of human services or not certified, is
considered a residential use of property and is a permitted residential use in
any residential zoning district. The day care shall be conducted solely by the
occupants of the residence where the family day care home is located.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.220 HOME OCCUPATIONS.
   It is the intent of this section to eliminate as home occupations all uses
except those that conform to the standards set forth in this section. The
standards for home occupations in this section are intended to ensure
compatibility with other permitted uses and with the residential character of
the neighborhood, plus a clearly accessory status in relation to the
residential use of the principal building as the criteria for determining
whether a proposed accessory use qualifies as a home occupation. Home
occupations are permitted accessory uses in residential zones only so long as
all the following conditions are observed. In the event the operation of a home
occupation violates any requirement in this Code, the home occupation may be
terminated by the Zoning Administrator.
   (A)   Such occupations shall be conducted solely by resident occupants in
their residence.
   (B)   No more than one room or 25% of the gross area of one floor of said
residence, whichever is less, shall be used for such purpose. Use of accessory
buildings for these purposes is prohibited.
   (C)   No use shall require internal or external alterations or involve
construction features or the use of electrical or mechanical equipment that
would change the fire rating of the structure or the fire district in which the
structure is located.
   (D)   No home occupation will cause an increase in the use of any one or
more utilities (water, sewer, electricity, telephone, garbage and the like) so
that the combined total use for dwelling and home occupation purposes exceeds
the average for residences in the neighborhood.
   (E)   There shall be no outside storage of any kind.
   (F)   The use may increase vehicular traffic flow and parking by no more
than one additional vehicle at a time.
   (G)   No use shall create noise, dust, vibration, smoke, glare, electrical
interference, fire hazard or any other hazard or nuisance to any greater or
more frequent extent than that usually experienced in an average residential
occupancy in the district in question under normal circumstances wherein no
home occupation exists.
   (H)   Only one sign shall be allowed. Such sign shall not exceed one square
foot in area, shall be non- illuminated, and attached flat to the principal
structure or visible through a window. The limitation of one sign is intended
to apply to all lots, including corner lots.
   (I)   No home-based business/occupation shall require the daily services of
a commercial freight carrier which produces traffic in greater frequency or of
a different nature than normally found in the surrounding residential area.
Delivery services normally and customarily associated with a residential use
are permitted.
   (J)   No retail or wholesale transactions shall be made on the premises.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.221 OUTDOOR PARKING AND STORAGE OF TRUCKS AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.
   In R-E, R-1, R-2 and R-3 Districts, the outside parking and storage of
trucks and recreational vehicles shall be permitted as an accessory use subject
to the following conditions and limitations:
   (A)   In one-family residential districts, one truck that is used solely by
the occupant and does not exceed one ton in rated capacity may be stored on the
residential lot.
   (B)   Prior to parking and storing a recreational vehicles on a lot in an R-
E, R-1, R-2, or R-3 District, an application for a Zoning Certificate for such
an accessory use shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator. Unless otherwise
provided in this Code, a one-time fee, as established by the Village’s Fee
Schedule/Ordinance, which can be obtained from the Zoning Administrator, shall
be charged for such Zoning Certificate. Any change in the recreational vehicle
involved shall terminate the Certificate, and a new application must thereafter
be filed and processed.
   (C)   Only one recreational vehicle such as a motorhome, or one or more off-
road vehicle(s) stored on one trailer used to transport such vehicles, or one
storage or work trailer shall be parked or stored on a lot, accessory to a
permitted principal use.
   (D)   Such vehicle(s) shall be owned or leased by an occupant of the
premises, except for the temporary parking of a recreational vehicle owned by a
guest of the occupant.
   (E)   In addition to the locational requirements set forth in
Schedule 150.218(C), recreational vehicles, storage trailers and work trailers
shall be parked or stored in compliance with the following:
      (1)   On an impervious surface, such as asphalt or concrete, or suitable
pervious surface.
      (2)   
Schedule 150.218(C) notwithstanding, the temporary outside parking of a
recreational vehicle shall be permitted in the front yard and side yard for a
period not to exceed a total of seventy-two (72) hours in a consecutive twenty-
one (21) day period.
      (3)   Proper care shall be taken to prevent gasoline, motor oils, or
other hazardous fluids from leaking onto the ground or draining into a storm
drain or water course.
      (4)   Under no circumstances shall any recreational vehicle have
connections to electricity, water, gas or sanitary sewer facilities, nor shall
such equipment be used at any time for living, storage, or housekeeping
purposes.
   (F)   Every truck, trailer and recreational vehicle parked or stored shall
be kept in good repair, operational and shall display current license/
registration with the Ohio Bureau of Motor Vehicles.
   (G)   No truck, trailer or recreational vehicle shall be parked or stored on
a vacant lot.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.222 PRIVATE SWIMMING POOLS.
   A private swimming pool, including farm ponds, shall be any pool, lake or
open tank not located within a completely enclosed building and containing or
normally capable of containing water to a depth at any point greater than one
and one-half feet. No such swimming pool, exclusive of portable swimming pools
with a diameter less than 12 feet or with an area of less than 100 square feet,
shall be allowed an “R” District except as an accessory use and unless it
complies with the following conditions and requirements:
   (A)   The pool is intended and is to be used solely for the enjoyment of the
occupants of the principal use of the property on which it is located.
   (B)   Private swimming pools, including any walks or paved areas or
accessory structures adjacent thereto, shall not be closer than five feet to
any property line of the property on which located.
   (C)   Below-ground swimming pools located within the corporate limits of the
village shall be surrounded by a fence, not less than four feet in height and
all openings, doorways and entrances into said pool area shall be equipped with
gates of equal height with said fence, which gates shall be provided with
latches, all in good condition. Above-ground pools shall have a locking ladder,
side walls or a fence, or a combination of, at least four feet in height and
openings and entrances shall conform to below ground pool requirements.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.223 LANDSCAPING, SCREENING, FENCING, AND LIGHTING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Fences shall comply with the regulations set forth in  §
150.402.
   (B)   Screening and landscaping shall be provided for all nonresidential
development in any residential district and residential development in the R-
4 and R-5 Districts in accordance with the provisions set forth in
Article 150.39, Landscaping, Screening, Fencing, and Lighting Regulations.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.224 REQUIREMENTS FOR OWNERS ASSOCIATIONS.
   Whenever a residential subdivision includes any type of common area,
facility or feature dedicated to common use, such as but not limited to
stormwater management areas, common open space and signage, a homeowner’s
association, community association, or similar legal entity shall be created to
be responsible for the maintenance and control of all common areas, facilities
and features. The Village Solicitor shall determine that the association’s or
entity’s bylaws or code of regulations incorporate the following requirements:
   (A)   Membership in the association shall be mandatory for each owner of a
lot in the development or unit in a condominium.
   (B)   The association shall be responsible for maintenance, control, and
insurance of all common areas, facilities and features.
      (1)   The association shall guarantee maintenance of all common areas,
facilities and features within the boundaries of the development.
      (2)   In the event of a failure to maintain such common areas, facilities
or features, the Village may seek to enforce the association’s non-performance
of its obligations and duties through an injunction or any other civil remedy.
   (C)   The association shall have the power to impose assessments on members
to pay for the maintenance, control and insurance of open space and common
areas, and the power to record liens against individual properties for failure
to pay assessments as permitted by the Ohio Revised Code.
   (D)   The conditions and timing of transfer of control from the developer to
the association shall be specified.
   (E)   The association shall not authorize its dissolution or the sale,
transfer or other disposal of any common area, including restricted open space,
without:
      (1)   An affirmative vote of 75% of its members;
      (2)   Creating a successor entity under Ohio law to accept the property
pursuant to the Village’s Zoning Code; and
      (3)   The approval of Village Council.
   (F)   The association shall convey to the Village of Swanton and other
appropriate governmental bodies, after proper notice, the right to enter common
areas for emergency purposes or in the event of nonperformance of maintenance
or improvements affecting the public health, safety and welfare. Such
governments shall have the right, after proper notice, to make improvements and
perform maintenance functions. In addition, the Village shall have the right to
proceed against the association for reimbursement of costs, including the right
to file liens against individual condominium units, houses, and vacant building
lots.
   (G)   A certified copy of all covenants and restrictions that may be
applicable and amendments thereto recorded with the Fulton County or Lucas
County Recorder’s Office (whichever is applicable) shall be submitted to the
Zoning Administrator within ten (10) days of recording.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.225 DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW.
   All uses in the R-4 and R-5 Districts shall be permitted only after a
development plan has been reviewed and approved according to the procedures set
forth in
Article 150.65 Development Plan Review Procedures.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
ARTICLE 150.23
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT REGULATIONS
   
150.231   Purpose.
   
150.232   Designation of PRD Overlay District.
   
150.233   Scope of regulation.
   
150.234   Minimum District Area.
   
150.235   Use Regulations.
   
150.236   Maximum Density.
   
150.237   Restricted Open Space Requirements.
   
150.238   Development and site planning standards.
   
150.239   Design Criteria.
   
150.240   Project Submittal Procedures.
   
150.241   Waiver.
   
150.242    Phased development.
§ 150.231 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the Planned Residential Development Overlay District (PRDO)
and associated regulations is to encourage and accommodate unique, well-
designed, unified residential developments through flexible site planning
concepts that are consistent with the Village’s planning policies and which
would not otherwise be achievable in a standard residential district pursuant
to this Zoning Code. More specifically, these PRDO regulations are intended to:
   (A)   Encourage site design practices that provide for efficient layout of
infrastructure and preserve open space and natural features, while maintaining
density control compatible with the base zoning district.
   (B)   Foster a variety of housing types and styles for village residents.
   (C)   Encourage development that minimizes roadway lengths to reduce
maintenance and snow plowing; clusters uses to minimize the length of water,
sewer and other utility lines; minimizes impervious surfaces and maximizes
natural stormwater detention and percolation.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.232 DESIGNATION OF PRD OVERLAY DISTRICT.
   An overlay district is a mapped zone that establishes a development option
with a set of design requirements that are in addition to those of the base
zoning district, so that any parcel of land lying in a PRD Overlay District
shall also lie in one or more base district. The PRD Overlay District gives
property owners the ability of developing according to the PRDO regulations in
a manner that is compatible with the underlying and/or surrounding base
districts.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.233 SCOPE OF REGULATION.
   The provisions in this
Article 150.23 set forth the list of permitted uses and flexible site planning
requirements that govern the design and layout of a Planned Residential
Development and the terms and conditions governing the development review and
approval process.
   (A)   Relationship to Base District.
      (1)   In the PRD Overlay District, the use and dimensional specifications
of the base zoning district are herein replaced by an approval process in which
an approved plan becomes the basis for continuing land use controls.
      (2)   The base zoning district shall be used as a guide for development,
with any adjustment relative to use, density and building layout reviewed and
approved through the PRDO review process set forth in §
150.240.
      (3)   In the event a proposed PRD is located in more than one base zoning
district, the regulations of base zoning district with the highest density
shall be used as the guide for the entire project.
   (B)   The standards contained in this Article prevail whenever there is a
conflict or difference between the provisions of this Article and those of
other Articles and Sections in this Zoning Code.
   (C)   If a provision found elsewhere in this Zoning Code has not been
explicitly modified by this Article, the standard shall govern unless such
standard is waived by the Planning Commission and/or Council, as applicable
pursuant to §
150.241.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.234 MINIMUM DISTRICT AREA.
   (A)   A site of ten (10) contiguous acres or more with a minimum of 200 feet
of frontage shall be required for application of the PRD Overlay District,
unless specifically permitted otherwise.
   (B)   The Planning Commission and Village Council may approve a rezoning to
the PRD Overlay District for an area less than ten (10) acres when it finds
that:
      (1)   Ownership of adjacent land cannot be readily consolidated to reach
the ten (10) acre minimum, or restrictions on the abutting property prevent the
developer from reasonably acquiring the additional land necessary to satisfy
the minimum area required;
      (2)   The smaller land area has unique features that cannot be preserved
if the parcel is developed applying the standard requirements for a major
residential development;
      (3)   The proposed project will not have any unreasonable or adverse
impacts on adjacent areas; and
      (4)   The proposed project will yield a sufficient number of residents to
adequately fund and maintain all common areas, including private infrastructure
in the PRD.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.235 USE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Use Schedule Summary. 
Schedule 150.235(C) sets forth the uses allowed in a PRD Overlay District. The
abbreviations used in the Schedule indicate the following:
      (1)   A “P” indicates that the use is allowed as a principal use.
      (2)   An “A” in a cell indicates that the use is a permitted accessory
use, provided it is clearly incidental and subordinate to a permitted principal
use listed in
Schedule 150.235(C).
      (3)   Use-Specific Standard Cross-Reference. An “*” in the “Allowed Use”
column indicates that a Use-Specific Standard cross-referenced in the right-
hand column of the Schedule applies to the use.
   (B)   Additional Uses. Additional uses may be authorized for a PRD as part
of the rezoning and preliminary plan approval, provided the Planning Commission
and Village Council find that:
      (1)   The additional uses are necessary or desirable and are appropriate
with respect to the purpose and character of the PRD.
      (2)   The additional uses will not create a detrimental influence on the
neighborhoods surrounding the PRD, or upon the internal character of any part
of the PRD itself.
   (C)   Schedule 150.235(C) Permitted Uses. 
Schedule 150.235(C) sets forth the uses allowed in a PRD Overlay District. The
abbreviations used in the Schedule are defined in §
150.235(A).
SCHEDULE 150.235(C) USES IN PRD OVERLAY DISTRICTS
 Districts Allowed Use Use Specific Standards
SCHEDULE 150.235(C) USES IN PRD OVERLAY DISTRICTS
                                                                        Districts Use
                                                                        Allowed   Specific
                                                                        Use       Standards
(1) Single Family Dwelling – Detached                                 P
(2) Single Family Dwelling - Attached                                   P
(3) Family day care home, Type B (1-6 children)                         P*        §
                                                                                  150.219
                                                                                  §
(4) Group Home, small                                                   P*        150.333
                                                                                  (F)
(5) Accessory Uses
   A. Fences, walls                                                  A*        §
                                                                                  150.402
   B. Private garages                                                A
   C. Other accessory structures approved as part of the preliminary A
plan
   D. Home occupation                                                A*        §
                                                                                  150.220
   E. Community recreation facilities for use of residents of the PRDA
   F. Signs                                                          A*        §
                                                                                  150.356
 
 
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.236 MAXIMUM DENSITY.
   (A)   The maximum gross density in a PRD shall be as set forth in
Schedule 150.236(A) as determined by the base zoning, except as otherwise
permitted in §
150.236(B) and §
150.236(C).
 
SCHEDULE 150.236(A) PRD DENSITY
Base Zoning District Maximum Gross Density
R-E                  2.7
R-1                  4.0
R-2                  4.5
R-3                  6.5
 
   (B)   Notwithstanding §
150.236(A), the Planning Commission and Village Council may approve a
preliminary development plan with a greater maximum gross density at the time a
rezoning application is being considered in compliance with the following.
      (1)   The Planning Commission and Village Council shall find that:
         (a)   The density of the underlying zoning is inappropriate or
unreasonable for the land being considered for a PRD based on, but not limited
to, such factors as: location, adjacent uses, current community objectives, and
natural constraints;
         (b)   The land, at the time of rezoning is not in an R-E, R-1, R-2, or
R-3 District; and
         (c)   The density will have no material adverse impact on the adjacent
properties compared to other reasonable uses that might be contemplated for the
property.
      (2)   In such case, the Planning Commission and Village Council shall
establish the maximum gross density in the ordinance adopting the PRD Overlay
District.
   (C)   Notwithstanding §
150.236(A), the Planning Commission and Village Council may establish a lower
maximum gross density for a proposed development when it finds that the PRD, at
the density permitted in §
150.236(A), will have an adverse effect on the character of the immediate
residential area when considering any one or more of the following:
      (1)   The unusual size and shape of the PRD parcel.
      (2)   The location and extent of sensitive natural areas such as
floodplain, steep slopes, streams, and wetlands.
      (3)   Limited size or shape of buildable area(s) because of
characteristics in subsection (C)(1) and (C)(2) above.
      (4)   The proximity of adjacent buildings and/or structures.
      (5)   The actual lot sizes of the immediate residential area.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.237 RESTRICTED OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Minimum Area. A minimum of twenty-five percent (25%) of the total land
area in the Planned Residential Development (PRD) shall be designated as
restricted open space.
   (B)   Use of Restricted Open Space. Areas designated as restricted open
space shall be provided according to the following:
      (1)   Irreplaceable natural features shall be included in the restricted
open space and conserved to the maximum extent feasible. Examples of
irreplaceable natural features include, but are not limited to, streams,
significant stands of mature trees, significant habitat, unique flora,
wetlands, rock outcroppings and ravines.
      (2)   A minimum area of 260 square feet of open space for every dwelling
unit shall be devoted to active recreation. Useable recreation opportunities
shall include active recreational activities such as playgrounds with play
apparatus, court games areas, walking/jogging trails and the like provided for
the residents of the Planned Residential Development.
      (3)   Stormwater management facilities may be located partially or
entirely within restricted open space areas, not to exceed 5% of the restricted
open space area. Where such facilities are so located, easements satisfactory
to the Planning Commission shall be established to require and enable
maintenance of such facilities by the appropriate parties.
   (C)   Calculating Restricted Open Space. In order to encourage the creation
of large areas of contiguous open space, the following areas do not qualify
when calculating restricted open space:
      (1)   Public street right-of-way or private street easement;
      (2)   Parking areas, access drives, common drives and driveways, except
as permitted by the Planning Commission to provide access to facilities in the
restricted open space;
      (3)   Required setbacks from project boundaries and streets for buildings
and parking areas;
      (4)   Required spacing between buildings and between buildings and
parking areas; and
      (5)   Private yards within a sublot.
   (D)   Design Criteria for Restricted Open Space.
      (1)   The suitability of open space for scenic value and purposes shall
be determined by its visibility from dwelling units and the length of the
streets, sidewalks, or walking trails from which it is visible.
      (2)   The usability of open space intended for recreation or scenic use
shall be determined by the size, shape, topography, and location requirements
of the particular recreational activity.
      (3)   Open space areas within the PRD shall be interconnected.
      (4)   An open space area may vary in width but shall not be less than 50
feet wide at any point.
   (E)   Treatment of Restricted Open Space. Any area within the restricted
open space that is disturbed during or after construction and is not preserved
or restored to its natural state, shall be landscaped with vegetation that is
compatible with the remaining flora and trees in the restricted open space.
   (F)   Ownership of Restricted Open Space. Restricted open space shall be
owned by the PRD’s Homeowners Association or a land trust or other conservation
organization approved by the Village. A Homeowners Association which takes
title to the restricted open space shall comply with §
150.224 Requirements for Homeowners Associations. Further division or
development of the restricted open space shall be prohibited unless the Final
Development Plan (FDP) is amended.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.238 DEVELOPMENT AND SITE PLANNING STANDARDS.
   The developer shall comply with the following development standards in the
design and layout of a PRD.
   (A)   Building Requirements. Single-family attached dwellings shall not have
more than six units attached in a single building
   (B)   Minimum Setbacks. All buildings, structures and parking areas shall
comply with the minimum setbacks in
Schedule 150.238(D).
   (C)   Minimum Spacing between Buildings. To promote privacy and separation,
individual buildings including terraces, decks and patios, shall be separated
by the minimum distance in
Schedule 150.238(D). The Council may approve a waiver reducing the distance of
building separation when adequate landscaping and screening are provided to
create privacy between dwelling units. The following definitions shall apply to
terms used in this Section.
      (1)   Front Wall. The outside wall of a building that contains the
primary entrance to the dwelling unit and the principal windows of the living,
family, or dining room.
      (2)   Rear Wall. The outside wall of a building that contains the
principal windows of any living, family or dining room but not the primary
entrance to the dwelling unit.
      (3)   Side Wall. An outside wall that does not contain the primary
entrance or principal windows to a living, family or dining room; the wall may
contain other windows or have no openings.
   (D)   Schedule 150.238(D).
SCHEDULE 150.238(D)
MINIMUM SETBACK AND SPACING REQUIREMENTS
 PRD
SCHEDULE 150.238(D)
MINIMUM SETBACK AND SPACING REQUIREMENTS
                                                                  PRD
(1) Setback from public right-of-way of an Existing Public Street 50 ft.
(2) Setback from PRD boundary, other than a public street         50 ft.
(3) Setback from interior street:
   (a) Public right-of-way                                     25 ft.
   (b) Private street - pavement or sidewalk line              30 ft.
(4) Spacing between buildings:
   (a) Between 2 front walls                                   50 ft.
   (b) Between 2 side walls                                    10 ft.
   (c) Between a side wall and a front or rear wall            25 ft.
   (d) Between 2 rear walls                                    40 ft.
 
   (E)   Lot Requirements.
      (1)   There is no minimum lot size or minimum lot width for individual
lots or sublots. However, when lots for standard detached one-family dwellings
or landominium sublots for one-family cluster dwellings or one-family attached
dwellings are included as part of a PRD, such lots or sublots shall be of
sufficient size and shape to accommodate dwelling units in compliance with the
spacing requirements of this section.
      (2)   Each dwelling shall have a dedicated access easement with a minimum
width of twelve (12) feet to a public right-of-way or private street.
      (3)   Land not owned by an individual dwelling unit owner shall be
designated as common area and owned and controlled by the owner’s association.
      (4)   All fee simple lots, common areas, building site boundaries and
building footprints that indicate where the dwelling unit and accessory
structures such as decks and patios will be located, shall be shown on the
development plan. The setbacks for each building location shall be shown to
establish compliance with the spacing requirements of this Section.
   (F)   Dwelling Unit Requirements. Each dwelling unit shall comply with the
minimum floor area for dwelling units in §
150.216 (Floor Area Requirements for Dwelling Units).
   (G)   Accessory Uses. The parameters for accessory buildings, structures and
uses – such as, but not limited to garages, sheds, patios, decks, fences,
pools, etc. - whether in common open space or on individual lots, shall be set
forth in the PDP submitted at the time of rezoning. If the PDP or FDP fails to
address these matters, then on fee simple lots the requirements of §
150.218 (General Provisions for Accessory Uses and Structures) shall apply.
   (H)   Parking Requirements.
      (1)   Parking spaces for each dwelling unit shall be provided in
compliance with
Schedule 150.376.
      (2)   Additional parking shall be provided at all community facilities
including cluster mailbox units, and community recreation facilities.
   (I)   Protection, Maintenance and Operation of Common Areas. Adequate
provision shall be made for the long-term protection, maintenance and/or
operation of all common areas within the PRD in compliance with §
150.224 (Requirements for Owners Associations).
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.239 DESIGN CRITERIA.
   (A)   The Planned Residential Development shall be planned, designed and
constructed in accordance with all applicable requirements in the Land Usage
Code, except as otherwise approved by the Planning Commission and Village
Council as authorized in §
150.663.
   (B)   The topography, natural features, views, traffic access and the
arrangement of the restricted open space shall be integrated in the arrangement
of land uses and buildings on the site.
   (C)   Individual lots, buildings, dwelling units, and parking areas shall be
arranged and situated to avoid the adverse effects of noise, and traffic upon
the residents of the property.
   (D)   Individual lots, buildings, dwelling units and parking areas shall be
arranged and situated to promote favorable views from buildings and reduce the
visibility of areas of motor vehicle access, ingress and egress.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.240 PROJECT SUBMITTAL PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Establishment of a Planned Residential Development Overlay District
requires a change of zoning classification of the property pursuant to
Article 150.73, Amendments. The boundaries of the Planned Residential
Development Overlay District shall be shown on the Zoning District Map with the
symbol “PRDO” followed by the PRD ordinance number (i.e. PRD-XXXX).
   (B)   A Preliminary Development Plan (PDP) and supporting documentation
shall be submitted, reviewed, revised if necessary, and approved concurrently
with the rezoning application. The PDP shall be submitted consistent with the
requirements of
Article 150.65 and reviewed by the Planning Commission and Village Council as
prescribed in §
150.657.
   (C)   Following approval of the rezoning to apply the PRD Overlay District
and associated preliminary development plan, the applicant shall proceed in
accordance with §
150.658 to complete the development plan review process.
   (D)   Conditions of Approval. The Planning Commission and Council may impose
terms and conditions of approval and grant waiver(s) in accordance with §
150.241, which shall be included in the ordinance adopting the rezoning of the
land to the PRD Overlay District, as may be determined necessary to maintain
harmony with neighboring uses and to promote the objectives and purposes of the
comprehensive plan and the intent of these zoning regulations.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.241 WAIVER.
   (A)   Council may approve a waiver to a requirement set forth in this
Article or other section of the Zoning Code or Subdivision Regulations when the
applicant proposes an alternative that achieves the objectives of the PRDO; and
the waiver result is equivalent to or greater than compliance with the minimum
regulation or standard.
   (B)   The terms and conditions of approval of a PRD shall be stated in the
ordinance approving the PRD Overlay District rezoning, which shall serve as a
supplement to these regulations.
   (C)   After adoption of the ordinance approving the PRDO rezoning by
Council, the Planning Commission may grant minor waivers with terms and
conditions of approval that meet all of the following criteria for minor
waivers:
      (1)   The application for waiver does not require a change in the
permitted uses, an increase in the number of dwelling units, or increase in the
approved size of nonresidential buildings approved by ordinance.
      (2)   Application for waiver, if granted, will not be contrary to other
provisions of the PRDO regulations.
      (3)   If the application for a minor waiver does not meet the criteria
set forth herein, the application shall be considered by Council. The applicant
may appeal the Planning Commission’s decision regarding waiver to Council, in
accordance with the requirements of
Article 150.69, Appeals and Variances.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.242 PHASED DEVELOPMENT.
   Each phase of the PRD to be developed shall provide adequate access,
parking, storm water management, and other public improvements to serve the PRD
phase in compliance with the criteria in this Article. Each phase shall include
temporary or permanent transitional features, buffers, or protective areas
while a phase is under construction in order to reduce the adverse impact of
construction on completed phases, future phases and adjoining property.
Restricted open space area shall be provided in each phase of the project
generally in proportion to the open space required for the total development.
Construction of recreation facilities shall be clearly identified on the plan
for each phase.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
ARTICLE 150.25
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK DISTRICT REGULATIONS
   
150.251   Intent.
   
150.252   Permitted uses.
   
150.253   General standards for manufactured home parks.
   
150.254    Compliance with Ohio’s manufactured home park requirements.
§ 150.251 INTENT.
   The provisions of this chapter provide for the regulation of existing
manufactured home parks in order to ensure their continual maintenance as an
integral and stable part of the community.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.252 PERMITTED USES.
   Structures or land within a Manufactured Home Park District shall be used,
and structures shall hereafter be erected, altered, enlarged, repaired or
rebuilt, moved, or designed to be used, stored or installed upon property
within such Districts only in accordance with the rules and regulations
contained in this chapter. Permitted uses shall be as follows:
   (A)   Manufactured homes, mobile homes and house trailers;
   (B)   Sanitary and laundry facilities and other service buildings, not
constituting commercial enterprises;
   (C)   Management and sales offices, provided that such offices only pertain
to the management of the manufactured home park and such sales offices are
confined only to the sales of manufactured homes within the associated
manufactured home park and no other products or vehicles;
   (D)   Accessory buildings or structures, for park management or park
resident use only and not exceeding two stories or 25 feet in height;
   (E)   Signs visible from the public right-of-way shall comply with
Article 150.35.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.253 GENERAL STANDARDS FOR MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS.
   Each manufactured home park development shall comply with the following
development standards:
   (A)   Park size. Minimum site size for manufactured home parks shall be ten
acres.
   (B)   Setbacks. All manufactured homes shall be set back not less than 25
feet from all property lines. Accessory buildings shall be set back not less
than five feet from all property lines. One accessory building is permitted per
lot.
   (C)   The park shall be served adequately by essential services, provided
either publicly or privately, such as highways, streets, drainage, refuse
disposal, schools, police and fire protection.
   (D)   All manufactured home parks shall have access to a paved major
thoroughfare. The vehicular approaches to the park property shall be so
designed as not to create traffic interference or congestion on surrounding
public streets or roads.
   (E)   Perimeter fences shall comply with §
150.402.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.254 COMPLIANCE WITH OHIO’S MANUFACTURED HOME PARK REQUIREMENTS.
   All manufactured home parks shall comply with the requirements of O.A.C.
Chapter 4781 and R.C. Chapter 4781.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
ARTICLE 150.27
BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS
   
150.271   Intent.
   
150.272   Use Regulations.
   
150.273   General Provisions For Development Standards.
   
150.274   Development Standards.
   
150.275   Required Design Standards.
   
150.276   Off-Street Parking, Loading and Service Area Regulations.
   
150.277   Performance Standards.
   
150.278   Accessory Buildings.
   
150.279   Landscaping, Screening, Fencing, and Lighting Regulations.
   
150.280   Signs Permitted.
   
150.281    Development Plan Review.
   
150.282   Heavy Industrial District Use Regulations (M-2).
§ 150.271 INTENT.
   Business and Industrial districts and their regulations are established
herein in order to achieve, among others, the following purposes:
   (A)   To provide in appropriate and convenient locations, zoning districts
of sufficient size for the exchange of goods and services and other business
and industrial activities.
   (B)   To provide a Neighborhood Business District (B-1) to serve the needs
for convenience goods in proximity to the immediate neighborhood which do not
attract large volumes of traffic. The character of these districts is intended
to be compatible with that of surrounding residential neighborhoods. Buildings
in these districts are typically smaller in scale than those found in the
general business district.
   (C)   To provide a Downtown Business District (B-2) to:
      (1)   Reflect and reinforce the existing and desired pedestrian-scaled
development pattern while accommodating the need for future growth;
      (2)   Preserve, maintain, enrich, and promote downtown Swanton as a core
area for retail sales and mixed uses, which enhance the existing historic,
compact pedestrian orientation of the downtown by permitting buildings to be
close to the street and to one another.
   (D)   To provide a General Business District (B-3) to accommodate businesses
that require large land areas and generate large volumes of traffic serving the
needs for shopping, convenience goods and services of the entire community.
   (E)   To provide for a Light Industrial District (M-1) and associated
regulations in order to achieve, among other things, the following:
      (1)   To provide in appropriate and convenient districts sufficient areas
for carrying on research, providing commercial services, manufacturing and
distributing goods to serve the community, to promote employment and to
strengthen the economy of the community;
      (2)   To provide for business, contracting, storage, distribution and
transportation services, and related types of minor production processes in
appropriate and convenient areas;
      (3)   To provide for limited heaver industrial uses in appropriate
locations for those products and processes that normally require a large amount
of motor vehicle trucking for the transportation of the raw materials and
finished products, but in which dust, smoke, fumes, glare, odors or other
objectionable influences can be controlled;
      (4)   To improve the general environment by prohibiting dwellings,
institutions and public facilities in industrial districts, and by so doing,
make land more readily accessible for industry;
      (5)   To protect adjacent residential districts by restricting the types
of manufacturing uses in the surrounding areas to only those not creating
objectionable influences beyond industrial district boundaries and by
separating and insulating them from the most intense manufacturing activities;
and
      (6)   To protect manufacturing and related development against congestion
and promote the appropriate regulation of the size of buildings in relation to
the land and provide off-street parking and loading facilities.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.272 USE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Use Schedule Summary. 
Schedule 150.272(D) sets forth the uses allowed in Business and Industrial
Districts. The abbreviations used in the Schedule indicate the following:
      (1)   Uses Permitted By Right. A “P” in a cell indicates that the use is
allowed by-right as a principal use in the respective district.
      (2)   Conditional Uses. A “C” in a cell indicates that the use is
regulated as a conditional use. The use is permitted in the respective district
only after an applicant receives Conditional Use approval pursuant to
Article 150.67.
      (3)   Accessory Uses. An “A” in a cell indicates that the use is a
permitted accessory use, provided it is clearly incidental and subordinate to a
permitted principal or conditional use listed in
Schedule 150.272(D).
      (4)   Conditional Accessory Uses. A “CA” in a cell indicates that the use
is permitted only as an accessory use and only after an applicant receives
Conditional Use approval pursuant to
Article 150.67.
      (5)   Uses Not Permitted. The letters “NP” in a District column indicate
that the use is not allowed in that zoning district.
      (6)   Use-Specific Standard Cross-Reference. An “*” in a cell indicates
that a Use-Specific Standard cross-referenced in the right-hand column of the
Schedule applies to the use in that zoning district.
   (B)   Compliance with Standards. Although a use may be indicated as a
permitted use in a particular district, it shall not be approved on a lot
unless it can be located thereon in full compliance with all of the standards
and other regulations of this Code applicable to the specific use and lot in
question, including but not limited to any supplemental use-specific standards
cross-referenced in
Schedule 150.272(D).
   (C)   Organization of Use Table. In the Use Table, land uses are classified
into general use categories and specific uses based on common physical or
functional characteristics, such as type of dwelling unit, amount of activity
generated by the use, and site conditions. Whenever a standard or reference is
made to a general use category throughout this code, it shall include the
specific uses in that category.
   (D)   Schedule 150.272(D) Permitted Uses. 
Schedule 150.272(D) sets forth the uses allowed in the Business and Industrial
Districts.
   SCHEDULE 150.272(D) PERMITTED USES IN BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
As defined in 150.272(A): P = permitted use; C = conditional use; A =
accessory use; CA = conditional accessory use; NP = not permitted *= subject
to use-specific standards as cross-referenced
 Neighborhood Business Downtown Gen. Comm. B-3 Light Industrial *Use- Specific
 B-1                   B-2                     M-1              Standards
   SCHEDULE 150.272(D) PERMITTED USES IN BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
As defined in 150.272(A): P = permitted use; C = conditional use; A =
accessory use; CA = conditional accessory use; NP = not permitted *= subject
to use-specific standards as cross-referenced
                Neighborhood Downtown                Light      *Use- Specific
                Business     B-2      Gen. Comm. B-3 Industrial Standards
                B-1                                  M-1
Residential
Dwelling,
multi-family    NP           C*       C*             NP         §
(freestanding                                                   150.333(D)
building)
Dwelling units
on upper floor                                                  §
(s) of multi-   NP           P*       C*             NP         150.333(D)
story mixed-use
building
Congregate care                                                 §
facility/       NP           NP       C*             NP         150.333(C)
nursing home
Civic Uses
Day care                                                        §
center, adult   C*           C*       P*             NP         150.334(D)
or child
Civic Uses
Country club
(public,
private/semi-   NP           NP       C*             NP         §
private),                                                       150.334(C)
including golf
course
Government      P            P        P              P          --
office building
Government
service         NP           NP       P              P          --
facilities
Meeting hall,
and similar     C*           P*       P*             NP         §
social,                                                         150.334(F)
fraternal clubs
Museum, gallery
and similar     C*           C*       P*             NP         §
cultural                                                        150.334(G)
facilities
Place of        C*           C*       P*             NP         §
worship                                                         150.334(E)
Public library  C*           C*       P*             NP         §
                                                                150.334(E)
Public park     P            P        P              NP         --
Office, Business and Professional Services
Financial       NP           P        P              P          --
institution
Funeral home,   NP           NP       P              NP         --
mortuary
Medical clinic/ C*           NP       P              NP         §
urgent care                                                     150.335(H)
Office:
administrative,
business,       P            P        P              P          --
executive,
professional
Radio or
television      NP           P        P              P          --
station
Research and                                                    §
testing         C*           NP       P              P          150.335(O)
laboratories
Sales office
with only       NP           P        P              NP         --
samples of
products
Vocational,
Trade or        NP           NP       P              P          --
Technical
School
Retail/Entertainment/Personal Services
Animal                                                          §
boarding,       NP           NP       NP             P*         150.335(A)
Kennel
Animal                                                          §
grooming/animal C*           C*       P*             NP         150.335(A)
day care
Retail/Entertainment/Personal Services
Animal
hospital,       NP           NP       C*             P*         §
veterinarian                                                    150.335(A)
office
Artisan studio/ C*           P*       P*             NP         §
workshop                                                        150.335(B)
Auction                                                         §
warehouse,      NP           NP       NP             C*         150.335(C)
showroom
Brewpub         NP           C*       C*             NP         §
                                                                150.335(D)
Business
equipment and   NP           NP       P              P          --
supplies
Hotel/motel     NP           C*       P*             NP         §
                                                                150.335(F)
Indoor
amusement/      NP           NP       P              NP         --
recreation
services
Indoor
Entertainment:
dancing and
live            NP           C*       C*             NP         §
entertainment,                                                  150.335(G)
in association
with a
permitted use
Micro-Brewery,
Micro-          NP           C*       C*             NP         §
Distillery,                                                     150.335(D)
Micro-Winery
Personal
services in
completely      P            P        P              NP         --
enclosed
building
Restaurant      NP           P        P              NP         --
Retail sales in
completely      NP           P        P              NP         --
enclosed
building
Retail, large-  NP           NP       P*             C*         §
format                                                          150.335(P)
Outdoor Facilities
Outdoor                                                         §
commercial      NP           NP       C*             NP         150.335(I)
recreation
Outdoor dining  NP           C*       C*             NP         §
                                                                150.335(J)
Outdoor
overnight       NP           NP       C*             P*         §
storage of                                                      150.335(K)
fleet vehicles
Outdoor sales/
display, in                                                     §
association     NP           P*       P*             NP         150.335(L)
with a
permitted use
Outdoor
storage, in                                                     §
association     NP           NP       C*             P*         150.335(M)
with a
permitted use
Vehicles and    NP
Equipment
Drive-in/drive- NP           NP       C*             NP         §
thru facilities                                                 150.335(E)
Sales and
service of
construction
equipment,
buses, farm     NP           NP       NP             P          --
machinery,
recreational
vehicles and
other large
equipment
Vehicle and
equipment major NP           NP       P              P          --
repair services
Vehicle fuel    NP           C*       P*             NP         §
station                                                         150.335(Q)
Vehicle sales   NP           NP       P              NP         --
and rental
Vehicle service NP           C*       P*             P          §
station, minor                                                  150.335(Q)
Vehicle wash    NP           NP       P*             NP         §
                                                                150.335(Q)
Storage, Warehousing, Distribution
Storage,
Warehousing,    NP           NP       NP             P          --
Distribution
Self-storage                                                    §
units/Mini      NP           NP       NP             C*         150.336(C)
Storage
Transportation
services -
storage and
maintenance of  NP           NP       NP             P          --
trucks; loading
and unloading
equipment or
supplies
Warehouses,
similar storage
establishments, NP           NP       NP             P          --
parcel delivery
stations
Wholesale
offices and
showrooms,      NP           NP       NP             P          --
storage limited
to samples
Production/Manufacturing
Brewery, Winery
or Distillery   NP           NP       NP             P          --
Production
Facility
Cleaning
Establishments,
such as
laundries,
dyeing, dry     NP           NP       NP             P          --
cleaning,
carpet
cleaning, towel
supply & auto
wash
Commercial      NP           NP       NP             P          --
Greenhouses
Production/Manufacturing
Fabrication and
assembly
operations,
including metal NP           NP       NP             P          --
and non-metal
production and
fabrication
Food & Drink    NP           NP       NP             P          --
Preparation
Light
manufacturing   NP           NP       NP             P          --
uses
Machine shop    NP           NP       NP             P          --
Printing and    NP           NP       P              P          --
publishing
Shops/Offices
of Contractors;
packing and     NP           NP       NP             P          --
crating and
monument works
Storage of
materials and
product within
buildings and
processing
operations      NP           NP       NP             A          --
which are
clearly
incidental to
the permitted
principal use
Utilities, Communication, Other
Adult oriented  NP           NP       P              NP         §
business                                                        150.336(A)
Electric
vehicle         A*           A*       A*             A*         §
charging                                                        150.336(C)
station
Essential       P*           P*       P*             P*         §
services                                                        150.336(D)
Solar collector                                                 §
system, ground- CA*          CA*      CA*            CA*        150.336(F)
mounted
Solar collector                                                 §
system, roof-   A*           A*       A*             A*         150.336(F)
mounted
Telephone
exchanges and   NP           NP       P              P          --
transformer
stations
Transmitting    NP           NP       P              P          --
towers
Utility         NP           P*       P*             P*         §
substation                                                      150.336(G)
Small wind      C*           C*       C*             C*         §
energy system                                                   150.336(H)
Similar Uses    P            P        P              P          §
                                                                150.635
 
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.273 GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Setbacks for Dwellings. The setback requirements established for the
adjacent residential districts shall apply to the buildings, or the parts
thereof, used for dwelling purposes. However, dwellings which are nonconforming
in regards to the applicable development standards on the effective date of
this zoning code may be continued to be used in accordance with the
nonconforming provisions in
Article 150.41.
   (B)   Minimum Lot Area. The area of zoning lot shall not be less than the
area set forth in
Schedule 150.274(B) or as modified in subsequent sections.
   (C)   Lot Width. The width of a zoning lot shall be not less than the width
set forth in
Schedule 150.274(B) or as modified in subsequent sections.
   (D)   Supplementary Setback Regulations. Setbacks may be used for off-street
parking, loading, traffic circulation, illumination, landscaping and signs as
regulated in other sections of this zoning code.
   (E)   Side Setbacks. Whenever a business building is located adjacent to
another business building having one or more party walls, there shall be no
side setback required. Absent a party wall, buildings shall be separated by not
less than six feet from the nearest business building, with no minimum side
setback required unless the site abuts a residential district pursuant to
Schedule 150.274(B).
   (F)   Maximum Coverage. The maximum coverage of the development site,
including all areas covered by buildings, vehicular drives, and parking areas
shall not exceed the percentage of the total area of the development project
set forth in
Schedule 150.274(B).
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.274 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)    In the business and industrial districts, land shall be divided and
developed, and buildings shall be located, designed, erected, altered, moved or
maintained in whole or in part only in accordance with §
150.274(B).
   (B)   Section
150.274(B) - Development Standards for the Business and Industrial Districts.
Every permitted use of land and all principal buildings and off-street parking
areas shall be located on a lot in a manner that maintains the required front,
side, and rear setbacks set forth in
Schedule 150.274(B) for the district in which the lot is located, measured from
the appropriate lot line, except as otherwise regulated in this Code and in
Article 150.33 for Use-Specific Regulations. The area within each setback shall
remain unobstructed by structures except as otherwise permitted in this Code.
SCHEDULE 150.274(B)
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR THE BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
 B-1          B-2      B-3          M-1
 Neighborhood Downtown General      Light Industrial
 Business              Business(b )
SCHEDULE 150.274(B)
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR THE BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
                            B-1          B-2          B-3          M-1
                            Neighborhood Downtown     General      Light
                            Business                  Business(b ) Industrial
(1) Minimum lot area        None         None         None         1 acre
(2) Minimum lot width at    None         None         None         100 feet
building setback line
(3) Maximum lot coverage by
principal & accessory       50%          100%(a)      50%          75%
structures
(4) Minimum Front Setback
(from public street rights- 20 feet      NA           20 feet      30 feet
of-way)(b)
(5) Maximum Front Setback
(from public street rights- NA           10 feet      NA           NA
of-way)
(6) Minimum Side Setback    None or      None or      None or
Abutting Nonresidential     minimum 6    minimum 6    minimum 6    5 feet
District                    ft. between  ft. between  ft. between
                            buildings(c) buildings(c) buildings(c)
(7) Minimum Side Setback
Abutting Residential        10 feet      10 feet      15 feet      50 feet
District
(8) Minimum Rear Setback
abutting Nonresidential     20 feet      20 feet      20 feet      20 feet
District
(9) Minimum Rear Setback
abutting a Residential      20 feet      20 feet      20 feet      50 feet
District
(10) Maximum height of      35 feet      40 feet      50 feet      50 feet(d)
principal building
(11) Minimum Off-Street
Parking Area Setback
   (a) Public Rights-of-W15 feet      10 feet      15 feet      15 feet
   (b) Residential       10 feet      10 feet      10 feet      10 feet
Districts
   (c) All Other Lot Line5 feet(e)    5 feet(e)    5 feet(e)    10 feet
Notes to Schedule 150.274(B):
(a)   Accessory off-street parking spaces may be provided off-site only in
conformance with §
150.276(B).
(b)   For parcels located on Airport Highway, see the development standards in
Article 150.29.
(c)   See §
150.273(E).
(d)   Chimneys, spires, cupolas, domes, towers (excluding telecommunication
towers), flagpoles, waste tanks, monuments and other mechanical appurtenances
located upon or constituted, as an integral part of a main building shall not
exceed a height of 100 feet above finished grade.
(e)   See §
150.276
NA = Not Applicable
 
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.275 REQUIRED DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   Purpose. The buildings in the Village’s Downtown Business District
define Swanton’s built environment and contribute to the character of the
community. Enhancing the quality and compatibility of these buildings and
thereby protecting the character of this areas is of utmost importance. The
standards set forth below are intended to achieve among others the following
purposes:
      (1)   To strengthen, protect, enhance and improve the existing visual and
aesthetic character of the B-2, Downtown, District;
      (2)   To protect and enhance property values; and
      (3)   To provide guidelines for property owners, architects, and
contractors to aid in the preparation of appropriate plans.
   (B)   Applicability of Regulations. In addition to the development standards
set forth in §
150.274, the design standards set forth in §
150.275(C) shall apply to the exterior appearance and design of all new
construction and building renovations in the B-2, Downtown District.
      (1)   The Planning Commission may grant an exemption from these standards
when the exterior building modifications are minor in nature, meaning the
design modifications will have no discernable impact on neighboring properties,
the public, the public right-of-way, or those intended to occupy or use the
proposed development.
      (2)   The Planning Commission may grant an exception or modification to
the Design Standards in §
150.275(C) if the applicant demonstrates that, due to the unusual shape or
topography of the lot or an adjoining lot, or due to the location or design of
existing structures, mature trees, or other features, the application of the
design standards would be unreasonable. The Planning Commission may grant a
complete exception from the standard, or it may modify the standard in view of
the peculiarities of the site. Any modification of the standard shall be
considered an “exception.” In determining whether to grant an exception, the
Planning Commission shall consider:
         (a)   The purposes of the Zoning District;
         (b)   The intent of the guideline from which the exception is
requested; and
         (c)   Whether the intent of the standard may be met by an alternate
means.
   (C)   Design Standards. The design standards set forth in this subsection
shall apply to the exterior appearance and design of all new construction and
building renovations in the B-2, Downtown District.
      (1)   Buildings and principal building entrances shall be oriented toward
the public street so as to define the street edge and contribute to a dynamic
pedestrian and street environment.
      (2)   The primary pedestrian entrance to the principal building shall be
located on a frontage line, adjacent to the public sidewalk.
      (3)   Windows and Doors on Primary Facades Facing a Street. Building
facades facing a street shall meet the following window and door design
standards:
         (a)   First Floor (Building Base) Façade. Transparent glass or framed
facade open areas consisting of display windows, entries and doors shall
comprise at least 60% of the wall/facade area between the height of two (2)
feet and ten (10) feet above the nearest sidewalk grade. The bottom edge of
such window shall not be higher than 30 inches above grade.
         (b)   Upper Floors facing a Street. Transparent glass or façade
openings shall comprise at least 30% of the wall/façade area for each floor
above the first floor.
         (c)   Window frames shall incorporate windowsills and lintels and/or
window heads that are visually distinct from the primary exterior finish
materials used on the façade on which it is located.
         (d)   A maximum of twenty (20) percent of the windows that can be seen
from all public rights-of-way, excluding alleys, shall be opaque.
      (4)   Each building façade, other than the front façade, that is visible
from a private right-of- way, public parking area or public circulation area
should incorporate design elements at least every 30 horizontal feet, such as
changes in color or texture and material modules; projections, recesses, and
reveals; arcades or pergolas providing pedestrian interest; or equivalent
elements that subdivide the wall into human scale proportions.
      (5)   Facade openings, including windows, shall be vertical in
proportion.
      (6)   Facades may be supplemented by awnings, which shall be straight
sheds with or without side flaps or curved.
      (7)   All roof top equipment shall be concealed in building materials
that match the structure or shall be painted to be visually compatible with the
structure.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.276 OFF-STREET PARKING, LOADING AND SERVICE AREA REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Cross Access to Off-Street Parking Lots. Parking lots in the B-1 and
B-3 Districts should be interconnected with non-residential parking lots on
adjacent properties to the maximum extent feasible.
   (B)   Off-Site Facilities. Whenever the required accessory off-street
parking facilities are proposed to be located on a parcel other than the one
occupied by the principal building served, the Planning Commission shall
require a copy of the agreements covering such an arrangement as set forth in §
150.381 to ensure availability of shared parking to users.
   (C)   Setbacks for Joint Parking Facilities. When cross access between two
parking areas is required or provided, the parking setback shall not be
required for the opening which accommodates the drive aisle, but it shall be
required in all other areas that abut the shared property line. When shared
parking, which spans the mutual property line, is required or provided, the
parking setback is not required to be provided.
   (D)   Off Street Parking, Loading and Service Areas.
      (1)   Parking spaces shall be provided in compliance with
Article 150.37, Off-Street Parking & Loading Regulations.
      (2)   Off-street loading and service areas shall be located in the rear
yard in compliance with the applicable parking setback requirements set forth
in
Schedule 150.274(B), unless the Planning Commission determines that placement
in a side yard would lessen the impact on adjacent residential uses.
      (3)   Landscaping and Screening. The off-street parking areas, off-street
loading areas and service areas shall be landscaped and screened in accordance
with
Article 150.39, Landscaping, Screening, Fencing, and Lighting Regulations.
      (4)   Off-street parking shall be permitted on a lot only as an accessory
use to a permitted principal use. Off-street parking shall not be permitted as
the sole use of a lot.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.277 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Any use established in any business or industrial district after the
effective date of this zoning code shall comply with the performance standards
set forth in this section prior to occupancy or initiation of that use. Any use
already established in such districts shall not be altered, added to or
otherwise modified so as to conflict with, or further conflict with the
performance standards set forth in this section for the district in which such
use is located as a precedence to any future use.
   (B)   Statements may be required by the Planning Commission from the owner
that such uses comply or will comply with the performance standards enumerated
in this section. The Village reserves the right to select and arrange for an
independent survey by a professional engineer qualified in the particular field
and the costs for such services shall be paid by the owner.
   (C)   All uses shall comply with the following performance standards:
      (1)   Enclosure. All permitted principal and accessory uses and
operations except off-street parking shall be performed wholly within an
enclosed building except where accessory, outdoor activities are permitted
pursuant to
Schedule 150.272(D) and this Code.
      (2)   Fire and Explosive Hazards. The storage, handling and use of
flammable or explosive materials shall be permitted only in structures having
incombustible exterior walls, and all operations in connection therewith shall
be provided with adequate safety and protective devices against hazards of fire
and explosion as well as with adequate firefighting and suppression equipment
and devices standard to the operation involved. The storage, handling and use
of flammable or explosive materials shall conform to the requirements of the
codified ordinances of the village and all applicable laws of the state.
      (3)   Emission of Pollutants. The emission of any atmospheric pollutant
shall not exceed the level permitted by applicable federal or state
regulations.
      (4)   Noise. The noise level, when measured in decibels, shall not exceed
that level specified or permitted by the Interim Noise Assessment Guidelines
(1980) HUD.
      (5)   Vibration. Vibrations shall not be permitted beyond the lot line
occupied by the use which would be perceptible without the aid of instruments.
      (6)   Radioactive or Electrical Disturbances. Radioactive or electrical
disturbances shall not be created which would adversely affect any form of life
or equipment at or beyond the boundaries of the lot occupied by the use.
      (7)   Refuse. In the M-1, Light Industrial District only, incineration
facilities are permitted as an accessary use provided they meet the
requirements of the State EPA.
      (8)   Waste Materials. Liquid wastes shall not be discharged into an open
reservoir, stream or other open body of water or a sewer unless treated or
controlled so that the amount of solid substances, oils, grease, acids,
alkalizes and other chemicals shall not exceed the amount permitted by other
codes of the state, county or village.
      (9)   Trash Receptacles. All solid waste products, including empty
packing boxes, that result from any permitted principal, conditional, or
accessory use shall either be disposed of, stored in buildings, or completely
enclosed in containers. Such building, container, or dumpster shall be located
in a side or rear yard and shall comply with the applicable parking setback set
forth in
Schedule 150.274(B) and shall be screened in accordance with the provisions set
forth in §
150.399, Screening of Accessory Uses and Structures.
      (10)   No activities shall be established which, when conducted in
compliance with the provisions of this Code, are or may become hazardous,
noxious, or offensive due to the emission of odor, dust, smoke, cinders, gas,
or fumes.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.278 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Accessory structures, including but not limited to sheds, garages, and
similar buildings, shall be permitted within the Business District (B2, B3) and
Industrial District (M1, M2) subject to the following conditions:
      (1)   Location and Setbacks. Accessory structures must be located behind
the principal building on the property. A minimum setback of 5 feet from any
property line, and a minimum of 10 feet from any adjacent structure shall be
required for all accessory structures. Accessory structures may not be located
within easement areas or obstruct access to utilities.
      (2)   Size and Height Limitations. The height of the accessory building
shall not exceed twenty (20) feet. Accessory buildings that have a gross floor
area of 200 square feet or less may be located in a side or rear yard and shall
comply with the applicable parking setbacks set forth in Schedule
150.274(B). All other accessory buildings shall be considered principal
buildings and shall conform to all lot and setback regulations and development
plan review for the appropriate zoning district. Any structure exceeding these
dimensions require approval through a conditional use permit or variance
application.
      (3)   Design and Aesthetics. The exterior of the accessory structure must
be constructed of materials consistent with or complementary to the principal
building on the property. The structure should maintain a design that is
visually harmonious with the surrounding environment, ensuring it does not
detract from the character or appearance of the Business or Industrial
District.
      (4)   Permitting and Inspections. A building permit is required for the
construction of any accessory structure within the Business or Industrial
District. The applicant must submit detailed plans indicating the location,
dimensions, and materials of the proposed structure. All accessory structures
must comply with applicable building codes and undergo inspection upon
completion to ensure compliance with safety standards.
      (5)   Use Restrictions. Accessory structures in the Business or
Industrial District may only be used for purposes of accessory to the principal
business use. These may include storage, maintenance, or office space but may
not be used for residential purposes, habitation, or other non-permitted
activities.
      (6)   Maintenance and Removal. The property owner is responsible for
maintaining accessory structures in good condition. Structures that become
dilapidated, unsafe, or otherwise non-compliant with zoning or safety
regulations must be repaired or removed.
   (B)   Special Considerations for Certain Business Uses. In cases where the
proposed accessory structure is intended for retail sales, signage, or
displays, a special use permit must be obtained to ensure it aligns with the
overall goals and aesthetics of the Business or Industrial District.
   (C)   Enforcement and Penalties. Any accessory structure constructed in
violation of these provisions may be subject to penalties, fines, or removal at
the discretion of the Zoning Administrator or the Village Council.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023; Ord. 2025-07, passed 3-10-2025)
§ 150.279 LANDSCAPING, SCREENING, FENCING, AND LIGHTING REGULATIONS.
   Screening and landscaping shall be provided for all lots in the Business and
Industrial Districts in accordance with the provisions set forth in
Article 150.39, Landscaping, Screening, Fencing, and Lighting Regulations.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.280 SIGNS PERMITTED.
   Signs shall be permitted in the Business and Industrial Districts only in
accordance with
Article 150.35, Sign Regulations.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.281 DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW.
   All uses, structures, and buildings in the Business and Industrial Districts
shall only be permitted after development plans have been reviewed and approved
according to the procedures set forth in
Article 150.65, Development Plan Review Procedures.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.282 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT USE REGULATIONS (M-2).
   Buildings and land shall be used, and buildings shall be designed, erected,
altered, moved and maintained, in whole or in part, in any Heavy Industrial
District only for the uses set forth in the following regulations.
   (A)   Main uses permitted.
      (1)   Office, laboratories, production, distribution and service uses
permitted in any Light Industrial (M-1) District;
      (2)   Manufacturing processes conducted wholly within an enclosed
building; cutting, forging, stamping, casting, extrusion, drilling, machining,
welding, brazing, soldering, sawing, cleaning, shot and sand blasting,
grinding, enameling, painting, galvanizing, finishing, heat-treating and rust
proofing, as a component process in connection with the production and assembly
of products;
      (3)   Other industrial processes and uses including blending, mixing and
packaging of disinfectants, fertilizers, insecticides, fungicides, ink, soap,
detergents, and related household and industrial chemical compounds; but
excluding the manufacture of primary chemicals or chemical compounds; making of
ferrous metal and metal alloy products from brass, bronze, pewter, tin, lead or
aluminum and the smelting or founding of such metals; and bulk distribution
stations for gasoline and oil, and reclamation of ferrous metal products may be
permitted provided a conditional use permit is granted in accordance with the
standards set forth in §
150.272; and
      (4)   Telecommunication towers.
   (B)   Similar main uses permitted. Any other manufacturing use not listed
above or in any industrial district if considered and found similar by the Plan
Commission according to standards set forth §
150.275.
   (C)   Accessory uses permitted.
      (1)   Storage of materials, products and processes clearly accessory to
the main use;
      (2)   Off-street parking and loading facilities as required and set forth
in §
150.276; and
      (3)   Signs: industrial, project, real estate, identification and
directional signs are permitted as set forth in §
150.280.
(Ord. 2024-08, passed 6-10-2024)
ARTICLE 150.29
AIRPORT HIGHWAY CORRIDOR OVERLAY DISTRICT REGULATIONS
   
150.291   Intent.
   
150.292   Airport Highway Corridor District Boundaries.
   
150.293   Use Regulations.
   
150.294   Development Standards.
   
150.295   Design Guidelines.
   
150.296   Off-Street Parking Regulations.
   
150.297   Access to Individual Parcels.
   
150.298   Sign Regulations.
   
150.299   Other Requirements.
   
150.300    Development Plan Review.
§ 150.291 INTENT.
   (A)   In addition to the underlying zoning district and the permitted and
conditional uses and all applicable development requirements, the following
overlay district has been enacted imposing additional restrictions on the use
and development of the land within the district. To regulate the bulk and
location of buildings in relation to the land in order to obtain proper light,
air, privacy and usable open spaces on each zoning lot appropriate for the
district.
   (B)   The purpose of the Airport Highway Corridor Overlay District is to
promote and protect the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general
welfare by providing for consistent and coordinated treatment of the properties
bordering Airport Highway in the village. Airport Highway is a high traffic
volume and major roadway corridor in the village. Therefore, it is the further
purpose of the Airport Highway Corridor Overlay District to preserve the
aesthetic qualities of those adjacent and bordering properties through the
promotion of coordinated parcel development in the district and the
establishment of consistent parcel development standards.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.292 AIRPORT HIGHWAY CORRIDOR DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   The boundaries of the district are hereby established as shown on the zoning
district map. The district includes those parcels that front along the right-
of-way of Airport Highway (except Turtle Creek Business Park) within the
village, not to exceed a depth of 400 feet from the right-of-way along both
sides of Airport Highway.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.293 USE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Permitted uses. All uses that are permitted by right or conditionally
in the underlying zoning district(s), except the uses expressly excluded by
division (B) below, are permitted in the Airport Highway Corridor Overlay
District.
   (B)   Excluded uses. The following uses shall not be permitted in the
Airport Highway Corridor Overlay District:
      (1)   Vehicle and equipment major repair services;
      (2)   Self-storage units/mini storage;
      (3)   Outdoor storage of materials and equipment.
   (C)   Use Restrictions.
      (1)   Minor Vehicle Service Stations and Vehicle Fuel Stations shall not
be located within 2,000 feet of another such establishment within the Airport
Highway Corridor Overlay District.
      (2)   Outdoor overnight storage of fleet vehicles shall be located a
minimum of 200 feet from the Airport Highway centerline.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.294 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Applicability. The standards of the Airport Highway Corridor Overlay
District are superimposed onto those of the underlying zoning district that
pertains to any given parcel. The regulations and requirements of both the
underlying zoning district(s) and the Airport Highway Corridor Overlay District
shall apply; however, in any case where there is a conflict between the Airport
Highway Corridor Overlay District and the underlying zoning district, the
provisions of the Airport Highway Corridor Overlay District take precedence.
   (B)   Schedule 150.294(B) - Development Standards for the Airport Highway
Corridor Overlay District. Every permitted use of land and all principal
buildings and off-street parking areas shall be located on a lot in a manner
that conforms to the development standards set forth in
Schedule 150.294(B), except as otherwise regulated in this Code and in
Article 150.33 for Use-Specific Regulation. The area within each required
setback shall remain unobstructed by structures except as otherwise permitted
in this Code.
SCHEDULE 150.294(B)
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR THE AIRPORT HIGHWAY CORRIDOR OVERLAY DISTRICT
REQUIREMENT
SCHEDULE 150.294(B)
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR THE AIRPORT HIGHWAY CORRIDOR OVERLAY DISTRICT
REQUIREMENT
(1) Front Setback, measured from         
centerline of Airport Highway
   (a) Minimum Front Setback         55 feet(a)
   (b) Maximum Front Setback         85 feet
(2) Front Setback along all other
streets, measured from the public
street right-of-way line
   (a) Minimum Front Setback         25 feet
   (b) Maximum Front Setback         30 feet
(3) Minimum Side Setback
   (a) Abutting Nonresidential Distri20 feet
   (b) Abutting Residential District 20 feet
(4) Minimum Rear Setback
   (a) Abutting Nonresidential Distri20 feet
   (b) Abutting Residential District 50 feet
(5) Minimum Off-Street Parking Area
Setback
                                        In a side or rear yard, located no
   (a) Along Airport Highway         closer to the street than the principal
                                        building
   (b) Side street Right-of-Way      10 feet
   (c) Residential Districts         50 feet
   (d) All Other Lot Lines           20 feet
Notes:
(b)   In those instances where a parallel service road is provided along
Airport Highway, the minimum front yard setback shall be 10 feet.
 
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.295 DESIGN GUIDELINES.
   (A)   Applicability of Regulations. The design guidelines set forth in §
150.295(B) shall apply to the exterior appearance and design of all new
construction in the Airport Highway Corridor Overlay District. Building
expansion shall comply with these guidelines at such time that the expansion
totals 50% or more of the existing square footage of the building.
   (B)   Design Guidelines.
      (1)   Primary and Secondary Exterior Finishes. Building materials should
be typical of those prevalent along the Corridor. Facades shall consist of one
or more of the following primary and secondary exterior finish materials:
         (a)   Primary Exterior Finish Materials:
            i.   Cementitious siding;
            ii.   Masonry;
            iii.   Brick;
            iv.   Natural stone;
            v.   Precast concrete;
            vi.   Decorative block;
            vii.   Glass; and/or
            viii.   Decorative metal panels.
         (b)   Secondary Exterior Finish Materials:
            i.   Brick;
            ii.   Wood;
            iii.   EIFS; or
            iv.   Other products that replicate the appearance and durability
of the above materials, as approved by the Planning Commission.
         (c)   Materials within ten (10) feet of the ground or the sidewalk
shall be of a durable material to withstand pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
If “dry vit” or E.I.F.S is used as an exterior building material, impact
resistant E.I.F.S., as classified by EIMA (EIFS Industry Members Association),
shall be used on all wall areas within ten (10) feet of the ground or sidewalk.
         (d)   No facade visible from adjoining property or the public right-
of-way shall be constructed of reflective glass unadorned or unpainted CMU or
concrete block, smooth vinyl, corrugated metal, or sheet metal.
      (2)   Accessory structures. Building materials and colors on accessory
structures shall be compatible with that approved for the primary structure.
For example, canopies permitted as part of a vehicle fuel station shall use a
combination of brick columns and a metal canopy that is similar in color to the
primary structure.
      (3)   Type of Construction. Manufactured, mobile, and metal units are
prohibited except as may be allowed for temporary office management or storage
uses during the construction phase.
      (4)   Orientation. Building facades and entrances should be oriented
toward Airport Highway, not toward internal parking areas.
      (5)   Facades. Architectural elements such as windows and doors,
bulkheads, masonry piers, transoms, cornice lines, window hoods, awnings,
canopies, and other similar details should be used on all facades facing public
or private street rights-of-way. Building wall offsets, including projections,
and recesses are encouraged in order to: add architectural interest and
variety; relieve the visual effect of a single, long wall; and subdivide the
wall into human size proportions. In order to offer pedestrian interest, the
ground level of any building should include windows, entrances, architectural
details and shed awnings. Architectural details should continue on all facades
visible from the public right-of-way.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.296 OFF-STREET PARKING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Parking Location. Off-street parking areas shall be located to the
rear or side of the principal building on the lot and no closer to the front
lot line than the front façade of the largest principal building on the lot.
   (B)   Example of Appropriate Siting of Off-Street Parking Areas.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/083b2827ca6deba1b1fb1d5dec2edfde91f29d3b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2484.png]
 
   (C)   Cross Access to Off-Street Parking Areas. Off-street parking areas
shall be interconnected with non-residential parking areas on adjacent
properties.
   (D)   Planning Commission Exceptions. The Planning Commission may grant an
exception to the requirements in §
150.296 where necessary due to the shallow depth of the parcel, the shape of
the parcel, the location of mature trees or other significant environmental
features, the location of existing buildings, the proximity of residential
uses, the location of existing traffic control devices, the location on access
points onto Airport Highway, or other similar circumstances.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.297 ACCESS TO INDIVIDUAL PARCELS.
   (A)   Access along Airport Highway shall be reviewed relative to the
distance from other drive approaches and from roadway intersections. In some
instances, a frontage road shall be provided to allow access to other parcels
and to the adjoining parcel(s). In other instances, cross access easements and/
or a shared drive approach shall be required for adjoining parcels, unless
specially waived, in writing by the Village Engineer or the Ohio Department of
Transportation. Access shall be reviewed by the designated Village Engineer,
Planning Commission and/or the Ohio Department of Transportation. A traffic
impact study shall be required by the developer if the proposed use of the
property generates 100 or more peak hour trips, consistent with the Institute
of Transportation Engineers (ITE) Generation Manual, unless such requirement is
specifically waived, in writing, by the Village Engineer.
   (B)   If requested, where there is a change of use to an existing
development, the designated Village Engineer, the Planning Commission or Ohio
Department of Transportation may make a recommendation to close access points
within the overlay district, which are deemed to be hazardous.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.298 SIGN REGULATIONS.
   See
Article 150.35 for sign regulations governing the Airport Highway Corridor
Overlay District.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.299 OTHER REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Utilities. All utilities shall be underground.
   (B)   Overnight parking. There shall be no overnight parking of any vehicles
or trailers, except passenger vehicles, in the front yard.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.300 DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW.
   (A)   In the Airport Highway Corridor Overlay District, review and approval
of development plans according to the procedures set forth in
Article 150.65, Development Plan Review Procedures shall be required for:
      (1)   All new development;
      (2)   Development that includes a structure that is enlarged by 50%; and
      (3)   Whenever the enlargement contains 5,000 square feet or more in
floor area.
   (B)   When there is a change of use to an existing facility or development,
the Planning Commission shall review such use for conformance to the zoning
code and impact on the district. The Planning Commission may further require
the developer to make transportation improvements, in order to comply with
standards set forth in this Article. If there will be a significant increase in
traffic or parking, the Planning Commission may require a traffic impact study.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
ARTICLE 150.31
PUBLIC/OPEN SPACE DISTRICT REGULATIONS
   
150.311   Intent.
   
150.312   Use Regulations.
   
150.313   Development Standards.
   
150.314   Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations.
   
150.315   Outdoor Storage.
   
150.316   Signs Permitted.
   
150.317    Development Plan Review.
§ 150.311 INTENT.
   The purpose of the Public/Open Space (P/OS) District is to protect and
preserve public open space land as a limited and valuable resource; to permit
and facilitate the reasonable use of open space land, while simultaneously
preserving and protecting the inherent characteristics of the open space to
ensure the continued availability for scenic, recreational, conservation, and
educational purposes; for the containment of urban sprawl and the structuring
of urban development; and for the retention of land in its natural or near-
natural state within the village.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.312 USE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Use Schedule Summary. 
Schedule 150.312(D) sets forth the uses allowed in the Public/Open Space
District. The abbreviations used in the Schedule indicate the following:
      (1)   Uses Permitted By Right. A “P” in a cell indicates that the use is
allowed by-right in the Public/Open Space District.
      (2)   Conditional Uses. A “C” in a cell indicates that the use is
regulated as a conditional use. The use is permitted in the respective district
only after an applicant receives Conditional Use approval pursuant to
Article 150.67.
      (3)   Accessory Uses. An “A” in a cell indicates that the use is a
permitted accessory use, provided it is clearly incidental and subordinate to a
permitted principal or conditional use listed in
Schedule 150.312(D).
      (4)   Uses Not Permitted. The letters “NP” in a cell indicates that the
use is not allowed in the Public/Open Space District.
      (5)   Use-Specific Standard Cross-Reference. An “*” in a cell indicates
that a Use-Specific Standard cross-referenced in the right-hand column of the
Schedule applies to the use in that zoning district.
   (B)   Compliance with Standards. Although a use may be indicated as a
permitted use in a particular district, it shall not be approved on a lot
unless it can be located thereon in full compliance with all of the standards
and other regulations of this Code applicable to the specific use and lot in
question, including but not limited to any supplemental use-specific standards
cross-referenced in
Schedule 150.312(D).
   (C)   Organization of Use Table. In the Use Table, land uses are classified
into general use categories and specific uses based on common physical or
functional characteristics, such as type of dwelling unit, amount of activity
generated by the use, and site conditions. Whenever a standard or reference is
made to a general use category throughout this code, it shall include the
specific uses in that category.
   (D)   Schedule 150.312(D) – Permitted Uses. 
Schedule 150.312(D) sets forth the uses allowed in the Public/Open Space
District.
SCHEDULE 150.312(D) PERMITTED USES IN PUBLIC OPEN SPACE DISTRICTS
As defined in 150.312(A): P = permitted use; C = conditional use; A =
accessory use; CA = conditional accessory use; NP = not permitted *= subject
to use-specific standards as cross-referenced
 P/OS *Use-Specific Standards
SCHEDULE 150.312(D) PERMITTED USES IN PUBLIC OPEN SPACE DISTRICTS
As defined in 150.312(A): P = permitted use; C = conditional use; A =
accessory use; CA = conditional accessory use; NP = not permitted *= subject
to use-specific standards as cross-referenced
                                                 P/OS *Use-Specific Standards
Civic Uses
Government office building                       P    --
Government service facilities                    P*   §
                                                      150.334(E)
Place of worship                                 C*   §
                                                      150.334(E)
Public library                                   P
School, elementary/secondary (public or private) P    --
Open Space/Recreation Uses
Agriculture (crops)                              C*   §
                                                      150.336(B)
Cemetery                                         P*   §
                                                      150.334(A)
Conservation area                                P    --
Country club (public, private/semi-private)      C*   §
including golf course                                 150.334(C)
Public parks and playgrounds                     P    --
SCHEDULE 150.312(D) PERMITTED USES IN PUBLIC OPEN SPACE DISTRICTS
As defined in 150.312(A): P = permitted use; C = conditional use; A =
accessory use; CA = conditional accessory use; NP = not permitted *= subject
to use-specific standards as cross-referenced
 P/OS *Use-Specific Standards
SCHEDULE 150.312(D) PERMITTED USES IN PUBLIC OPEN SPACE DISTRICTS
As defined in 150.312(A): P = permitted use; C = conditional use; A =
accessory use; CA = conditional accessory use; NP = not permitted *=
subject to use-specific standards as cross-referenced
                                            P/OS *Use-Specific Standards
Open Space/Recreation Uses
Public sports fields and active recreation   P*   §
facilities                                        150.334(B)
Parking lot extension                        C    --
Utilities and Communication Uses
Electric vehicle charging station            A*   §
                                                  150.336(C)
Essential services                           P*   §
                                                  150.336(D)
Solar collector system, ground-mounted       CA*  §
                                                  150.336(G)
Solar collector system, roof-mounted         A*   §
                                                  150.336(G)
Utility Substation and Transmission Facility P*   §
                                                  150.336(H)
Small wind energy system                     C    §
                                                  150.336(F)
Wireless telecommunication facility          CA*  §
                                                  150.336(I)
Accessory Uses/Structures
Fences, walls                                A    --
Accessory uses and structures                A    --
Signs                                        A    --
 
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.313 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   Principal and accessory buildings and structures shall be erected, altered,
moved, and maintained only in accordance with the development standards set
forth in Schedule 150.313.
SCHEDULE 150.313
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS IN THE PUBLIC/OPEN SPACE DISTRICT
Category Standard
SCHEDULE 150.313
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS IN THE PUBLIC/OPEN SPACE DISTRICT
Category                                               Standard
(A) Minimum lot area                                   None
(B) Minimum lot width at building setback line         None
(C) Maximum lot coverage
   (1) Civic Uses                                   60%
   (2) All other uses                               5%
(D) Front Setback (from public street right-of-way)(b) 50 feet
(E) Side Setback                                       15 feet
(F) Rear Setback(c)                                    30 feet
(G) Minimum Off-Street Parking Area Setback
   (1) Public Rights-of-Way                         20 feet
   (2) Residential Districts                        50 feet
   (3) All Other Lot Lines                          10 feet
(H) Maximum height of principal & accessory building   2 stories
                                                       30 feet
 
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.314 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS.
   Off-street parking and loading regulations as set forth in
Article 150.37 shall apply to all uses established within the P/O District.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.315 OUTDOOR STORAGE.
   The outdoor storage of general materials and equipment in association with a
permitted use shall comply with the following:
   (A)   Outdoor storage of materials and equipment shall only include the
storage of goods, materials, equipment or products customary associated with
the principal use. The storage of radioactive, toxic or otherwise hazardous
materials shall not be permitted.
   (B)   All outdoor storage of goods, materials, and equipment shall be
enclosed with a solid wall or fence, including solid gates. The wall or fence
shall have a height tall enough to conceal all materials therein from the view
of any observer standing at grade level. However, in no case shall the height
of the fence or wall be less than six feet. The solid wall or fence and the
associated gates shall be maintained in good condition. No barb or razor wire
shall be permitted.
   (C)   All outdoor storage shall be stored in such a fashion as to be
accessible to fire-fighting equipment at all times.
   (D)   Areas devoted to outdoor storage shall be located in a rear yard so
that it is behind the principal building and not visible from any public
street, unless the outdoor storage is located on a corner lot. It shall also be
setback fifty feet from any property boundary that abuts a Residential District
and in no case shall the side and rear setback of the enclosed area be less
than ten (10) feet.
   (E)   All equipment shall be in an operable state. In no case shall
inoperable equipment be stored on the site.
   (F)   Any proposed outdoor storage areas shall be approved as part of a
Development Plan Review in accordance with
Article 150.65.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.316 SIGNS PERMITTED.
   Signs shall be permitted in the P/O District only in accordance with
Article 150.35, Sign Regulations.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.317 DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW.
   All uses, structures, and buildings in the Public/Open Space District shall
only be permitted after development plans have been reviewed and approved
according to the procedures set forth in Article 150.65, Development Plan
Review Procedures.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
ARTICLE 150.33
USE-SPECIFIC STANDARDS
   
150.331   Intent.
   
150.332   Applicability; Conflict with district standards.
   
150.333   Supplementary Regulations – Residential Uses.
   
150.334   Supplementary Regulations – Civic Uses.
   
150.335   Supplementary Regulations – Commercial Uses.
   
150.336    Supplementary Regulations – Production/Distribution, Utilities, and
Communication Uses.
§ 150.331 INTENT.
   This Article establishes supplemental standards, exceptions to standards, or
alternative standards for particular uses in order to protect surrounding
property values and uses, and protect the public health,
safety, and general welfare.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.332 APPLICABILITY; CONFLICT WITH DISTRICT STANDARDS.
   No use governed by the regulations in this Article may be initiated,
established, or maintained unless it complies with the standards set forth for
such use in this Article.
   (A)   The use shall comply with the development standards for the applicable
zoning district in which the use is located except when a specific development
standard is specified in this Article.
   (B)   To the extent there is a conflict between a standard in another
Article of this Zoning Code and a standard in this Article, the standard in
this Article governs unless otherwise indicated.
   (C)   Whenever state or county law requires a use regulated by this Zoning
Code to be registered, certified or licensed, and/or a building permit be
obtained, compliance with such law shall be a condition precedent to zoning
approval of such use. Failure to maintain such license, certification or other
approval requirements shall be cause for revocation of the applicant’s
conditional use permit.
   (D)   Any use in this Article that is regulated as a conditional use in the
district in which it proposed shall also comply with the conditional use
criteria set forth in
Article 150.67.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.333 SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS – RESIDENTIAL USES.
   (A)   Accessory Living Suite.
      (1)   Purpose. These standards for accessory living suites (“ALS”) are
intended to permit the creation of legal accessory living suites wholly within
one-family detached units in a manner that is compatible with and retains the
character of the residential neighborhood.
      (2)   This use shall only be permitted as accessory to and within a
legally existing or proposed one-family detached dwelling that is the sole
principal use on the lot. An ALS shall not be permitted in a two-family
dwelling, multi-family dwelling, or Bed & Breakfast.
      (3)   The property on which the ALS is located shall comply with the
following:
         (a)   The lot shall have a minimum lot area of 8,400 square feet.
         (b)   Not more than one accessory living suite shall be permitted
within the one-family detached dwelling on the lot.
         (c)   The one-family detached dwelling unit shall have and retain a
minimum dwelling unit floor area of 1,000 square feet, not counting the area of
the ALS.
      (4)   The design of the ALS shall comply with the following:
         (a)   The ALS shall occupy no more than thirty percent (30%) of the
heated floor area of the one-family dwelling, but in no case be greater than
500 square feet.
         (b)   The ALS shall not have a separate, outside entrance from the
exterior of the one- family dwelling.
      (5)   Parking for the ALS shall be served by the same driveway as the
one-family dwelling.
      (6)   The ALS shall not be rented for a term less than 30 days.
      (7)   The owner of the property shall reside in either the one-family
dwelling unit or the accessory living suite.
      (8)   The residence shall retain the appearance of a one-family dwelling
at all times.
   (B)   Bed and Breakfast Inn and Short-Term Rental. Bed and breakfast inns
and short-term rentals are unique semi-commercial operations that adapt a
residential dwelling unit into a lodging concept limited in scope and
operation. The regulations presented herein provide a systematic set of
requirements to ensure that such operations do not adversely affect adjacent
uses as a result of the commercial aspects of the structure and property.
      (1)   The bed and breakfast inn or short-term rental shall be subordinate
to the principal use of a one-family detached dwelling, and the residence shall
retain the appearance of a one-family dwelling at all times.
      (2)   The one-family detached dwelling unit shall be occupied by the
owner(s) of the property as his/her primary residence.
      (3)   The operator of the bed and breakfast inn or short-term rental
shall maintain a log of all guests, including their name, address, license
plate number, and length of stay, and shall make the log available to the
Zoning Inspector upon request.
      (4)   Required parking for guests, and employees when permitted, shall be
provided on-site. Parking shall be located behind the front line of the
principal building. The Planning Commission may grant an exception to this
requirement due to the shallow depth of the parcel, the location of existing
buildings and mature trees, or other similar circumstances.
      (5)   Exterior lighting shall be residential in character and compatible
with the surrounding neighborhood.
      (6)   The dwelling shall fully comply with all applicable Village, County
and State codes, including but not limited to income tax, building, fire, and
health requirements.
      (7)   The owner shall maintain weekly residential trash collection
services. Trash dumpsters, trash containers, recycling containers, and
mechanical equipment shall be screened per the requirements of §
150.398, Screening of Accessory Uses.
      (8)   Bed and breakfast inns shall comply with the following additional
requirements:
         (a)   Each guest stay shall be limited to consecutive days of less
than one week.
         (b)   No more than four (4) rooms shall be utilized as guest sleeping
rooms in the bed and breakfast inn, and occupancy shall be limited to two (2)
individuals per guest sleeping room.
         (c)   A maximum of two (2) non-resident employees shall be permitted
on the premises.
         (d)   No cooking shall be permitted in guest rooms.
         (e)   No guest rooms shall have direct entrance or exit to the outside
of the building, except that emergency exits when required by the Fire Marshal
may be provided for emergency purposes only.
         (f)   Health Department approval of kitchen facilities for the bed and
breakfast inn shall be submitted prior to issuance of a certificate of zoning
compliance.
      (9)   Short-term rentals shall comply with the following additional
requirements:
         (a)   Each guest stay shall be limited to consecutive days of less
than one week.
         (b)   Rental of the one-family detached dwelling unit, whether in
whole or in part, shall be limited to a maximum of 30 days per calendar year.
         (c)   All sleeping quarters shall be located within the dwelling unit.
         (d)   The maximum overnight occupancy shall be limited to two (2)
individuals per bedroom, plus two (2) additional occupants within the dwelling
unit.
         (e)   Each short term rental owner shall provide the name and contact
information of the person(s) responsible for the short term rental, who shall
be available on a 24-hour basis, seven days a week, during periods in which the
structure is being rented, for the purpose of responding within one (1) hour to
complaints regarding the condition or operation of the short term rental unit
or the conduct of short-term tenants.
            (i)   The 24-hour contact person may be the owner, a property
management company representative, or other person employed, authorized or
engaged by the owner to manage, rent, and supervise the short term rental.
            (ii)   If the contact person is not the owner of record, the 24-
hour contact person shall maintain a residence or permanent place of business
within 30 miles driving distance to the short term rental.
            (iii)   If the local contact person designated by the owner
changes, then the owner shall update the permit on file with the village within
three (3) days.
         (f)   All short-term rental tenants shall abide by all applicable
noise, nuisance, fire and safety ordinances and not endanger or interfere with
the safety or rights of others.
         (g)   Use of the short-term rental unit for any commercial or large
social events or gatherings, such as weddings, is prohibited.
      (10)   In considering whether to grant the conditional use permit, the
Planning Commission shall have authority to require such reasonable conditions
as necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare and to
ensure that the use of the property as a bed and breakfast inn or short-term
rental will not have an adverse effect on the use, value and qualities of the
surrounding neighborhood.
      (11)   The property owner shall submit the following documentation when
applying for a required conditional use certificate.
         (a)   One (1) form of proof of identity;
         (b)   Two (2) pieces of evidence that the dwelling unit is the
property owner’s primary residence;
         (c)   Compliance with all applicable requirements noted in subsection
(G)(3) above.
   (C)   Congregate Care Facility/Nursing Home.
      (1)   Congregate Care Facility/Nursing Homes shall comply with the
development standards set forth below:
         (a)   Minimum lot area: two (2) acres.
         (b)   Minimum lot width: 100 feet.
         (c) Maximum Lot Coverage: 50% or the maximum permitted for the
district in which the use is located, whichever is higher.
      (2)   When located in a residential district, a congregate care facility/
nursing home shall comply with the standards set forth below:
         (a)   Minimum side and rear setback for principal buildings: 30 feet
or the minimum required for the residential district in which the use is
located whichever is greater.
         (b)   Minimum side and rear setback for parking facilities: 20 feet.
         (c)   Buildings shall be designed to have a residential character,
street-oriented with pedestrian entrances from the street, and compatible with
the surrounding residential development.
   (D)   Dwelling, Multi-family and dwelling units in the upper floors of
commercial buildings in Business Districts.
      (1)   Multi-family buildings in the B-2 District shall conform to all
requirements of the B-2 District including the Required Design Standards in §
150.275.
      (2)   Multi-family developments in the B-3 District shall meet all
requirements of the R-4 District and all other sections of this code applicable
to multi-family development.
      (3)   Each dwelling unit shall comply with the minimum dwelling unit
floor area requirement set forth in §
150.216(D).
   (E)   Dwelling, Two-Family.
      (1)   Two-family dwellings in the R-3 District shall be erected, altered,
moved, and maintained only in accordance with the development standards set
forth below:
         (a)   Minimum Lot Area: 8,400 square feet.
         (b)   Minimum Lot Width at Building Setback Line: 70 feet.
      (2)   Dwelling Unit Area Requirements.
         (a)   The minimum ground floor area of the structure shall be 750
square feet.
         (b)   Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum of 750 square feet.
      (3)   The public street elevation of the two-family dwelling shall have
at least one street oriented entrance and contain the principal windows of at
least one of the units.
      (4)   All required parking spaces shall be located behind the front
building line. The Planning Commission may grant an exception to this
requirement where necessary due to special characteristics of the site such as
lot depth, the location of existing mature trees and/or structures, or other
similar circumstances.
      (5)   Trash dumpsters, trash containers, recycling containers, and
mechanical equipment shall be screened per the requirements of §
150.399, Screening of Accessory Uses.
      (6)   A subdivision plat shall be submitted where individual attached
units are to be owned separately on individual lots.
   (F)   Group Home, Large and Small.
      (1)   The persons residing in such residential home shall live as a
single housekeeping unit in a single dwelling unit and maintain said home as
their sole, bona fide, permanent residence. The term “permanent residence”
means:
         (a)   The resident intends to live at the dwelling on a continuing
basis; and
         (b)   The resident does not live at the dwelling in order to receive
counseling, treatment, therapy or medical care.
      (2)   The applicant shall comply with the applicable parking regulations
of the Zoning Code for the type of residential structure used by the
residential home and shall make adequate provision for on-site parking of
vehicles used by visitors and the home supervisors.
      (3)   The group home shall meet local fire safety requirements for the
proposed use and level of occupancy.
      (4)   Small group homes shall comply with all standards that apply to
one-family dwellings in the district in which the home is located.
      (5)   Large Group homes shall comply with the following additional
requirements:
         (a)   The architectural design and site layout of the large group home
shall be compatible with adjoining land uses and the residential character of
the neighborhood.
         (b)   Conversion of an existing dwelling to a large group home shall
require that the dwelling be brought into conformity with applicable Village
and State regulations.
         (c)   The applicant shall demonstrate that adequate qualified
supervision will be provided in the home on a twenty-four hour per day basis.
         (d)   In considering whether to grant the conditional use permit, the
Planning Commission shall take into consideration the proximity and location of
other such large group homes within the neighborhood so as not to change the
character of the area, create undue congestion in the public ways, or otherwise
adversely impact upon a given area with such use.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.334 SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS – CIVIC USES.
   (A)   Cemetery.
      (1)   The minimum lot area shall be five acres, and the minimum lot width
at the setback line shall be 100 feet.
      (2)   No gravesite shall be located within 50 feet of a public street
right-of-way or residential zoning district boundary line.
      (3)   The minimum parking setback shall be 20 feet from all lot lines.
      (4)   Sufficient parking spaces shall be provided throughout the cemetery
so as not to hinder traffic flow, and no vehicle stacking shall be permitted in
the right-of-way.
   (B)   Community facility, building, recreation amenity privately operated by
Homeowners Association (HOA); Public sports fields/active recreation.
      (1)   The facility shall comply with the following minimum lot
requirements:
         (a)   Indoor community facility and outdoor passive recreation area:
20,000 square feet.
         (b)   Sports field and other outdoor active recreation facility:
minimum two (2) acre lot area and minimum 200 feet of lot width.
      (2)   The minimum building setback for both principal and accessary
buildings from all lot lines shall be 40 feet or the minimum required by the
zoning district in which the use is located, whichever is greater.
      (3)   The minimum setback for outdoor recreation facilities from all lot
lines shall be 50 feet, measured from the edge of the recreation area including
any associated seating areas.
      (4)   Exterior lighting shall be compatible with the surrounding
neighborhood. Where nighttime lighting of outdoor recreation areas is proposed,
evergreen trees that conform to the standards in §
150.401 shall be required in a location appropriate to screen adjoining
residences.
      (5)   The proposed use shall not generate excessive noise, odor, dust or
smoke beyond the premises. In order to minimize any effects of the above, the
Planning Commission may require all applicable surface areas to be paved, and
impose additional noise reduction measures, including mounding, landscaping and
sound barriers, to ensure that the level of noise is less than or the same as
the prevailing noise levels of permitted uses in the District.
      (6)   Only retail uses that are customarily accessory or incidental to
the main recreational use shall be permitted, including but not limited to
concession stands. Such facility shall be provided for the convenience of
customers attending the recreation facility.
   (C)   Country Club (public, private/semi-private) including golf course.
      (1)   The minimum lot area shall be twenty-five (25) acres.
      (2)   Such use should be located on an arterial or collector street or
have direct access to an arterial or collector street to minimize impacts on
local streets and residential neighborhoods.
      (3)   In a Residential or Public/Open Space District, all principal and
accessory buildings, parking areas, and outdoor recreation areas shall be
located a minimum of 50 feet from the street right-of-way and all lot lines.
For all outdoor recreation areas the setback shall be measured from the edge of
the recreation area including any associated seating areas.
      (4)   When located in a B-3 District, the country club shall comply with
the B-3 District standards, except for outdoor recreation areas, which shall be
located a minimum of 30 feet from a lot line that abuts a residential district.
      (5)    Exterior lighting shall be compatible with the surrounding
neighborhood or development. Where nighttime lighting of outdoor recreation
areas is proposed evergreen trees that conform to the standards in §
150.334 shall be required in a location appropriate to screen adjoining
residences.
      (6)   All activities, programs and other events shall be directly related
to the activities listed on the approved conditional use permit. If any
additional activities are proposed that were not included on the approved
conditional use permit, then a new conditional use permit shall be required
according to the procedures in this
Article 150.67.
      (7)   Fencing, netting, trees, berms, or other control measures shall be
provided around the perimeter of the golf course to prevent golf balls from
leaving the property.
      (8)   Retail and restaurant uses shall be limited to accessory eating,
dining and pro-shop sales. Such facilities shall be provided for the
convenience of the members or customers attending the Country Club or Golf
Course, and no sign advertising the retail or restaurant use(s) shall be
permitted.
      (9)   Swimming pools shall comply with the following:
         (a)   Pools shall be adequately fenced to prohibit unauthorized access
to the facility.
         (b)   Pools and their enclosures shall comply with the building
setback requirements for the zoning district in which the pool is located.
         (c)   The fenced pool enclosure shall be locked whenever the pool is
not in use.
   (D)   Day Care Center, Adult or Child.
      (1)   The location and design of the facility shall provide for the
protection of the children and adults from the traffic, noise, and other
hazards of the area.
      (2)   A drop-off/pick-up location that will not impede traffic on or off
the site shall be clearly identified on the plans and arranged to ensure the
safety of the children and adults.
      (3)   The outdoor activity area shall not be located closer than 50 feet
to any adjacent residential property line.
      (4)   For the protection of children and adults enrolled in the Day Care
Center, a fence or wall having a height of at least five (5) feet shall enclose
all outdoor activity areas. A securely fastened entry gate shall be provided to
such outdoor activity areas.
   (E)   Government Office Building; Places of Worship; Public Library; School
(Public/Private) Elementary/Secondary.
      (1)   The minimum lot area shall be 40,000 square feet.
      (2)   In a residential district, the facility shall comply with the
following minimum setback requirements, unless a larger setback is required by
the district in which the facility is located:
         (a)   Principal buildings minimum front setback: 40 feet.
         (b)   Principal buildings minimum side and rear setbacks: 30 feet.
         (c)   Parking lots minimum side and rear setbacks: 20 feet.
         (d)   In residential districts, off street parking lots shall not be
located in a front yard.
      (3)   Associated sports fields and outdoor activity areas shall comply
with §
150.334(B).
      (4)   Exterior lighting shall be compatible with the surrounding
neighborhood and development.
      (5)   All outdoor children’s activity areas shall be enclosed by an
ornamental or stockade fence or wall having a height of at least five (5) feet
but not exceeding six (6) feet. An entry gate that can be securely fastened
shall be provided.
      (6)   In Residential Districts:
         (a)   The scale, massing, and building design shall be compatible with
the surrounding neighborhood.
         (b)   Such uses should be located on an arterial or collector street
or have direct access to an arterial or collector street to minimize impacts on
local streets and residential neighborhoods.
         (c)   The maximum lot coverage shall be 65%.
   (F)   Meeting Hall and Similar Social, Fraternal Clubs. All activities,
programs and other events shall be directly related to the approved conditional
use permit, and shall take place completely within an enclosed building.
   (G)   Museum, Gallery, & Similar Cultural Facilities.
      (1)   All activities, programs and other events shall be directly related
to the approved conditional use permit, and shall take place completely within
an enclosed building, except for the outdoor display of artwork.
      (2)   Such uses should be located on an arterial or collector street or
have direct access to an arterial or collector street to minimize impacts on
local streets and residential neighborhoods.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.335 SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS – COMMERCIAL USES.
   (A)   Animal grooming/animal day care; Animal hospital/veterinarian office;
Animal boarding/kennel.
      (1)   The parts of a building where animals are boarded shall be fully
enclosed, with solid core doors and no operable windows, and shall be
sufficiently insulated so no unreasonable noise or odor can be detected off
premises.
      (2)   Animals shall not be permitted outside except within a secure
animal run, and no outdoor animal run shall be permitted within 200 feet of any
adjacent residential district or use, except where the adjoining property is
owned or occupied by the operator of the kennel.
      (3)   Animals shall be confined in an enclosed building between the hours
of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
      (4)   There shall be no burial or incineration of animals on the
premises.
      (5)   All solid waste material shall be removed from the site on a daily
basis, and no animal waste shall be buried on site or be allowed to accumulate
on the premise.
      (6)   The facility shall be operated in accordance with all applicable
State of Ohio and county health code regulations.
   (B)   Artisan Studio/Workshop.
      (1)   The principal activities of the use shall occur completely within
an enclosed building.
      (2)   All work activities, artist shows, programs and other events shall
be directly related to the activities listed on the approved conditional use
permit.
   (C)   Auction Warehouse, Showroom.
      (1)   All activities shall be conducted indoors.
      (2)   There shall be no outside storage.
      (3)   An on-site showroom that is open to the general public shall be
limited to ten percent (10%) of the floor area of the building, or 4,000 square
feet, whichever is less.
   (D)   Brewpubs; Micro-brewery, Micro-distillery, Micro-winery (Micro
Production Facility).
      (1)   Each brewpub or micro production facility shall manufacture and
sell alcoholic beverages in accordance with the provisions of the Ohio Division
of Liquor Control and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms (ATF), and
shall maintain current licenses as required by each agency.
      (2)   Brewpubs:
         (a)   A minimum of 50% of the gross floor area of the brewpub shall be
devoted to restaurant use for on-site consumption of food and beverages,
including the kitchen and seating area, but not including any outdoor dining
area.
         (b)   The area used for on-site production, including but not limited
to manufacturing, bottling and storage, shall not exceed 50% of the total floor
area of the entire facility or 8,000 square feet, whichever is less.
      (3)   Micro production facilities shall provide a minimum of 1,500 square
feet devoted to onsite retail sale, restaurant or tasting room for the on-site
consumption of products produced on the premises.
      (4)   Each brewpub and micro production facility shall be architecturally
compatible with the surrounding commercial uses.
      (5)   No outdoor storage of brewing equipment or materials shall be
permitted.
      (6)   The facility shall be designed and operated so as not to produce
odors, gas, dust, or any other atmospheric pollutant detrimental to the health,
safety, or general welfare of persons living or working in the surrounding
area. The emission of odorous matter or smells in such quantities as to produce
a public nuisance or hazard is not permitted.
      (7)   The facility shall not generate truck traffic materially different
in truck size or frequency from that generated by the surrounding commercial
uses.
      (8)   Each facility shall maintain copies of all reports filed with the
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms (ATF) and shall be able to demonstrate,
upon request of the Village, that they have not exceeded the annual beverage
production limit in any 12-month period.
   (E)   Drive-in/Drive-thru Facilities.
      (1)   The drive-in/drive-thru facility shall comply with the off-street
stacking space requirements in §
150.384, and with the drive-thru sign regulations in §
150.357(H).
      (2)   The drive-in/drive-thru facility shall maintain a minimum of 100
feet of street frontage, be located on a collector or arterial street, and be
designed so that vehicles waiting for service at the drive-in/drive-thru
facility do not interfere with a public right-of-way.
      (3)   All components of the drive-in/drive-thru facility, including but
not limited to drivethrough signs, waiting lanes, trash receptacles, audio
equipment, drive up windows, and other objects associated with the drive-
through area shall be located in the side or rear yard of a property to the
maximum extent feasible, and shall not cross, interfere with, or impede any
public right-of-way.
      (4)   All components of the drive-in/drive-thru facility shall be located
a minimum of 100 feet from a residential property line.
      (5)   On a corner lot, access drives shall be placed as far from the
intersection as possible and limited to no more than one access drive per
street frontage.
      (6)   Any changes in the approved development plan or in the activity to
be conducted on the site shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for
review and approval.
      (7)   Loudspeaker systems shall be approved as part of the development
plan approval and shall be appropriately located and screened to not create a
nuisance.
   (F)   Hotel/Motel.
      (1)   Such establishments should be located to minimize the amount of
space located in a retail setting that is inactive during normal business
hours.
      (2)   The use shall be located on a lot that has frontage on an arterial
or collector street.
      (3)   A hotel/motel shall be located on a lot having a minimum area of
400 square feet per room and a minimum lot width of 150 feet.
   (G)   Indoor Entertainment: Dancing & Live Entertainment.
      (1)   Dance floors and other similar entertainment facilities including
live entertainment shall be permitted only as an accessory use to a permitted
principal use.
      (2)   The Planning Commission may impose restrictions on the hours such
establishment is open for business.
      (3)   All indoor entertainment/music shall take place in a fully enclosed
sound-resistant building, with closed windows and double-door entrances that
provide a sound lock.
      (4)   Outside entertainment/music may be permitted provided it complies
with the following:
         (a)   Outdoor entertainment/music shall be permitted no later than 10
pm Sunday through Wednesdays and no later than 12 am on Thursdays through
Saturdays.
         (b)   The location of the area devoted to outdoor entertainment/music
shall be clearly indicated on the development plan.
         (c)   The Planning Commission may require the outdoor area to be
screened with a wall, fence or landscaping to ensure that sound does not exceed
normal conversation levels beyond the property line or cause a nuisance to
adjoining properties.
   (H)   Medical Clinic/Urgent Care.
      (1)   The design of a Medical Clinic/Urgent Care shall be sufficient to
accommodate staff, clients, patients and visitors without waiting or queuing
outside of the building.
      (2)   Outdoor storage of ambulances and other vehicles used in the
operation of the principal use may be permitted provided such storage areas
shall be located in the side or rear yard in off-street parking areas. Storage
for ambulances and other vehicles shall be shown on the development plan.
      (3)   Where the site is adjacent to a residential zoning district, hours
of operation may be restricted by the Planning Commission.
   (I)   Outdoor Commercial Recreation.
      (1)   The minimum lot area shall be two acres and minimum lot width shall
be 200 feet.
      (2)   Vehicular approaches shall be designed to reduce traffic congestion
and interference with traffic on surrounding public streets or roads.
      (3)   All activities, programs and other events shall be identified in
the application and listed in the approved zoning certificate and shall be
adequately and properly supervised to prevent personal injury, property damage
and disturbance or nuisance to surrounding properties, residents or to the
community in general.
      (4)   Rifle ranges, pistol and skeet shooting ranges, and other
activities involving the use of firearms shall not be permitted.
      (5)   The Planning Commission may require an outdoor active recreation
area to be enclosed by a fence having a minimum height of five feet and a
maximum height of six feet.
      (6)   Swimming pools shall comply with the following additional
requirements:
         (a)   Pools shall be adequately fenced to prohibit unauthorized access
to the facility.
         (b)   Pools and their enclosures shall comply with the building
setback requirements for the zoning district in which the pool is located.
         (c)   The fenced pool enclosure shall be locked whenever the pool is
not in use.
      (7)   The use shall not generate excessive noise, odor, dust or smoke
beyond the premises above the prevailing levels from permitted uses in the
zoning district. The Planning Commission may impose additional noise reduction
measures, including mounding, landscaping and sound barriers, to minimize noise
and maintain the prevailing noise levels of permitted uses in the zoning
district.
   (J)   Outdoor Dining, Accessory to a Restaurant.
      (1)   Restaurants shall be permitted to operate outdoor dining on
sidewalks, including areas within the public right-of-way and in courtyards,
provided that pedestrian circulation and access to store entrances shall not be
impaired.
      (2)   If outdoor dining is proposed to be in the public right-of-way, a
permit shall be obtained from the Village Public Works Supervisor before a
zoning certificate is issued.
      (3)   Planters, fencing, or other devices shall be used as a way of
defining the area occupied by the outdoor dining.
      (4)   Extended awnings, canopies, or large umbrellas shall be permitted
if located to provide shade or cover.
      (5)   The operators of outdoor dining shall maintain a clean, litter-
free, and well-kept appearance within and immediately adjacent to the area of
café activity.
      (6)   The outdoor seating area shall be used in conjunction with, and is
under the same management and exclusive control of, a restaurant located on the
same or contiguous property.
   (K)   Outdoor Overnight Storage of Fleet Vehicles Related to the Principal
Business.
      (1)   The stored vehicles shall be necessary to, customarily associated
with, and used on a regular basis by the principal use of the premises.
      (2)   All stored vehicles and equipment shall be operable, and vehicles
shall have a current vehicle registration.
      (3)   Location and Setbacks.
         (a)   In a B-3 General Business District, the outdoor storage area for
vehicles shall be located in a rear yard in compliance with the parking
setbacks in
Schedule 150.274(B).
         (b)   In an M-1 Light Industrial District, the outdoor storage of
fleet vehicles shall be located in a side or rear yard, in compliance with the
parking setbacks in
Schedule 150.274(B).
      (4)   Any area devoted to outdoor storage of fleet vehicles shall be
paved with asphalt or concrete, and maintained free from dust. The Planning
Commission may grant a variance from the paving requirement if the applicant
demonstrates that dust will be adequately controlled and the storage area will
have little vehicular traffic.
   (L)   Outdoor Sales and Display of Merchandise for Sale.
      (1)   Outdoor display of merchandise for sale shall be limited to
products that are customarily associated with the operation of the principal
business located on the premises and conducted by employees of such principal
business.
         (a)   There shall be no outdoor display of merchandise for sale by any
person operating or conducting a business that is different or distinct from
the principal business conducted at that location.
         (b)   These regulations do not apply to vehicle sales and rental
establishments.
      (2)   The area of the lot devoted to outdoor display shall not exceed 15
percent of the ground floor area of the building(s) on the lot. The Planning
Commission may grant an exception to this requirement when the ground floor
area is 5,000 square feet or less.
      (3)   The outdoor display area shall comply with the parking setbacks,
shall not be located in areas intended for traffic and pedestrian circulation,
and shall not occupy any required parking spaces as identified on the
development plan.
      (4)   Any proposed outdoor display areas shall be approved as part of a
Development Plan Review in accordance with
Article 150.65.
   (M)   Outdoor Storage of Materials and Equipment.
      (1)   Outdoor storage of materials, and equipment shall only include the
storage of goods, materials, equipment or products customary associated with
the principal use. The storage of radioactive, toxic or otherwise hazardous
materials shall not be permitted.
      (2)   All outdoor storage of goods, materials, and equipment shall be
enclosed with a solid wall or fence, including solid gates. The wall or fence
shall have a height tall enough to conceal all materials therein from the view
of any observer standing at grade level. However, in no case shall the height
of the fence or wall be less than six feet. The solid wall or fence and the
associated gates shall be maintained in good condition. No barb or razor wire
shall be permitted. The Planning Commission may consider alternative forms of
screening such as a dense planting of trees or berm in compliance with §
150.398.
      (3)   All outdoor storage shall be stored in such a fashion as to be
accessible to fire-fighting equipment at all times.
      (4)   Areas devoted to outdoor storage shall be located in a rear yard so
that it is behind the principal building and not visible from any public
street, unless the outdoor storage is located on a corner lot. In the M-
1 District, enclosed storage areas devoted to outdoor storage shall be setback
fifty feet from any property boundary that abuts a Residential District. In no
case shall the side and rear setback of the enclosed area be less than ten (10)
feet.
      (5)   All equipment and fleet vehicles shall be in an operable state. In
no case shall inoperable equipment and vehicles be stored overnight.
      (6)   Any proposed outdoor storage areas shall be approved as part of a
Development Plan Review in accordance with
Article 150.65.
   (N)   Plant Nursery or Greenhouse, Commercial in an R-E District.
      (1)   The facility shall be located on an arterial or collector road.
      (2)   All buildings, equipment, and other activities associated with the
use shall be setback 75 feet from any residential lot line and 50 feet from any
public street.
      (3)   The minimum parking setback shall be 20 feet from all lot lines,
except for semi-truck parking areas and loading areas, which shall comply with
the building setback requirements.
      (4)   The proposed use shall not generate excessive noise, odor, dust or
smoke beyond the premises.
      (5)   The storage and display area of materials used for landscaping
purposes and agriculturally related products necessary for maintaining the
health of nursery stock shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the nursery or a
maximum of one (1) acre, whichever is less, and shall be screened as specified
in §
150.399 (A)(1) and (2). Related products include but are not limited to
railroad ties, decorative stones, mulch and fertilizers.
      (6)   Landscape services shall be accessory to the production of nursery
stock. The number of pieces and type of landscaping equipment may be limited by
the Planning Commission according to site constraints and compatibility with
surrounding uses.
   (O)   Research and Testing Laboratories.
      (1)   The principal activities of the use shall occur completely within
an enclosed building.
      (2)   Where the site is adjacent to a residential zoning district
boundary line and regulated as a conditional use, hours of operation may be
restricted by the Planning Commission.
      (3)   No exterior odor, dust, noise, or other impacts shall be produced
as a result of the use. The Planning Commission may impose additional noise
reduction measures, including landscaping and sound barriers, to minimize noise
and to maintain the prevailing noise levels of permitted uses in the zoning
district.
   (P)   Retail, Large-format. The Planning Commission shall find that the
proposed use is located and designed to be compatible with the other uses
permitted in the district.
   (Q)   Vehicle Fuel Station; Vehicle Service Station, Minor, Vehicle Wash
Establishment.
      (1)   The minimum lot area is 20,000 square feet, and the minimum lot
width is 100 feet.
      (2)   When located on a corner lot, the facility shall have not less than
150 feet frontage on each of the two intersecting streets:
         (a)   The location of access drives shall be placed as far as possible
from the intersection; and
         (b)   Shall be limited to no more than one (1) access drive per street
frontage.
      (3)   A vehicle wash establishment may be combined with a vehicle fueling
station or vehicle service station, provided the minimum lot size for the
combined uses is a minimum of 40,000 square feet.
      (4)   Gasoline pumps may be erected in front of the established building
line, but not less than 20 feet from the road right-of-way.
      (5)   Outdoor self-service vehicular vacuum stations shall be located in
a side or rear yard.
      (6)   All activities, except those required to be performed at a fuel
pump, air dispenser or self-serve vehicular vacuum, shall be conducted entirely
within a building or garage.
      (7)   No inoperative motor vehicles, equipment, or parts shall be
permitted to remain outside on the property, unless such vehicles are stored in
an approved screened outdoor storage area.
      (8)   The Planning Commission may restrict the hours of operation where a
site is adjacent to a residential zoning district boundary line and regulated
as a conditional use.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.336 SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS – PRODUCTION/DISTRIBUTION, UTILITIES, AND
COMMUNICATIONS USES.
   (A)   Adult Oriented Business (AOB) establishment.
      (1)   The AOB shall not be located within 500 feet of any residentially
zoned district, or within 500 feet of other adult oriented business
establishments, day care centers, churches, public parks, schools, libraries or
other public buildings or premises. Distances shall be measured in a straight
line without regard to intervening structures, from the nearest portion of the
building or structure where an adult oriented business is conducted, to the
nearest property line of the premises of a place of worship, school or other
protected building or premises.
      (2)   Adult oriented business establishments shall comply with all of the
density, setback and parking requirements of the district and all other zoning,
building and state building requirements.
      (3)   All buildings, entries, windows and the like, shall be located,
covered or otherwise arranged in such a manner to prevent a view into the
interior.
      (4)   No screen, stages, loudspeakers or other sound systems, shall be
seen or heard from the exterior of an adult business establishment.
      (5)   No advertisements, displays, or other promotional materials
displaying specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas shall be
shown or exhibited so as to be visible to the public from pedestrian sidewalks
or walkways, or from other public or semi-public areas.
   (B)   Agriculture (Crops).
      (1)   For the purposes of this Zoning Code, the terms agriculture,
agricultural activities and agricultural uses do not include the keeping of
animals, animal products or animal husbandry.
      (2)   The minimum lot area shall be 5 acres.
      (3)   The minimum front setback for principal and accessory buildings and
structures shall be comply with the requirements of the district.
      (4)   Agricultural uses shall properly manage fertilizer in compliance
with all applicable local and state regulations, so as to not create a nuisance
or health hazard to adjoining or nearby property owners.
      (5)   Farm stands are permitted when in compliance with the following:
         (a)   Such stands shall be freestanding structures that are no more
than 200 square feet;
         (b)   Off-street parking facilities shall be limited to 4 parking
spaces and shall be set back and separate from the right of way;
         (c)   Such stands shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from the
front and side lot lines; and
         (d)   Products sold at the farm stand shall be limited to farm
products grown or raised on the premises.
   (C)   Electric Vehicle Charging Stations (EVCS), Outdoor.
      (1)   An outdoor electric vehicle charging station (EVCS) is a public or
private parking space(s) that is (are) served by battery charging equipment
with the purpose of transferring electric energy to a battery or other energy
storage device in an electric vehicle.
      (2)   Outdoor EVCS for public use shall be permitted as an accessory use
within any parking space in a parking lot, subject to the following
regulations:
         (a)   A maximum of two parking spaces or 5% of the minimum required
parking spaces, whichever is greater, shall be permitted as an accessory use.
         (b)   The EVCSs shall be located in a side or rear yard in a location
that will be easily seen by the public for informational and security purposes
and shall be illuminated during evening business hours.
         (c)   The EVCS pedestals shall be protected as necessary to prevent
damage by automobiles.
         (d)   Complete instructions and appropriate warnings concerning the
use of the EVCS shall be posted on a sign in a prominent location on each
station for use by the operator.
      (3)   Outdoor electric vehicle charging stations for private use shall be
permitted as an accessory use in compliance with the following:
         (a)   Be located in a side or rear yard and in a manner that will not
allow public access to the charging station.
         (b)   The EVCS pedestals shall be protected as necessary to prevent
damage by automobiles.
      (4)   All outdoor EVCS shall be maintained regularly, kept in good repair
and operating condition.
         (a)   Outdoor EVCS shall comply with all state and federal
requirements.
         (b)   The following information shall be posted at all electric
vehicle charging stations:
            (i)   Voltage and amperage levels;
            (ii)   Hour of operations if time limits or tow-away provisions are
to be enforced by the property owner;
            (iii)   Usage fees;
            (iv)   Safety information;
            (v)   Contact information for reporting when the equipment is not
operating or other problems.
   (D)   Essential Services.
      (1)   Intent. Provision for essential services requirements are
established in order to achieve, among others, the following purposes:
         (a)   To provide a reasonable assurance that right-of-way, easement or
other spaces will be available for the installation, placement, erection or
construction of utility systems;
         (b)   To provide for the alteration and maintenance of such utility
systems; and
         (c)   To promote the general convenience, welfare and prosperity of
business, service, research, production and manufacturing developments and
convenience to residences, all of which depend upon essential services.
      (2)   Essential services that are necessary for the furnishing of
adequate service by public utilities, municipal departments, commissions, or
for the public health, convenience, safety or general welfare are permitted in
all districts.
      (3)   Permitted essential services shall include:
         (a)   Locations underground, on the surface or overhead;
         (b)   Conveyances for gas, electrical, steam wastes or water;
         (c)   The facilities may include collection, storage, transmission or
distribution systems; and
         (d)   The components of such facilities may include: mains, drains,
sewers, pipes, conduits, wires, cables, fiber optics, traffic signals,
hydrants, poles and other similar equipment, and accessories in connection
therewith, but not including telecommunication towers, which are otherwise
regulated in this Zoning Code.
      (4)   All proposed essential services shall be reviewed and approved by a
professional engineer selected by the Planning Commission and or the Village
Administrator as authorized by Village Council.
   (E)   Self-storage Units/Mini Storage.
      (1)   The development plan shall indicate the orientation of the
buildings and the number and size of storage units.
      (2)   The standard leases for rental of a self-storage units shall
include clauses prohibiting the following:
         (a)   The storage of flammable liquids or radioactive, highly
combustible, explosive or hazardous materials.
         (b)   The self-storage unit shall be used only for dead storage.
         (c)   No activities, such as the sale, repair, fabrication, or
servicing of goods, motor vehicles, appliances, equipment, or materials shall
be conducted from the self-storage units.
      (3)   All storage shall be within a completely enclosed building. The
outdoor storage of inventory, materials, vehicles, merchandise or other
personal property is prohibited.
      (4)   The maximum size of an individual storage compartment shall be 500
square feet.
      (5)   No storage unit door opening shall face a residential zoning
district.
      (6)   Ornamental fencing is permitted and encouraged in the front of the
building. No fence shall be topped with barbed wire or sharp edged materials.
      (7)   The Fire Department shall be provided 24-hour access to the
grounds. A lockbox or similar mechanism shall be provided for the Fire
Department’s use.
   (F)   Small Wind Energy Systems.
      (1)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish general
guidelines for the location of small wind energy systems. The village
recognizes in some specific instances, under carefully controlled
circumstances, it may be in the public interest to permit the placement of wind
turbine generators in certain areas of the village. The village also recognizes
the need to protect the village from unreasonable visual interference, noise
radiation and that wind turbine generators may have negative health, safety,
welfare and aesthetic impacts upon adjoining and neighboring uses.
      (2)   Intent.
         (a)   Protect residential areas from potential adverse impact of wind
turbine generators;
         (b)   Permit wind turbine generators in selected areas by on-site
residential, commercial or industrial users, subject to terms, conditions and
provisions hereof;
         (c)   Ensure the public health, welfare and safety of the village’s
residents in connection with wind turbine generators; and
         (d)   Avoid potential damage to real and personal property from the
wind turbine generators or anemometer towers or the failure of such structures
and related operations.
      (3)   Minimum Acreage and Maximum Heights Standards.
         (a)   A wind turbine shall be located on a single lot, with a minimum
size of one acre.
         (b)   Only one wind turbine per lot owned, which must be operated and
maintained by the property owner per address only.
         (c)   The maximum height of any turbine shall be 100 feet, which
includes the tower and the maximum vertical height of the turbine’s blades.
Maximum height shall be calculated by measuring the length of a prop at a
maximum vertical rotation to the base of the tower, which shall be no higher
than ground level.
         (d)   The wind turbine shall be an un-guyed, monopole style tower
only.
      (4)   Setbacks.
         (a)   Any wind turbine system erected on a parcel of land shall
establish a “clear fall zone” from all neighboring property lines and
structures, public rights-of-way and utility rights-of-way, as well as any
structures on the parcel intended for the turbine.
         (b)   The wind turbine shall be erected and placed on the lot in such
a manner that if it were to fall, the entire system would be contained solely
on the property where the turbine was installed, and would not strike any
structures, including the primary dwelling and any accessory buildings or uses.
      (5)   Lighting. The maximum lighting used for or on the structure shall
comply with state and federal regulations.
      (6)   Decibel levels. Decibel levels for the system shall not exceed 60
decibels (dba) measured at the property line.
      (7)   Color. Color of the unit as well as the location and size of the
manufacturers identifying logos shall be included in the plan.
         (a)   Logos, advertising or other identification markers other than
those of the manufacturer and model type are not permitted.
         (b)   The system, including the prop blades, turbine, cowling and
tower shall be painted or coated white, gray or sky blue.
         (c)   Lettering shall be either black or white and no taller than six
inches in height.
      (8)   Maintenance, construction and installation.
         (a)   A maintenance schedule as well as an erection and dismantling
plan that outlines how the unit will be installed and dismantled shall be
required as part of the permit. The plan shall include all potential impacts to
neighboring properties and village assets.
         (b)   All power turbine distribution wire shall be installed
underground.
         (c)   The owner shall notify the Zoning Administrator if operations of
the wind turbine cease and the turbine shall be removed within 60 days of
cessation of operations at owner’s expense.
         (d)   No grid-interconnected wind energy system shall be installed
until evidence has been provided to the village that the utility company has
been informed of the customer’s intent to install a grid-connected customer-
owned generator.
      (9)   Permit Required. A zoning permit shall be required prior to
construction of any individual wind turbine system. As part of the permit
process, the applicant shall submit an application for conditional use approval
as provided in
Article 150.67, which shall include:
         (a)   A map or drawing visually showing the location of all public and
private airports in relation to the location of the turbine, as well as any FAA
restrictions that may be applicable;
         (b)   An engineering report performed by an engineer currently
licensed to practice in the state that shows the following:
            (i)   The total size and height of the unit;
            (ii)   The total size and depth of the unit’s concrete foundation;
            (iii)   Foundation design sealed and signed by a professional
structural engineer currently licensed by the state;
            (iv)   An average decibel rating for that particular model at the
property line;
            (v)   A list and or depiction of all safety measures that will be
on the unit including anti-climb device, grounding devices and lightning
protection;
            (vi)   Data specifying the kilowatt size and generating capacity of
the particular unit; and
            (vii)   Evidence of a “clear fall zone” with manufacturers
recommendations.
         (c)   A scaled site drawing showing the location of the unit in
relation to existing structures on the property, roads and other public rights-
of-way and neighboring properties, including an aerial view of the existing
site and adjoining properties with the tower location identified.
      (10)   Definitions. For purposes of regulating residential, commercial
and industrial use of wind generators, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         (a)   CLEAR FALL ZONE. An area surrounding the wind turbine unit into
which the turbine and or turbine components might fall due to inclement
weather, poor maintenance, faulty construction methods or any other condition
causing turbine failure, that shall remain unobstructed and confined within
property lines of the primary parcel where the turbine is located, the purpose
being that if the turbine should fall or otherwise become damaged, the falling
structure will be confined to the primary parcel and will not fall onto
dwellings, accessory buildings nor intrude onto a neighboring public or private
property.
         (b)   MONOPOD TYPE TOWER. A tower constructed of a single component
such as a pipe or tube. Towers of an open web truss style similar to a
conventional television tower or radio communications tower, though they may be
self-supporting, are not considered monopod types.
         (c)   PRIMARY STRUCTURE. For each property, the structure that one or
more persons occupy the majority of time on that property for either business
or personal reasons. PRIMARY STRUCTURES include structures such as residences,
commercial buildings, hospitals and day care centers.
         (d)   PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER. A qualified individual who is licensed to
practice as a professional engineer in the State of Ohio.
         (e)   SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM. A wind driven system generating 30kw
or less.
         (f)   WIND POWER TURBINE OWNER. The person or persons who own the wind
turbine structure and the property on which it is constructed.
         (g)   WIND POWER TURBINE TOWER. The support structure to which the
turbine and rotor are attached.
         (h)   WIND POWER TURBINE TOWER HEIGHT. The distance from the rotor
blade at its highest point to the top surface of the wind power generating
facility (WPGF) foundation.
   (G)   Solar Collector Systems, Ground-Mounted and Roof-Mounted.
      (1)   Solar collector systems shall be limited to small-scale solar
collectors and shall be permitted only as an accessory use to provide power for
use by owners, lessees, tenants, residents, or other occupants of the premises
on which they are erected.
      (2)   Ground-mounted solar collector systems shall comply with the
following:
         (a)   The minimum lot area shall be five (5) acres, and the ground
area covered by the solar panels shall not exceed one (1) percent of the lot
area.
         (b)   The area of the ground mounted solar collectors shall not count
toward the maximum lot coverage if the ground below the structure is permeable
or substantially pervious to water.
         (c)   The height of the ground mounted solar collectors and any mounts
shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet when oriented at maximum tilt.
         (d)   In Residential Districts, ground mounted solar collectors and
associated equipment shall be located in a rear yard and comply with the
minimum side and rear setbacks for principal buildings in the applicable zoning
district.
         (e)   In Nonresidential Districts, ground mounted solar collectors and
associated equipment shall be located in a side or rear yard and comply with
the minimum side and rear setbacks for principal buildings in the applicable
zoning district.
         (f)   Ground mounted solar collectors shall be designed and located in
an arrangement that minimizes glare or reflection onto adjacent properties and
adjacent roadways, and does not interfere with traffic or create a safety
hazard.
         (g)   All ground mounted solar energy collector systems shall be
enclosed by a fence or wall six feet in height, and a landscaping buffer shall
be provided around the perimeter of any portion of a ground mounted solar
collector system that is visible from an adjacent residentially used property
or a public street. All landscaping shall be maintained in compliance with
Article 150.39.
      (3)   Roof-mounted solar collector systems are permitted as an accessory
use when attached to a principal or accessory building and installed in
conformance with the following:
         (a)   Roof-mounted solar panels that are integrated with the surface
layer of the roof structure or are mounted flush with the roof structure are
permitted on any roof surface of a principal building or accessory building.
         (b)   For flat roofs or the horizontal portion of mansard roofs, the
solar panels may extend up to three (3) feet above the highest point of the
roof.
         (c)   For pitched, hipped, or gambrel roofs, whenever solar panels are
located visible from a public street, the panels shall be mounted at the same
angle as the roof’s surface with no more than 18 inches between the roof and
the upper side of the solar panel.
         (d)   Solar collectors shall be considered part of the building and
shall comply with all building height and setback requirements.
         (e)   Glare. Solar panels shall be placed and arranged such that
reflected solar radiation or glare shall not be directed onto adjacent
buildings, properties or streets.
      (4)   Utility Connections.
         (a)   All exterior utility lines for ground mounted solar energy
systems shall meet all applicable building and electric codes.
         (b)   If the proposed solar collector system is to be connected to the
electricity power grid through net metering, the owner must receive written
approval from the electric utility service provider that serves the proposed
site. Copies of the written approval shall be submitted with the zoning permit
application.
      (5)   In the event a solar collector ceases its useful intended operation
for a period of six (6) months, the solar collector shall be considered
abandoned. The owner/operator shall remove the non-functioning collector within
180 days after receipt of a notice from the Zoning Inspector to do so. Removal
shall consist of the physical removal of all solar collector panels, mounts and
associated equipment, from the site, the disposal of all solid and hazardous
waste in accordance with local, state, and federal waste disposal regulations,
and, for ground-mounted solar panels, the stabilization or revegetation of the
site as necessary to minimize erosion.
   (H)   Utility Substation and Transmission Facility.
      (1)   Facilities shall be limited to structures that are essential for
the distribution of services to the local area or when topographical features
restrict the location of such facility.
      (2)   Utility Substations and Transmission Facility, as measured from the
outermost edge of the facility, shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any
residential property line.
      (3)   Natural or man-made barriers shall be provided to lessen any impact
on and views from an adjacent residential area. In making this determination,
the proximity of residential uses, the form of surrounding built environment,
and the location and type of surrounding land uses shall be considered by the
Planning Commission.
      (4)   Fences and walls, in excess of six (6) feet in height, shall be
setback from every public street right of way line a distance no less than
twelve (12) feet and shall be setback from every other property line a distance
of no less than ten (10) feet. Within these setbacks, evergreen shrubs and
trees shall be planted in conformance with §
150.397(G)(1)(a).
      (5)   Storage of materials shall be within a completely enclosed
building.
   (I)   Wireless Telecommunication Facilities.
      (1)   Purpose. These regulations are established to provide for the
construction and use of wireless telecommunication facilities, which shall
include all antennas, towers, and support structures, within areas of the
village as permitted herein except for noncommercial antennas in residential
districts. The intent of these regulations is to balance the competing
interests created by the Federal Telecommunication Act of 1996, Public Law 104-
104, and the interests of the village in regulating wireless telecommunication
towers and related facilities for the following purposes:
         (a)   To protect residential areas and avoid potential damage to
adjacent properties from wireless telecommunication antennas, towers, support
structures and facility failure;
         (b)   To protect property values;
         (c)   To encourage the joint use of any new and existing wireless
telecommunication towers and related facilities to minimize the number of such
structures within the village; and
         (d)   To minimize the adverse visual effects of wireless
telecommunication towers and related facilities.
      (2)   Accessory Use. Whenever a wireless telecommunication facility is
permitted in a district, it shall be permitted as an accessory use to an
existing principal use, as noted below, requiring conditional use approval in
compliance with
Article 150.67.
      (3)   Antenna Attached to an Existing Building. An antenna for a wireless
telecommunication facility may be attached to an existing residential building
four or more stories in height or to an existing nonresidential structure
subject to the following conditions.
         (a)   Maximum height. The antenna shall not extend more than 20 feet
above the roof of the existing building or top of the existing structure.
         (b)   Roof setback. The pole structure supporting such antenna shall
be set back one foot from the edge of such roof for each one foot of height
above such roof. This requirement shall not apply to antennas two inches or
less in thickness without a supporting pole structure.
         (c)   Separate equipment shelter. If the applicant proposes to locate
the telecommunication equipment in a separate equipment shelter, not located in
or attached to the building, the equipment shelter shall comply with the
accessory building regulations of the district and not be located above the
ground within any required front or side yard.
         (d)   Vehicular access. Vehicular access to the equipment shelter
shall be via the existing circulation system and be paved with asphalt or
concrete.
      (4)   Tower. A freestanding wireless telecommunication tower may be
erected as an accessory use to a public or institutional use within a
residential zoning district, provided the Planning Commission finds the
following standards have been met.
         (a)   Minimum lot size for principal use. The minimum lot size for
principal use for which the tower is accessory shall be five (5) acres.
         (b)   Minimum setback from property lines and residential structures.
The minimum setbacks and yard requirements shall be established by the Planning
Commission.
         (c)   Maximum height. The height of such tower shall be subject to
approval by the Planning Commission and be the minimum height necessary.
         (d)   Equipment shelter. The minimum setbacks, height limits, bulk
requirements and screening standards shall be established by the Plan
Commission during the conditional use process. Such shelter shall not be
located above ground in any required front or side yard.
         (e)   Required buffer. A buffer screen shall be planted around the
perimeter of the site.
      (5)   Vehicular access. Vehicular access to the equipment shelter shall
be via the existing circulation system and be paved with asphalt or concrete.
      (6)   Noncommercial Antennas in Residential Districts. Noncommercial
antennas for individual, private use, such as but not limited to, amateur radio
antennas, shall comply with the regulations in
Article 150.21.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
ARTICLE 150.35
SIGN REGULATIONS
   
150.351   Intent.
   
150.352   Applicability.
   
150.353   Prohibited signs.
   
150.354   Classification of signs.
   
150.355   Computations and rules of measurement.
   
150.356   Permanent signs in Residential and Public Open Space Districts.
   
150.357   Permanent signs in Business and Industrial Districts.
   
150.358   Changeable copy/electronic message center signs.
   
150.359   Temporary signs.
   
150.360   Sign illumination, construction and maintenance standards.
   
150.361   Nonconforming, abandoned and illegal signs.
   
150.362    Application for sign permit.
§ 150.351 INTENT.
   (A)   These sign regulations, including provisions to control the type,
design, size, location, motion, illumination, replacement and maintenance
thereof, are established to promote the public health, safety, and welfare, and
to achieve, among others, the following purposes:
      (1)   Enhance and protect the physical appearance of the community;
      (2)   Promote and maintain visually attractive residential, business, and
industrial districts by reducing visual clutter and preventing blight
characterized by oversized, overcrowded, abandoned, obsolete, and/or
dilapidated signs;
      (3)   Provide businesses, institutions and residents with an effective
means of communication while balancing their rights to convey messages through
signs with the right of the public to be protected against the unrestricted
proliferation of signs;
      (4)   Eliminate potential hazards to motorists and pedestrians resulting
from sign clutter and the erection of structures that obstruct sight distance
at the intersection of streets, alleys, or driveways;
      (5)   Promote desirable developments and economic activity in accordance
with the objectives of this zoning code;
      (6)   Prohibit all signs not expressly permitted by this Chapter; and
      (7)   Provide review procedures that enable the Village to evaluate the
compliance of a sign with these standards as well as its appropriateness to a
specific site or building, and its surroundings.
   (B)   No part of these standards shall be interpreted to infringe upon
rights guaranteed by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.352 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   The regulations contained in this Article shall apply to all signs,
sign structures, and other types of sign devices located within the Village of
Swanton, except when specifically stated otherwise.
   (B)   No sign shall be erected, established, painted, created, or maintained
in the Village of Swanton without the issuance of a zoning permit and payment
of the required fee as required in §
150.362 unless otherwise exempted in this Article.
      (1)   A zoning permit is not required for the following types of signs
and sign maintenance:
         (a)   The non-structural maintenance of a sign.
         (b)   A change of copy on changeable copy signs.
         (c)   Temporary signs in residential districts.
      (2)   A zoning permit is required for changes to sign panels, painted
signs or letters that are attached to a structure or wall.
      (3)   All structural changes to a sign or supporting structure shall
require a zoning permit.
      (4)   Signs in nonresidential districts, in multi-family residential
districts, and for nonresidential uses in one-family districts shall be
reviewed by the Planning Commission according to §
150.652.
   (C)   Architectural features that are an integrated part of the building or
structure are not considered signs and are exempt from these regulations.
      (1)   Architectural feature means ornamentation or decorative elements
attached to, incorporated into, or projected from the exterior of a building or
structure, including a structure attending to, but not an integral part of the
sign;
      (2)   Architectural features of a building include, but are not limited
to, doors, windows, columns, cornices, eaves, gutters, fascias, belt courses,
sills, lintels, pediments, bay windows, chimneys, trim details and decorative
ornaments; and
      (3)   Architectural features may consist of landscaping, building or
structural forms that enhance the site in general.
   (D)   Noncommercial Speech. The commercial message sign area allowed for any
permanent sign permitted in this Article may be substituted with a
noncommercial message. A sign permit shall not be required for this
substitution if there is no structural change to the sign.
   (E)   Exempt Signs. The following signs and displays are exempt from the
regulations of this Chapter:
      (1)   The display of official public notices, the Unites States or any
state flag, emblem or insignia of an official governmental body shall not be
governed by the provisions of these regulations.
      (2)   Any sign erected or required to be erected by a unit of local,
state or federal government.
      (3)   Any warning signs or traffic safety signs required by public
utility providers.
      (4)   Building marker, cornerstones, or building plaques.
      (5)   Works of art that do not include a commercial message.
      (6)   Religious symbols that do not display a commercial message.
      (7)   Decorative religious displays and other holiday lights or
decorations containing no commercial message when displayed during the
appropriate time of the year.
      (8)   Any sign located inside a building that is not visible from outside
of the building, or that is mounted more than three feet beyond a transparent
window or door. Signs in windows that are mounted in such a way as to be viewed
from outside the building shall be considered window signs subject to the
provisions of this Article.
      (9)   Any outdoor sign that does not exceed two square feet and that is
not visible from any adjacent public right-of-way or from any adjacent
property.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.353 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   The following signs are prohibited in the Village:
   (A)   Abandoned signs, as defined in §
150.354(B).
   (B)   Public areas: no sign shall be placed on any curb, sidewalk, post,
pole, public or private utility appurtenance, hydrant, bridge, tree or other
surface located on public property or over or across any street or public
thoroughfare, easement or right-of-way except as may otherwise expressly be
authorized by this zoning code. Unauthorized signage in public areas is subject
to immediate removal by the Village.
   (C)   Animated, flashing, rotating, revolving, whirling signs and festoons,
inflatable signs, tethered balloons, pennants, searchlights, streamers, exposed
light bulbs, strings of lights not permanently mounted to a rigid background
and any clearly similar features, except those specifically exempt from
regulation in §
150.352, and electronic message centers as permitted in §
150.358.
   (C)   Signs placed on or painted on a motor vehicle or trailer parked with
the primary purpose of providing signage not otherwise allowed by the Code.
Prohibited is any sign displayed on a parked trailer or truck or other vehicle
where the primary purpose of the vehicle is to advertise a product, service
business, or other activity. A vehicle sign shall be considered to be used for
the primary purpose of advertising if the vehicle fails to display current
license plates or inspection sticker, if the vehicle is inoperable, if evidence
of paid-to-date local taxes cannot be made available, or if the sign alters the
standard design of such vehicle. Vehicle signs include those attached to or
placed on a vehicle or trailer. Vehicles or trailers shall not be parked
continuously in one location to be used primarily as additional signage. This
does not apply to a vehicle parked at a driver’s residence and which is the
primary means of transportation to and from his or her place of employment.
   (D)   Signs containing any words, symbols, or illumination that would cause
confusion because of their resemblance to highway traffic control or direction
signals.
   (E)   Signs that prevent the driver of a vehicle from having a clear and
unobstructed view of official government signs and/or approaching or merging
traffic, or which by means of illumination obscure a government sign or cause a
traffic hazard.
   (F)   Signs located on trees, utility poles, public benches or any other
form of public property or within any public right-of-way unless explicitly
permitted by the regulations.
   (G)   Signs mounted on top of a roof.
   (H)   Portable signs, not including A-frame sidewalk signs.
   (I)   Signs located on private property without the written consent of the
owner or agent thereof.
   (J)   Other signs or attention getting devices that raise concerns
substantially similar to those listed above.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.354 CLASSIFICATION OF SIGNS.
   For the purposes of this Article, signs shall be classified and defined by
physical design or structure, and function or purpose as follows:
   (A)   Definition. A sign is defined as any display, figure, painting,
drawing, placard, poster or other device visible from a public way that is
designed, intended or used to convey a message, advertise, inform or direct
attention to a person, institution, organization, activity, place, object or
product. It may be a structure or part thereof printed or attached directly or
indirectly on a structure.
      (1)   Sign Area. The entire display area of a sign as measured pursuant
to §
150.355(A).
      (2)   Sign Copy. Those letters, numerals, and figures, symbols, logos,
and graphic elements comprising the content or message of a sign.
      (3)   Face of Sign. The area of a sign on which the copy is placed.
   (B)   Physical Characteristics.
      (1)   Abandoned Sign. A sign that pertains to a business, lessor,
service, owner, or activity no longer conducted on the premises for 90
consecutive days, and/or for which no legal owner or proprietor is found on the
premises.
      (2)   A-Frame Sign. A freestanding portable sign that is readily
moveable, not secured or attached to the ground or surface upon which it is
located and constructed in such a manner as to form an “A” or a tent-like
shape, hinged or not hinged at the top; with each angular face held at an
appropriate distance by a supporting member. Also known as a sandwich board
sign.
      (3)   Animated Sign. A sign that uses movement or change of lighting to
depict action or to create a special effect or scene.
      (4)   Awning Sign. A sign painted on, printed on, or attached to the
fascia of an awning, canopy, or other fabric, plastic, or structural protective
cover over a door entrance or window.
      (5)   Banner Sign. A sign made with fabric, plastic, paper, or similar
lightweight material with no frame. National and state flags and the official
flag of any organization, institution or business shall not be considered
banners.
      (6)   Building Sign. A sign attached to any part of a building including
but not limited to wall, awning, canopy, marquee and projecting signs.
      (7)   Building Marker. Letters, words, or insignia cut into the building
surface, or otherwise permanently mounted on the building, at the time of
construction with the name or address of the building, date of construction, or
to convey a memorial or similar message.
      (8)   Changeable Copy Sign. A sign on which the message or graphics is
not permanently affixed to the structure, framing or background and is designed
to be periodically replaced or covered manually or by electronic or mechanical
devices. Examples are a bulletin board and announcement board. See also the
definition of “electronic message sign.”
      (9)   Drive-Thru Sign. Any sign located along a drive-thru lane that is
oriented toward the customer or user in the drive-thru lane, such as a menu
board.
      (10)   Entrance Sign. A small permanent sign located near driveway access
points and/or at the intersection of internal access drives.
      (11)   Electronic Message Sign. A sign with a fixed or changing display
or message composed of a series of lights that may be changed automatically
and/or remotely through electronic or mechanical means.
      (12)   Festoons. A string of ribbons, tinsel, small flags, pinwheels or
the like.
      (13)   Flashing Sign. A sign, other than a changeable copy sign or
animated sign, which contains an intermittent or sequential flashing light
source, used primarily to attract attention.
      (14)   Freestanding Sign. A sign supported by one or more uprights,
posts, columns, or vertical structures or supports affixed to the ground and
not attached to any part of the building.
      (15)   Illuminated Sign. A sign with an artificial light source that
internally or externally illuminates the sign.
      (16)   Inflatable Sign. A sign that is an air inflated object, which may
be of various shapes, made of flexible fabric, resting on the ground or a
structure, and equipped with a portable blower motor that provides a constant
flow of air into the device.
      (17)   Marquee Sign. A sign attached to or supported by a permanent roof-
like structure or canopy of rigid materials supported by and extending from the
façade of a building.
      (18)   Monument Sign. A permanent freestanding sign other than a pole
sign, not attached to a building, which is placed upon or supported by the
ground independently of any other structure, typically on a monument or
pedestal structure.
      (19)   Nonconforming Sign. Any sign lawfully existing on the effective
date of an ordinance, or an amendment thereto, which renders such sign
nonconforming because it does not conform to all the standards and regulations
of the adopted or amended ordinance.
      (20)   Pole Sign. A permanent freestanding sign that is affixed,
attached, or erected on a pole.
      (21)   Portable Sign. A sign that is designed to be portable and can be
transported on wheels, skids, a bench, runners, brackets or has a frame to
which wheels, skids, runners, brackets or similar mechanical devices are or can
be attached.
      (22)   Projecting Sign. A sign that is wholly or partly dependent upon a
building for support and projects more than 12 inches from such building.
      (23)   Roof Sign. A sign erected on, above, or over the roof of a
building.
      (24)   Rotating Sign. A sign, or any portion thereof, which moves in a
revolving or similar manner.
      (25)   Under-canopy Sign. A sign that is affixed perpendicular to and
underneath and hanging, or suspended, from a marquee, awning, canopy, or
ceiling of a building or structure, which is intended to be viewed by
pedestrian traffic.
      (26)   Wall Sign. A sign fastened to or painted on the exterior wall of a
building in such a manner that the wall becomes the supporting structure for,
or forms the background surface of the sign or erected parallel thereto, which
does not extend more than 12 inches therefrom nor project above the roofline or
beyond the corner of the building.
      (27)   Window Sign. A sign that is attached to, affixed to, or painted on
the interior or exterior of a window or door, or a sign located within two (2)
feet inside of a window or door for the purpose of being visible and read from
the outside of the building.
   (C)   Function.
      (1)   Commercial Message or Speech. Any sign, wording, logo or other
representation that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises or calls
attention to a business, product, service, or other commercial activity.
      (2)   Instructional (Incidental) Sign. A sign that instructs employees,
customers or users as to specific parking requirements; the location of, or
regulations pertaining to, specific activities on the site or in the building;
specific services offered; or methods of payments accepted and is not intended
or designed to attract attention from off-site.
      (3)   Noncommercial Message or Speech. Any sign, wording, logo or other
representation that, does fall under the definition of “commercial message or
speech.”
      (4)   Permanent Sign. Any sign that does not fall under the definition of
“temporary sign.”
      (5)   Temporary Sign. A sign that is designed to be used only temporarily
and is not permanently, or intended to be permanently, attached to a building,
structure or on the ground.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.355 COMPUTATIONS AND RULES OF MEASUREMENT.
   The following regulations shall control the computation and measurement of
sign area, sign height, sign setbacks, building frontage, and window area.
   (A)   Determining Sign Area or Dimension.
      (1)   Sign area shall include the face of the entire display area of the
sign. Sign area shall not include the structural support unless such structural
support is an integral part of the sign design.
      (2)   The surface area of a sign shall be computed by calculating the
area of the sign face.
      (3)   Sign Area.
         (a)   Framed: A sign that is framed, outlined, painted or otherwise
prepared and intended to include a background for the sign display, the sign
area shall include the entire portion within such frame or background.
         (b)   Nonframed: For a sign comprised of individual elements such as
letters, symbols, or other graphic objects or representations that are painted,
attached to, or otherwise affixed to a surface such as a wall, window, canopy,
or awning, the sign area shall be based on the sum of the individual areas of
the smallest geometric shape or combination of geometric shapes capable of
encompassing the perimeters of the individual elements comprising the sign.
When separate elements are organized to form a single sign, but are separated
by open space, the sign area and dimensions shall be calculated by determining
the geometric shape, or combination of shapes, that comprises all of the
display areas, including the space between different elements. Minor appendages
to a particular regular shape, as determined by the Zoning Administrator or
Planning Commission, shall not be included in the total area of a sign.
      (4)   Freestanding Sign Area.
         (a)   When two identical, flat sign faces are placed back-to-back or
at angles of 30 degrees or less, so that both faces cannot be viewed from any
one point at the same time, and when such sign faces are part of the same sign
structure and are not more than 12 inches apart, the sign area shall be
computed by the measurement of one of the faces. If the two faces are unequal,
the sign area shall be calculated based on the larger of the two faces.
         (b)   No more than two display faces shall be permitted for one sign.
   (B)   Determining Sign Height.
      (1)   The height of a freestanding sign shall be measured as the distance
from the highest portion of the sign including frame and structural members to
the average finished grade of the street closest to the sign.
      (2)   In the case of a sign located greater than 100 feet from a public
street, height shall be measured to the average finished grade at the base of
the sign. The finished grade shall be construed to be the newly established
grade after construction, exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding, or
excavating solely undertaken for the purpose of locating or increasing the
height of the sign.
      (3)   Clearance for freestanding and projecting signs shall be measured
as the smallest vertical distance between finished grade and the lowest point
of the sign, including any framework or other embellishments.
   (C)   Sign Setbacks.
      (1)   The required setbacks for a sign shall apply to all elements of the
sign, including its frame and base.
      (2)   The setback of a freestanding sign or projecting sign shall be
measured horizontally from the outward edge of the sign frame to the street
right-of-way or lot line, as applicable.
   (D)   Determining Building Frontage, Building Units, and Building Facades.
      (1)   For the purposes of this Article, building frontage includes the
length of any building wall described below:
         (a)   Any building wall that faces a public or private street;
         (b)   Any building wall that contains a public entrance to the uses
therein.
      (2)   The calculation of the width or lineal measurement of any building
frontage shall be the measurement of the façade between two side facades. The
calculation shall be based on viewing the façade from a 90-degree angle (i.e.,
straight on), regardless of façade insets, offsets, or angles. See Figure
150.355(D).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/083b2827ca6deba1b1fb1d5dec2edfde91f29d3b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2492.png]
 
      (3)   For multi-tenant buildings, the portion of a building that is owned
or leased by a single occupant or tenant shall be considered a building unit.
The building frontage for a building unit shall be measured from the centerline
of the party walls defining the building unit.
   (E)   Determining Window Area. The window area of a building shall be the
total glass area of windows on the building frontage. For the purposes of
determining window area for ground floor occupants, the ground floor shall be
considered to be no more than 15 feet in height above grade.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.356 PERMANENT SIGNS IN RESIDENTIAL AND PUBLIC OPEN SPACE DISTRICTS.
   Permanent signs for all uses in Residential Districts and the P/OS District
shall comply with the regulations set forth in this Section.
   (A)   Permanent signs for all uses in residential districts and P/OS
District shall be limited in number, area, height and setback based on the type
of use, as set forth in Schedule 150.356(A).
SCHEDULE 150.356(A)
SIGNS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS (R-E, R1, R2, R3, R4 AND R-5) AND P/OS
DISTRICT
                                      Regulations for Freestanding signs
          Maximum                                 Min          Min
Signs     Number of Maximum Sign   Maximum Height Setback from Setback from
Permitted Signs     Area Permitted                ROW          side lot line
          Permitted
SCHEDULE 150.356(A)
SIGNS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS (R-E, R1, R2, R3, R4 AND R-5) AND P/OS DISTRICT
                                                                                       Regulations for
                                                                                    Freestanding signs
                                                                                                    Min
                                                              Maximum     Maximum           Min     Setback
Signs Permitted                                               Number of   Sign Area Maximum Setback from
                                                              Signs       Permitted Height  from    side
                                                              Permitted                     ROW     lot
                                                                                                    line
(1) One-family and two-family                                 1/unit      5 sq. ft. 4 sq.   10 ft.  10 ft.
dwelling units                                                                      ft.
(2) Multi-family and one family
attached developments with
                                                              1/          20 sq.
   (a) Per development                                     developmen  ft.       6 ft.   10 ft.  10 ft.
                                                              t
   (b)   Per unit when each unit has a separate outdoor 1/unit      2 sq. ft. NP      NP      NP
entrance                                                                  per unit
(3) Freestanding sign for Residential                         1/          40 sq.
Subdivision[a]                                                subdivision ft.       6 ft.   10 ft.  25 ft.
                                                              entrance
(4) Nonresidential Uses[b]
   (a) Wall Sign                                           1/building  40 sq.    NA      NA      NA
                                                                          ft.
                                                              1/500 feet
   (b)   Freestanding monument sign                     of          40 sq.    5 ft.   10 ft.  10 ft.
                                                              parcel      ft.
                                                              frontage[c]
Notes:
[a]   Sign approval required at the time of final plat approval.
[b]   Located on the premises of an approved nonresidential use in any residential district.
[c]   Except as otherwise permitted in §
150.356(B)(3), for lots that exceed 500 feet in street frontage.
 
   (B)   Additional Requirements for Permanent Signs in Residential and P/OS
Districts.
      (1)   Residential properties.
         (a)   Unless otherwise restricted in
Schedule 150.356(A), signs may be freestanding, mounted to a permanent building
or structure or displayed in a window.
         (b)   Signs shall not be illuminated.
      (2)   Residential Subdivision Entrance Sign.
         (a)   A maximum of two sign faces shall be permitted per entrance on a
collector or arterial street as determined by the Zoning Administrator. The
sign shall either be a doublesided freestanding sign or a two single-sided
signs be mounted on a decorative wall or other entrance feature.
         (b)   Freestanding signs shall be placed on private property, except
that the Planning Commission may approve a freestanding sign in the street
right-of-way provided such sign shall be located on the center island of a
boulevard entrance, placed no closer than 25 feet to the intersecting street’s
right-of-way.
         (c)   Regardless of location, every residential subdivision entrance
sign shall be maintained by a homeowners association in compliance with the
regulations for homeowners associations in §
150.224.
         (d)   Signs shall not be internally illuminated.
      (3)   Nonresidential Uses in Residential and P/OS Districts.
         (a)   A maximum of 30% of the area of a monument sign may be devoted
to changeable copy provided the changeable copy shall not be changed more than
once per day.
         (b)   Monument signs may be illuminated in compliance with the
illumination requirements in
150.360(A).
         (c)   Conditionally permitted uses may be permitted additional sign
area as part of conditional use approval by the Planning Commission if the
Planning Commission determines that, because of the large size of the facility
and its site, the proposed larger sign will be consistent with the objectives,
intent and criteria of this Article.
         (d)   One additional monument sign shall be permitted for a lot with a
lot frontage that exceeds 500 feet. Such sign shall comply with §
150.356(c)(1), above. For corner lots, each street frontage shall be calculated
separately. Freestanding signs on the same lot shall be separated by a minimum
of 100 feet, as measured along the street right-of-way line. For corner lots,
both sides of the intersection shall be used in measuring spacing.
      (4)   Supplemental Regulations for Permanent Monument Signs in
Residential and P/OS Districts.
         (a)   Monument signs shall be erected in a landscaped area and not on
sidewalks, drives, or in parking lots.
         (b)   No part of a monument sign, the wall or entry feature on which
it is mounted, or the landscaping shall obstruct the view of vehicles entering
or exiting the property.
      (5)   Instructional Signs. Instructional signs on multi-family and
nonresidential properties that are clearly intended for instructional purposes
shall be permitted as needed provided such signs are not larger than necessary
to serve the intended instructional purpose, are the minimum number to serve
the intended instructional purpose, and are not located nor designed to attract
attention beyond the perimeter of the site, as determined by the Planning
Commission.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.357 PERMANENT SIGNS IN BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Signs for Residential Uses in Nonresidential Districts. Buildings,
developments, subdivisions, or any portions thereof, that are 100 percent
residential in any nonresidential district, shall be subject to the permanent
sign allowances established in §
150.356. Buildings or a single lot with a mixture of residential and
nonresidential uses shall be permitted signs in accordance with this section.
   (B)   Projecting Signs in B-2 Downtown Business District.
      (1)   Projecting signs shall be limited to one for each customer entrance
to the building, with a maximum sign area of 10 feet, shall be permitted in
lieu of a freestanding sign and shall not count toward the maximum building
sign area permitted in subsection (D) below.
      (2)   Projecting signs shall be attached to the building wall so as to
project at an angle of approximately 90 degrees and shall not extend more than
four feet from the face of the building to which it is attached.
      (3)   Projecting signs shall not be located less than five feet from a
party wall.
      (4)   All projecting signs shall have a minimum clearance of ten feet
from the ground to the bottom of the sign and a maximum height of 14 feet.
      (5)   Projecting signs shall not project into a public right-of-way,
unless approved by the Public Works Supervisor.
      (6)   Signs shall be fastened securely so that movement in all directions
is prevented.
      (7)   Decorative supporting structures for projecting signs are
encouraged and shall not count toward the maximum square footage of signs
allowed, however, in no case shall the supporting structure exceed six square
feet.
   (C)   Under-canopy Signs in Business Districts.
      (1)   Buildings that have a covered walkway along the building frontage
shall be permitted to install one under-canopy sign for each ground floor
tenant directly above the entrance to the tenant space.
      (2)   Under-canopy signs shall be attached to the ceiling of an outdoor
arcade or underneath a canopy, awning, or marquee perpendicular to the wall of
the building to which it is attached.
      (3)   Each under-canopy sign shall not exceed a maximum sign area of six
square feet and shall have a minimum clearance of eight feet from the ground to
the bottom of the sign.
   (D)   Building Signs. Building signs are permitted on all principal
buildings in accordance with the following.
      (1)   Building signs include wall or fascia signs, and signs otherwise
permanently applied parallel to the building wall or other surfaces, including
wall, awning and window signs.
      (2)   The maximum permitted area for building signs shall be:
         (a)   In the B-1 and B-2 Districts: one square foot for every lineal
foot of building frontage.
         (b)   In the B-3 District: one and one-half square feet for every
lineal foot of building frontage.
         (c)   In the M-1 District: two square feet for every lineal foot of
building frontage.
      (3)   For buildings that have more than one building frontage as defined
in §
150.355(D), sign area shall be permitted for a maximum of two building
frontages.
      (4)   This maximum area shall be the sum of the areas of all building
signs, including awning and marquee signs, but not including the area of
projecting signs and under-canopy signs.
      (5)   Notwithstanding the above standard, each building shall be
permitted a minimum of 40 square feet of building sign area.
      (6)   Building signs shall not extend above the top of the roofline of
the building to which it is attached.
      (7)   Building signs shall not be attached to mechanical equipment or
roof screening.
      (8)   Building signs may be internally illuminated, but shall not include
electronic message centers.
      (9)   Additional Building Sign Area for Large Building Setback. The
maximum allowable area for building signs may be increased by one-half square
foot of sign area for each foot of building frontage when the principal
building is set back more than 200 feet from the principal street on which the
building is located. In the event that only a portion of the building is more
than 200 feet from the street, the additional sign area shall be calculated
only for that portion of the building that is more than 200 feet from the
street and facing such street.
      (10)   Permanent Window Signs. The maximum permitted area for permanent
window signs shall be 25% of the total glass area of the ground floor windows.
For the purposes of determining the window area of a ground floor, the ground
floor shall be considered to be no more than fifteen (15) feet in height above
grade.
   (F)   Freestanding Signs.
      (1)   Freestanding signs shall be limited to one (1) per property held in
single and separate ownership, unless specifically permitted otherwise.
      (2)   Freestanding signs shall comply with the maximum permitted area and
height specified in Schedule 150.357(F), except as otherwise specifically
permitted in this Chapter.
 
SCHEDULE 150.357(F)
REGULATIONS FOR FREESTANDING SIGNS IN B-1, B-2, B-3 AND M-1 DISTRICTS
                Maximum Sign   Maximum Height Min Setback from Min Setback from
                Area Permitted [3]            ROW              side lot
                                                               line
B-1 and B-      32 sq. ft.     6 ft.          10 ft.           10 ft.
2 Districts[1]
B-3 District    60 sq. ft.[2]  12 ft.         10 ft.           20 ft.
M-1 District    60 sq. ft.[2]  12 ft.         10 ft.           20 ft.
Airport Highway
Corridor        40 sq. ft.[2]  8 ft.          10 ft.           10 ft.
Overlay
District
Notes:
[1]   Not permitted on the site when the building is located less than 10 feet
from the street right-of-way.
[2]   Plus 1 square foot for every seven (7) feet of lot frontage greater than
200 feet. In no case shall the sign area exceed 200 square feet.
[3]   Freestanding signs with height of eight feet or less shall be designed
and installed as monument signs.
 
      (3)   Additional Freestanding Signs for Large Lot Frontage. The maximum
sign area allowed in
Schedule 150.357(F) may be distributed to one or more freestanding sign(s) for
each 250 feet of lot frontage or fraction thereof. See Figure 150.357(F).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/083b2827ca6deba1b1fb1d5dec2edfde91f29d3b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2498.png]
 
      (4)   Signs on Corner Lots. For corner lots, each street frontage shall
be calculated separately.
         (a)   The allowable sign area permitted in
Schedule 150.357(F) may be distributed to one or more freestanding sign(s) for
each 250 feet of lot frontage or fraction thereof.
         (b)   The total area of all freestanding signs shall comply with
Schedule 150.357(F).
         (c)   Two signs may be aggregated into a single sign provided that the
area of any freestanding sign face shall not exceed 150 percent of the maximum
area permitted for a single sign.
      (5)   Minimum Separation of Freestanding Sign. Whenever multiple
freestanding signs are permitted on a lot, the freestanding signs shall be
separated by a minimum of 200 feet, as measured along the street right-of-way
line. For corner lots, both lot lines that coincide with the street right-of-
way line shall be used in measuring spacing.
      (6)   Landscaping. Freestanding signs shall be erected in a landscaped
setting and not on sidewalks, access drives or in parking lots.
         (a)   Neither the landscaping nor the freestanding sign shall obstruct
the view of vehicles entering or exiting the property.
         (b)   The landscaped area shall include all points where sign
structural supports attach to the ground.
         (c)   Exposed sign foundations shall be constructed with a finished
material such as brick, stone, or wood, or be screened with evergreens to the
top of the anchor bolts.
      (7)   When a freestanding sign is permitted on a site that has more than
one occupant, it is the property owner’s responsibility to determine if the
sign area shall be devoted to identification of the building, the anchor
occupant, all occupants, or some combination thereof.
      (8)   Changeable copy. A freestanding sign may include a changeable copy
sign provided it does not comprise more than eighty percent (80%) of the total
sign area, and is in compliance with §
150.358.
   (G)   Entrance Signs. Each lot that includes a parking lot having spaces for
four or more cars or containing a drive-thru facility shall be permitted to
erect one (1) sign within 10 feet of an entrance or exit drive. Such signs
shall be located on the premises which they serve. Each sign shall not exceed
four (4) square feet. No more than four (4) driveway entrance signs per
premises shall be erected.
   (H)   Drive-thru Signs.
      (1)   Up to two freestanding drive-thru signs, such as, but not limited
to menu boards, shall be permitted for each waiting lane in a drive-thru
facility provided the total aggregate sign area of all drive-thru signs, for
each facility, does not exceed 72 square feet. In no case shall a single drive-
thru sign exceed 36 square feet in sign area.
      (2)   Drive-thru signs shall be permitted only in a side or rear yard.
      (3)   Drive-thru signage shall be in addition to the permitted
freestanding sign area permitted in §
150.357(F).
      (4)   No drive-thru sign shall exceed seven feet in height measured from
the grade of the adjacent driving surface to the top of the sign.
      (5)   Drive-thru signs may be internally or externally illuminated.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.358 CHANGEABLE COPY/ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER SIGNS.
   (A)   Non Electronic Changeable Copy. Changeable copy by non-electronic
means may be utilized on any permitted sign.
   (B)   Electronic Changeable Copy. Electronic message center (EMCs) signs are
permitted in Nonresidential Districts in accordance with the sign areas
permitted in §
150.357 in compliance with the following provisions:
      (1)   Frontage on Airport Highway (SR 2). Electronic message centers are
permitted on lots in Nonresidential Districts with frontage on Airport Highway
(SR 2) in compliance with the following:
         (a)   Setback from Residential Districts. The leading edge of the sign
shall be a minimum distance of 100 feet from an abutting residential district
boundary.
         (b)   Orientation. When located within 150 feet of a residential
district, all parts of the electronic changeable copy sign shall be oriented so
that no portion of the sign face is visible from an existing or permitted
principal structure on such residential lot.
      (2)   EMC Illumination.
         (a)   The brightness of the EMC’s illuminance shall not exceed 0.3
foot-candles above the ambient light level in accordance with the following
procedure:
            1.   The illuminance of an EMC shall be measured with an
illuminance meter set to measure footcandles accurate to at least two decimals.
            2.   Illuminance shall be measured with the EMC off, and again with
the EMC displaying a white image for a full color-capable EMC, or a solid
message for a single-color EMC.
            3.   All measurements shall be taken as close as practical to a
perpendicular plane of the sign at the distance determined by the following
formula: Area of Sign Sq. Ft. x 100.
         (b)   All permitted EMCs shall be equipped with a sensor or other
device that automatically determines the ambient illumination and be programmed
to automatically dim according to ambient light conditions, or that can be
adjusted to comply with the 0.3 footcandle measurements.
         (c)   Each EMC sign shall be operated with monitoring and methods in
place that shall either turn off the display, or show a full black image on the
display, in the event of a malfunction that affects more than fifty percent
(50%) of the EMC sign face.
      (3)   EMC Display. EMC signs shall comply with the following display
requirements:
         (a)   EMC signs shall have a minimum display time of eight (8)
seconds.
         (b)   The transition time between messages and/or message frames shall
not exceed three (3) seconds.
         (c)   Transitions may employ fade, dissolve, and or other transition
effects.
         (d)   The following EMC display features and functions are prohibited:
continuous scrolling and/or traveling, flashing, spinning, rotating, and
similar moving effects, and all dynamic frame effects or patterns of
illusionary movement or simulating movement.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.359 TEMPORARY SIGNS.
   (A)   General Regulations of Temporary Signs.
      (1)   Signs that meet the standards of this section are exempt from the
standards for permanent signs and are not counted in the total square footage
of permanent signage allowed on any particular property or site. Signs that do
not meet the standards of this subsection are subject to the standards for
permanent signs.
      (2)   Unless otherwise stated, a sign permit for temporary signs shall be
required for temporary signs that exceed 12 square feet.
      (3)   Temporary signs shall comply with the intersection visibility
requirements. See §
150.360.
      (4)   Temporary signs proposed to be placed over a public right-of-way
shall be reviewed and approved by the Village Administrator.
      (5)   Except as limited by the standards in §
150.359(E), there is not a limit on the number of temporary signs permitted in
this section provided the aggregate total square footage of sign area does not
exceed the area allowed in this section.
   (B)   Standards that Apply to all Temporary Signs.
      (1)   Temporary signs shall not be posted in any place or in any manner
that is destructive to public property including, but not limited to, rights-
of-way, utility poles, and public trees.
      (2)   Temporary signs shall not be mounted, attached, affixed, installed,
or otherwise secured in a manner that will make the sign a permanent sign, and
shall not require a foundation, support, wiring, fittings, or elements that
would traditionally require a building permit or electrical permit.
      (3)   No temporary sign shall be mounted, attached, affixed, installed,
or otherwise secured so as to protrude above the roofline of a structure.
      (4)   Unless otherwise specifically stated, temporary signs shall not be
illuminated.
      (5)   All temporary signs shall be secured in such a manner as to prevent
swinging or other significantly noticeable movement resulting from the wind
that could pose a danger to people, vehicles, or structures.
      (6)   Portable signs on wheels, runners, casters, parked trailers, parked
vehicles, or other temporary or movable signs shall not be permitted unless
otherwise specifically stated in this chapter.
      (7)   Temporary signs shall be removed or replaced when such sign shows
signs of deterioration, such as but not limited to faded colors or lettering,
torn or damaged sign face, and rusted stakes.
   (C)   Temporary Signs in Residential Districts. The following temporary
signs are permitted in Residential Districts and the P/OS District, as well as
on lots used for residential-only purposes in a business district:
      (1)   Each lot shall be permitted to erect one temporary sign per
dwelling unit provided that no such sign shall be larger than five (5) square
feet or a height greater than four (4) feet and the combined area of all
temporary signs on the site shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in area.
      (2)   A temporary sign shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from all
lots lines and rights-of-way.
      (3)   Temporary signs shall be limited to yard signs and signs posted in
a window subject to the sign-specific standards in §
150.359(E), and shall be displayed for a duration not to exceed forty-five (45)
days.
      (4)   Temporary Signs on Properties for Lease or Sale.
         (a)   In addition to any other permitted sign, one (1) unlighted
temporary sign may be permitted on an individual lot (without a zoning
certificate) when the property is being offered for sale or lease. Such sign
shall be limited to five (5) square feet or less in sign area and four (4) feet
in height, and shall be located on private property.
         (b)   For properties that are five acres or larger, such temporary
sign shall be permitted with a maximum sign area of 24 square feet and a
maximum height of eight feet. Such sign shall be set back 10 feet from all lot
lines.
         (c)   Such temporary sign shall be removed within ten (10) days of the
completion of said sale (title transfer, lease, or rental).
      (5)   In lieu of the above regulations, any nonresidential use located in
a residential zoning district shall be permitted to have temporary signs with a
commercial message in the same size, height, and manner as temporary signs
allowed in Nonresidential Districts, pursuant to this section.
   (D)   Temporary Signs in Nonresidential Zoning Districts. The following
temporary signs are permitted in B-1, B-2, B-3, and M-1 districts:
      (1)   Up to 12 square feet of temporary signs is permitted year-round,
without time restrictions, provided the signs are of the following type,
subject to the standards for each specific type of sign:
         (a)   Temporary A-Frame sidewalk signs.
            (i)   Sidewalk signs are permitted outside on the sidewalk only
during the hours of the establishment’s operation, and shall be stored indoors
when the business is closed. There shall be no limit on the number of days
sidewalk signs are permitted to be displayed.
            (ii)   Each business establishment shall be limited to one sidewalk
sign displayed at any one time.
            (iii)   Such sign shall not exceed three feet in height or two feet
in width and shall be located within five feet of such business entrance.
            (iv)   The sign may be located on a public or private sidewalk or
walkway provided it is placed on pavement and not in any landscaped areas or on
pavement used for vehicles (e.g., driveways and parking lots).
            (v)   If the sign is placed on a sidewalk or walkway, the sign
shall be placed only where the paved sidewalk or walkway width, not including
curb top, is at least seven feet wide. The width and placement of the sign
shall be such so that there shall be a minimum width of four feet of clear and
passable sidewalk or walkway for pedestrians.
            (vi)   The sign shall be free-standing and shall not be affixed,
chained, anchored, or otherwise secured to the ground or to any pole, parking
meter, tree, tree grate, fire hydrant, railing, or other structure, and shall
not obstruct access to any feature legally in the right-of-way.
            (vii)   The sign shall be internally weighted so that it is stable
and windproof.
            (viii)   The Village of Swanton shall be held harmless from any
liability resulting from accident or injury caused by the placement and/or
maintenance of such sign.
         (b)   Temporary Banner Signs on Private Property.
            (i)   Banner signs may be attached to a building, fence, or other
similar structure, provided such banner sign does not encroach on the public
right-of-way.
            (ii)   Banner signs attached to posts and mounted in a yard or
landscaped area shall be regulated as a temporary yard sign.
            (iii)   The maximum height standard for temporary signs shall not
apply to a banner sign but such signs shall not be mounted in a manner that
extends above the roofline of a building or the top of the structure on which
it is mounted.
            (iv)   For zoning permit applications related to the establishment
of a new use within an existing building where there is existing permanent
sign, a banner sign that is installed so to cover the existing sign may be
approved for up to 60 consecutive days. Such banner sign shall not exceed the
sign area of the permanent sign and shall require a sign permit.
         (c)   Temporary yard signs.
            (i)   There shall be a maximum of two faces to the sign, mounted
back-to-back.
            (ii)   The maximum height shall be five feet.
      (2)   Limited Temporary Sign Allowance. In addition to the temporary
signage allowed year- round, each lot in nonresidential districts shall be
permitted the use of additional temporary signage on a limited time basis.
         (a)   Each lot is permitted to have an additional 24 square feet of
temporary signs for a period of 30 consecutive days, up to four times per
calendar year.
         (b)   The limited temporary sign allowance may include any of the
following sign types subject to any applicable standards established for each
sign type in this chapter.
            (i)   Banner signs;
            (ii)   Temporary window signs; and
            (iii)   Temporary yard signs.
      (3)   Temporary Signs on Properties for Lease or Sale.
         (a)   In addition to any other permitted sign, each lot shall be
permitted one (1) unlighted temporary sign not to exceed eight (8) square feet
in area when the property is being offered for sale or lease. Such temporary
sign shall be located on private property at least twenty (20) feet from the
edge of pavement.
         (b)   Such temporary sign shall be removed within ten (10) days of the
completion of said sale (title transfer, lease, or rental).
   (E)   Temporary Sign for Properties Under Construction. In addition to any
other permitted sign, one (1) unlighted sign not exceeding eight (8) square
feet in area may be located and maintained upon a property during active
construction, with the issuance of a six (6) month renewable zoning
certificate. Such sign shall not be located closer than twenty (20) feet to the
road pavement edge.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.360 SIGN ILLUMINATION, CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Illumination. Illuminated signs permitted in §§
150.356 through
150.358 shall be illuminated only in compliance with the following standards:
      (1)   Lights shall not be of such brightness so as to cause glare that is
hazardous to pedestrians or motorists or cause reasonable objection from
adjacent residential districts.
      (2)   Signs that have external illumination, whether the lighting is
mounted above or below the sign face or panel, shall have lighting fixtures or
luminaires that are fully shielded.
      (3)   No sign shall be illuminated in such a way that the source of light
is visible from any premises other than that on which the sign is located.
      (4)   In no event shall an illuminated sign or lighting device permit the
beams or illumination therefrom to be directed upon a public thoroughfare,
highway, sidewalk or adjacent premises so as to cause glare or reflection that
may constitute a hazard or nuisance.
      (5)   Any illuminated sign or lighting device shall emit a light of
constant intensity and no sign shall be illuminated by or contain flashing,
intermittent, rotating, or moving light or lights. This restriction shall not
apply to any legally permitted electronic message center sign, provided such
sign is operated in accordance with §
150.358.
   (B)   Construction Standards. The construction, erection, safety and
maintenance of all signs shall comply with all requirements of the applicable
building and electrical codes and all of the following:
      (1)   All signs shall be constructed in a professional manner in
conformance with the appropriate building code and other applicable
requirements of the Village and County and shall be structurally sound to
withstand wind pressures of at least 30 pounds per square foot of surface area.
      (2)   All permanent freestanding signs shall have self-supporting
structures erected on, or permanently attached to, concrete foundations.
      (3)   Signs shall not be erected in locations that interfere with safe
vehicular and pedestrian circulation or public safety signals and signs.
      (4)   If possible, signs should not be in locations that obscure
architectural features such as pilasters, arches, windows, and cornices.
      (5)   Signs shall not project over or obstruct the required windows or
doors of any structure or building, and shall not be attached to or obstruct a
fire escape or interfere with other safety provisions as may be further related
to other codes.
      (6)   Signs shall be structurally designed in compliance with ANSI and
ASCI standards. All electric signs shall be constructed according to the
technical standards of a certified testing laboratory, and shall be installed,
repaired, altered, and serviced only by a contractor licensed to perform such
tasks.
   (C)   Clearances.
      (1)   Vision clearance areas: Vision clearance areas are triangular
shaped areas located at the intersection of any combination of rights-of-way or
driveways. No sign shall be installed within the clear sight triangles defined
below. See also
Figure 150.360(C).
         (a)   At the intersection of two street rights-of-way, the triangle
shall extend thirty (30) feet from the intersection of the rights-of-way in
either/each direction.
         (b)   At the intersection of a street right-of-way and a driveway, the
triangle shall be established by locating the intersection of the street curb
with the driveway edge, and by measuring from this point a distance of ten feet
along the driveway to a point and a distance of 20 feet along the street curb
to a point and connecting these points.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/083b2827ca6deba1b1fb1d5dec2edfde91f29d3b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2500.png]
 
      (2)   Signs shall not be erected so as to obstruct traffic-control
lights, street name signs at intersections, or signals at railroad grade
crossings.
      (3)   Vehicle area clearances: In areas outside of rights-of-way, when a
sign or awning extends over an area in which vehicles travel or are parked, the
bottom of the structure shall be at least fourteen (14) feet above the ground.
Vehicle areas include driveways, alleys, parking areas, and loading and
maneuvering areas.
      (4)   Signs in the Right-of Way. Only the Village may install signs in
the public right-of-way, which, when installed shall be at least fourteen (14)
feet above the ground.
   (D)   Maintenance Requirements. All signs shall be maintained in accordance
with the following:
      (1)   The property owner shall maintain the sign in a condition
appropriate to the intended use and in compliance with all applicable
requirements of this Code.
      (2)   The Zoning Administrator may order any sign to be painted or
refurbished whenever needed to keep the sign in a neat and safe condition. All
supporters, guys, braces and anchors for such signs shall be maintained in a
safe condition.
      (3)   If the sign is deemed by the Zoning Administrator to be in an
unsafe condition, the owner of the business shall be immediately notified in
writing, and shall, within 48 hours of receipt of such notification, respond to
the Village with a plan to correct the unsafe condition, remove the unsafe
sign, or cause it to be removed. If, after 14 days, the unsafe condition has
not been corrected through repair or removal, the Zoning Administrator may
cause the repair or removal of such sign, at the expense of the property owner
or lessee. If the total costs are not paid in full within 30 days of the
repairs or removal, the amount owed shall be certified as an assessment against
the property of the sign owner, and lien upon that property, together with an
additional 50% penalty for collection as prescribed for unpaid real estate
taxes.
         (a)   All notices mailed by the Zoning Administrator shall be sent by
certified mail. Any time periods provided in this subchapter shall be deemed to
commence on the date of the receipt of the certified mail.
         (b)   For all other signs, the notice shall be mailed to the owner of
the property on which the sign is located as shown on the last equalized
assessment roll. If unknown, the notice shall be mailed to or delivered to the
owner of the sign and the occupant of the property.
         (c)   Any person having an interest in the sign or the property may
appeal the determination of the Zoning Administrator ordering removal or
compliance by filing a written notice of appeal with the Committee of Zoning
Appeals within 30 days after receipt of the notice.
      (4)   In cases of emergency, the Zoning Administrator may cause the
immediate removal of a dangerous or defective sign without notice.
      (5)   Whenever any sign, either conforming or nonconforming to these
regulations, is required to be removed for the purpose of repair, relettering
or repainting, the same may be done without a permit or without any payment of
fees provided that all of the following conditions are met:
         (a)   There is no alteration or remodeling to the structure or the
mounting of the sign itself;
         (b)   There is no enlargement or increase in any of the dimensions of
the sign or its structure;
         (c)   The sign is accessory to a legally permitted, conditional or
nonconforming use.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.361 NONCONFORMING, ABANDONED AND ILLEGAL SIGNS.
   (A)   Maintenance. Nonconforming signs shall be maintained in good condition
and structural parts may be repaired or restored to a safe condition if
required, and if a permit is issued; provided, however, that any sign or parts
thereof which have been blown down, destroyed or otherwise taken down for any
purpose, shall not be rebuilt, re-erected or relocated unless it shall be made
to comply with the provisions of this zoning code and the state building code.
Any repainting, cleaning and other normal maintenance or repair of the sign or
sign structure shall not modify the sign structure in any way which makes it
more nonconforming or the sign may lose its legal nonconforming status.
   (B)   Alteration and Removal of Nonconforming Signs.
      (1)   Nonconforming signs shall be removed and any subsequent
modification or replacement, excluding maintenance pursuant to §
150.360 shall conform to all requirements of this chapter:
         (a)   When more than fifty percent (50%) of the value of the sign has
been destroyed or has been taken down; or
         (b)   When the use to which the nonconforming sign is accessory is
vacant for ninety consecutive days.
      (2)   Following six (6) years from the date of the amendment to this
Article that made the sign nonconforming, unless an extension is granted by the
Planning Commission.
         (a)   The Planning Commission may extend the time for removal of a
nonconforming sign for a period that is the lesser of the remaining depreciable
life of the nonconforming sign or five years.
         (b)   Any such extension shall be subject to the criteria for granting
variances set forth in
Article 150.69. In determining the depreciable life of a nonconforming sign,
the Planning Commission may consider the depreciable life determined by the
owner of such sign, but may also consider other standard accounting principles.
      (3)   A nonconforming sign shall not be altered, modified or
reconstructed except:
         (a)   When such alteration, modification or reconstruction would bring
such sign into conformity with these regulations;
         (b)   When the existing use has new ownership which results in a
change in the name or logo of the use or business on the property, and such
change complies with subsection (4) below;
         (c)   When the space is reoccupied by a similar use and the new
occupant requires no external building or site renovation, and such change
complies with subsection (4) below;
         (d)   Any alteration, modification or reconstruction permitted in this
section shall be limited to the replacement of a sign panel, replacing
individual letters and logos within the same area or repainting a sign face,
and does not permit changes to the structure, framing, erection or relocation
of the sign unless such changes conform to subsection (1) above.
      (4)   A nonconforming sign shall immediately lose its legal nonconforming
status and thereafter must be brought into conformance with this article or
removed whenever alterations to a nonconforming sign changes the structure,
framing or erection or relocation of the sign.
   (C)   Abandoned Signs.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this Section, any sign that is
located on property which becomes vacant and is unoccupied for a period of 90
days or more, or any sign which pertains to a time, event, or purpose which no
longer applies, shall be deemed to have been abandoned.
         (a)   An abandoned sign is prohibited and shall be removed by the
owner of the sign or owner of the premises.
         (b)   Permanent signs applicable to a business temporarily suspended
because of a change of ownership or management of such business shall not be
deemed abandoned unless the property remains vacant for a period of 120 days or
more.
      (2)   Whenever the removal of an abandoned sign has been ordered by the
Zoning Administrator, the person, firm, or corporation who erected, affixed, or
attached such a sign or display, shall remove such sign within 30 days after
receiving such notice.
         (a)   In the event of noncompliance, the Zoning Administrator is
authorized to commence legal action for an order to remove such sign at the
expense of (b) person, firm or corporation who erects such sign or on whose
premises it was erected, affixed or attached.
         (b)   The sign area shall be replaced by a neutral, single background
color panel or similar cover. If the sign is comprised of individually raised
letters, the letters shall be removed and any holes in the building’s façade
shall be repaired.
         (c)   The person, firm or corporation who erects such sign or on whose
premises it was erected, affixed or attached shall be individually and
separately liable for all expenses incurred by the Village to remove the sign.
   (D)   Illegal Signs. Signs erected in violation of the Code shall be removed
by the owner, tenant, occupant and/or sign applicant, or person having the
beneficial use of the building, structure, or land upon which such sign is
located, within 90 days after receipt of written notice by the Zoning
Administrator. Upon failure to remove the sign pursuant to such order, the
Zoning Administrator is hereby authorized to commence legal action for an order
to remove the sign. All expenses incurred by the Village to remove the sign
shall be paid by the owner of the property on which the sign is located.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.362 APPLICATION FOR SIGN PERMIT.
   (A)   Application generally. The application for a sign permit shall be made
by the owner or tenant of the property on which the sign is to be located, or
his or her authorized agent, or sign contractor.
      (1)   Such application shall be made in writing on forms furnished by the
Zoning Administrator and shall be signed by the applicant.
      (2)   A sign permit shall be required for all permanent signs and each
application shall be accompanied by a drawing (to scale), showing the
following:
         (a)   The design and layout proposed, including the total area of the
sign, the size, character, materials and color of letters, lines and symbols;
         (b)   The method of illumination, if any;
         (c)   The exact location of the sign in relation to the structure of
building and property; and
         (d)   Details and specifications for construction, erection, and
attachment as may be required by the zoning or state building code.
   (B)   Issuance: denial.
      (1)   The Zoning Administrator shall issue a permit for the erection,
alteration or relocation of a sign within the village when an application has
been properly made and the sign complies with all appropriate laws and
regulations of the village.
      (2)   The Zoning Administrator may, in writing, suspend or revoke a
permit issued under provisions of this section whenever the permit is issued on
the basis of misstatement of fact or fraud. When a sign permit is denied by the
Zoning Administrator, he or she shall give written notice of the denial to the
applicant, together with a brief written statement of the reasons for the
denial.
   (C)   Effect of issuance. No permit for a sign issued hereunder shall be
deemed to constitute permission or authorization to maintain an unlawful sign
nor shall any permit issued hereunder constitute a defense in any action to
abate an unlawful sign.
   (D)   Fees.
      (1)   The applicant shall pay the sign fee established by council, which
shall accompany each application.
      (2)   When any sign is installed on any property prior to obtaining all
necessary permits, the normal fee for that sign shall be doubled. The late fee
shall not relieve the owner of the sign from complying with all other
provisions of this zoning code.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
ARTICLE 150.37
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
   
150.371   Intent.
   
150.372   Scope of Regulations.
   
150.373   Application and Design.
   
150.374   Use of Facilities.
   
150.375   Units of Measure.
   
150.376   Schedule of Parking Requirements.
   
150.377   Parking Requirements for the B-2 Downtown Business District.
   
150.378   Modification of Standards.
   
150.379   Deferred Construction of Required Spaces.
   
150.380   Allowance for Shared Parking.
   
150.381   Allowance for Off-site Parking.
   
150.382   Parking Spaces for Persons with Disabilities.
   
150.383   Location of Required Parking Spaces.
   
150.384   Off-Street Stacking Spaces For Drive-Through Facilities.
   
150.385   Off-Street Loading Requirements.
   
150.386   Access Drives.
   
150.387   Construction, Use, Improvement, and Maintenance Standards.
   
150.388   Landscaping and Screening Requirements.
   
150.389    Approval of Facilities.
§ 150.371 INTENT.
   Off-street parking and loading requirements are established in order to
achieve, among others, the following purposes:
   (A)   To provide regulations for the development of accessory off-street
parking and loading facilities in accordance with the objectives of this Zoning
Code so as to:
      (1)   Ensure a sufficient number of off-street parking spaces are
provided on site in proportion to the need of the use;
      (2)   Relieve congestion so the streets can be utilized more fully for
movement of vehicular traffic;
      (3)   Promote the safety and convenience of pedestrians and shoppers by
locating parking areas so as to lessen car movements in the vicinity of
intensive pedestrian traffic and minimize external effects on adjacent
properties;
      (4)   Protect adjoining residential neighborhoods from excessive on-
street parking;
      (5)   Promote the general convenience, welfare and prosperity of
business, service, research, production and manufacturing developments which
depend upon off-street parking facilities; and
   (B)   To provide for accommodation of vehicles in a functionally and
aesthetically satisfactory manner.
   (C)   To allow flexibility in addressing vehicle parking and access issues.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.372 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Compliance Required. Accessory off-street parking facilities shall be
provided in compliance with the provisions of this Article prior to the
occupancy of a building, structure, land, or portion thereof whenever:
      (1)   A new building is constructed or a new use is established.
      (2)   An existing building is altered such that there is an increase in
the number of dwelling units, seating capacity, floor area of a building, or
employees. In the case of such expansions and enlargements, additional parking,
loading, and waiting spaces are required to serve only the enlarged or expanded
area.
      (3)   The use of an existing building or structure or use of land is
changed to a use that requires more off street parking facilities.
      (4)   Notwithstanding subsections (2) and (3) above, certain
nonconforming uses may continue as provided in §
150.416.
   (B)   Existing Uses. The requirements of this Article shall not apply to
buildings and uses legally existing on the effective date of this Article,
except when the use is changed or modified in a manner described in §
150.372(A), such as but not limited to when a single-family dwelling is
converted to a two-family dwelling. Any existing parking facility serving an
existing building or use shall be continued and maintained in operation and
shall not be reduced below the capacity that was provided on the effective date
of this amendment unless an equivalent number of spaces shall be provided for
said use in another approved location, in compliance with this Article.
   (C)   Expansion/Alteration of Existing Parking and Loading Facilities.
      (1)   Parking lot expansion. Whenever an existing parking lot or loading
area is enlarged to cover a greater surface area, the entire parking lot and/or
loading area shall be made to conform with the current requirements for paving,
storm sewer, and landscaping, to the maximum extent practicable as determined
by the Planning Commission.
      (2)   Alterations or repairs may be made to any existing parking lot and/
or loading area without requiring the existing facility to comply with all
requirements of this Article, provided the alteration or repair conforms to the
requirements applicable specifically to such alteration or repair set forth
herein.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.373 APPLICATION AND DESIGN.
   (A)   Any application for a zoning permit to construct a building with
requisite parking facilities, or for a certificate of zoning compliance for a
change in use of land or a building, shall include a development plan drawn to
scale and fully dimensioned, showing the proposed design of the parking area
and loading facilities to be provided in compliance with the provisions of this
Article and
Article 150.65, Development Plan Review.
   (B)   The development plan shall be accompanied by a storm water management
plan for all parking areas. Storm water calculations, including detention
plans, shall be submitted for review to the Planning Commission, Village
Engineer and Village Administrator. No zoning permit or zoning certificate
shall be issued until an adequate storm water management plan has been approved
in accordance with
Article 150.65 Development Plan Review.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.374 USE OF FACILITIES.
   Off-street parking and loading facilities accessory to an existing use on
the effective date of this Zoning Code, and those required as accessory to a
use created or a building constructed or altered thereafter, shall be continued
and maintained in operation, and shall not be used for the sales, service or
repair of motor vehicles or for any other outdoor uses, except when
specifically authorized by the Zoning Code.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.375 UNITS OF MEASURE.
   (A)   Computations. In computing the number of parking spaces required by
this Code, the following rules shall apply.
      (1)   Floor Area. Where floor area is designated as the standard for
determining parking space requirements, “floor area” shall mean the total area
of all floors of the building used by the principal activity as specified in
Schedule 150.374, measured from the exterior faces of the building. The areas
used for storage or otherwise not occupied by people may be excluded from the
floor area calculation, when approved by the Planning Commission, according to
§
150.378.
      (2)   Seats. Whenever the parking requirements are based on seating
capacity, capacity shall be determined by:
         (a)   The number of seating units indicated on the development plan;
or
         (b)   One seat for each 24 lineal inches of benches or pews indicated
on the development plan; or
         (c)   One seat for each 20 square feet of gross floor area of the
assembly room(s).
      (3)   Employees. Whenever the parking requirements are based on
employees, it shall mean the maximum number of employees on duty on the
premises at any one time or on any two successive shifts, whichever is greater.
   (B)   Fractional Numbers. When the computation results in a fractional unit,
the number shall be rounded up to the next whole number.
   (C)   Parking for Mixed Uses. When a building or group of buildings on a
development site contains two or more uses, the number of parking spaces for
each use shall be computed separately. The total spaces provided shall not be
less than the sum of the spaces required for each use, except as otherwise
provided for in §
150.380.
   (D)   Parking Requirements for Uses Not Specified. When the off street
parking requirements for a use are not specifically defined herein, the parking
facilities for such use shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator based
on the standard most similar to the proposed use.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.376 SCHEDULE OF PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   Accessory off-street parking facilities shall be provided in quantities not
less than set forth below in Schedule 150.376.
SCHEDULE 150.376
REQUIRED OFF STREET PARKING SPACES
Principal Building or Use Minimum Parking Requirement(a), (b)
SCHEDULE 150.376
REQUIRED OFF STREET PARKING SPACES
                                                                                 Minimum
Principal Building or Use                                                        Parking
                                                                                 Requirement
                                                                                 (a), (b)
(A) Residential                                                                   
                                                                                 1 space per
                                                                                 guest room,
   (1) Bed & Breakfast                                                        plus 2 spaces
                                                                                 for the
                                                                                 dwelling unit
                                                                                 1 space per 2
                                                                                 beds, plus 1
   (2) Congregate Care Facility/Nursing Home                                  space for
                                                                                 every 3
                                                                                 employees
                                                                                 Minimum
Principal Building or Use                                                        Parking
                                                                                 Requirement
                                                                                 (a), (b)
   (3) Dwelling unit, including permanently sited manufactured home units     2 spaces per
                                                                                 dwelling unit
   (4) Group Home, Small & Large                                              1 space per 2
                                                                                 beds
                                                                                 2 spaces per
   (5) Manufactured Home Park                                                 manufactured
                                                                                 home space
(B) Civic Uses                                                                    
                                                                                 1 space per
                                                                                 400 square
   (1) Day Care Center, Adult or Child                                        feet of floor
                                                                                 area plus 1
                                                                                 space per
                                                                                 employee
                                                                                 1 space per
                                                                                 classroom
                                                                                 plus 1 space
   (2) School, elementary/secondary                                           for every 4
                                                                                 seats in the
                                                                                 largest
                                                                                 auditorium or
                                                                                 assembly room
                                                                                 As determined
   (3) Government Facilities                                                  by the
                                                                                 Planning
                                                                                 Commission(b)
                                                                                 1 space per 4
                                                                                 seats in main
                                                                                 assembly room
   (4) Places of Assembly, including: Country Club (public, private/semi-     or 1 space
private); Place of worship; Meeting Hall, Similar Social/Fraternal Club; Museum, per 4 persons
Gallery & Similar Cultural Facility                                              at maximum
                                                                                 capacity,
                                                                                 whichever is
                                                                                 greater
                                                                                 As determined
   (5) Public Park, Playground; Public Sports Fields                          by the
                                                                                 Planning
                                                                                 Commission(b)
(C) Office, Business & Professional Services                                      
                                                                                 1 space per
   (1) Financial Institutions                                                 300 square
                                                                                 feet of floor
                                                                                 area
                                                                                 1 space for
                                                                                 each 50
                                                                                 square feet
                                                                                 of parlors
   (2) Funeral Home, Mortuary                                                 plus 1 space
                                                                                 for each
                                                                                 vehicle
                                                                                 maintained/
                                                                                 stored on the
                                                                                 premises
                                                                                 1 space per
   (3) Medical Clinic/Urgent Care; Dental Office                              250 square
                                                                                 feet
                                                                                 1 space per
   (4) Office: Administrative, business, executive and/or professional; Radio 300 square
Television Station; Sales Office with only samples of products                   feet of floor
                                                                                 area
                                                                                 1 space per
   (5) Research and Testing Laboratories; Business Equipment and Supplies     400 square
                                                                                 feet of floor
                                                                                 area
                                                                                 1 space for
                                                                                 every
   (6) Vocational, Trade or Technical School                                  employee,
                                                                                 plus 1 space
                                                                                 for every 2
                                                                                 students
(D) Retail/Entertainment/Personal Services                                        
                                                                                 1 space per 3
   (1) Amusement/Recreation Services, Indoor                                  persons based
                                                                                 on maximum
                                                                                 occupancy
                                                                                 1 space per
   (2) Animal Boarding/Kennel; Animal Grooming/Animal Day Care                500 square
                                                                                 feet of floor
                                                                                 area
                                                                                 1 space per
                                                                                 400 square
                                                                                 feet of floor
   (3) Animal Hospital/Veterinarian Office                                    area, plus 1
                                                                                 space for
                                                                                 every 2
                                                                                 employees
                                                                                 1 space per
                                                                                 employee,
   (4) Auction Warehouse, Showroom                                            plus 1 space
                                                                                 per 500
                                                                                 square feet
                                                                                 of floor area
                                                                                 2 spaces per
   (5) Beauty salons and barber shops                                         beauty or
                                                                                 barber chair
                                                                                 1 space per
                                                                                 50 square
                                                                                 feet of
                                                                                 restaurant
                                                                                 floor area or
                                                                                 1 space per
                                                                                 two seats,
                                                                                 whichever
   (6) Brewpub                                                                requires the
                                                                                 greater
                                                                                 number of
                                                                                 spaces, plus
                                                                                 1 space per
                                                                                 2,000 square
                                                                                 feet of floor
                                                                                 area of
                                                                                 production
                                                                                 area
                                                                                 1 space per
                                                                                 guest room or
   (7) Hotel/Motel                                                            unit, plus 1
                                                                                 space for
                                                                                 every 2
                                                                                 employees
                                                                                 1 space per 3
                                                                                 persons based
   (8) Indoor Entertainment: Dancing & Live Entertainment in association with on maximum
permitted use                                                                    occupancy
                                                                                 load of
                                                                                 entertainment
                                                                                 area
                                                                                 1 space per
                                                                                 500 square
                                                                                 feet of
                                                                                 industrial/
                                                                                 manufacturing
                                                                                 floor area,
   (9) Micro-Brewery, Micro-Distillery, Micro-Winery                          plus the
                                                                                 required
                                                                                 parking
                                                                                 spaces for
                                                                                 retail/
                                                                                 restaurant
                                                                                 floor area
                                                                                 1 space per
   (10) Retail establishment; Personal Services                               250 square
                                                                                 feet of floor
                                                                                 area
                                                                                 1 space per
                                                                                 50 square
                                                                                 feet of floor
                                                                                 area or 1
                                                                                 space per 2
   (11) Restaurant, indoor (including bars/taverns)                           seats,
                                                                                 whichever
                                                                                 requires the
                                                                                 greater
                                                                                 number of
                                                                                 spaces
                                                                                 For the first
                                                                                 500 square
                                                                                 feet of
                                                                                 outdoor
                                                                                 seating area,
                                                                                 no additional
                                                                                 parking
                                                                                 spaces.
                                                                                 Beyond 500
                                                                                 square feet,
   (12) Restaurant, outdoor seating                                           1 space per
                                                                                 50 square
                                                                                 feet of floor
                                                                                 area or 1
                                                                                 space per 2
                                                                                 seats,
                                                                                 whichever
                                                                                 requires the
                                                                                 greater
                                                                                 number of
                                                                                 spaces.
                                                                                 1 space per
                                                                                 500 square
                                                                                 feet of floor
                                                                                 area, plus 1
   (13) Retail, Large-Format                                                  space per
                                                                                 1,000 square
                                                                                 feet of
                                                                                 outdoor
                                                                                 display area
(E) Vehicles and Equipment                                                        
                                                                                 1 space per
                                                                                 400 square
                                                                                 feet of floor
                                                                                 area of sales
   (1) Sales and service of construction equipment, buses, farm machinery,    room, plus 1
recreational vehicles and other large equipment                                  space for
                                                                                 each service
                                                                                 stall in the
                                                                                 service room
                                                                                 and 1 space
                                                                                 per employee
                                                                                 2 spaces per
   (2) Vehicle and equipment major repair services; Vehicle service station,  service bay,
minor                                                                            plus 1 space
                                                                                 for every
                                                                                 employee
                                                                                 1 space per
                                                                                 400 square
                                                                                 feet of floor
                                                                                 area of sales
                                                                                 room, plus 1
   (3) Vehicle sales & rental                                                 space for
                                                                                 each auto
                                                                                 service stall
                                                                                 in the
                                                                                 service room
                                                                                 and 1 space
                                                                                 per employee
   (4) Vehicle fuel station                                                   2 spaces per
                                                                                 pump
   (5) Vehicle wash                                                           2 spaces per
                                                                                 wash bay
(F) Storage, Warehousing, Distribution                                            
   (1) Distribution Operations                                                1 space per 2
                                                                                 employees
                                                                                 When an
                                                                                 onsite
                                                                                 leasing or
                                                                                 project
                                                                                 office is
                                                                                 provided, 1
                                                                                 parking space
                                                                                 for each 100
                                                                                 storage
                                                                                 units. When
                                                                                 no on site
                                                                                 office is
   (2) Self-Storage Units/Mini Storage                                        provided, no
                                                                                 spaces are
                                                                                 required.
                                                                                 Required
                                                                                 parking
                                                                                 spaces shall
                                                                                 not be
                                                                                 rented,
                                                                                 leased, or
                                                                                 used as
                                                                                 vehicle
                                                                                 storage
                                                                                 areas.
   (3) Transportation Services; Warehouses, Similar Storage Establishments,   1 space per 2
Parcel Delivery Stations                                                         employees
                                                                                 1 space per 2
                                                                                 employees,
                                                                                 plus 1 space
   (4) Wholesale Offices & Showrooms                                          per 500
                                                                                 square feet
                                                                                 of showroom
                                                                                 space
(G) Production/Manufacturing                                                      
                                                                                 1 space per
                                                                                 400 square
                                                                                 feet of
                                                                                 office floor
                                                                                 area, plus 1
   (1) Light manufacturing uses; Fabrication and assembly operations          space per
                                                                                 1,500 square
                                                                                 feet of
                                                                                 production/
                                                                                 assembly
                                                                                 activities
                                                                                 floor area
   (2) All Other Production/Manufacturing Facilities                          1 space per 2
                                                                                 employees
Notes to Schedule 150.376:
(a)   A minimum of five (5) spaces is required for each facility other than one-family
detached dwellings.
(b)   Specific requirements shall be based on requirements for similar uses, location of
proposed use, surrounding land uses, expected demand and traffic generated by the proposed
use, and appropriate traffic engineering and planning criteria and information.
 
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.377 PARKING REQUIREMENTS FOR THE B-2 DOWNTOWN BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   In recognition of the historic, compact character of buildings in the B-
2 Downtown Business District, the Planning Commission may approve a development
plan with up to a fifty percent (50%) reduction in the requirements of
Schedule 150.376, Required Off-Street Parking Spaces, for nonresidential uses.
To request such a reduction, an applicant shall submit a parking assessment at
the time a development plan is submitted that includes the information detailed
in §
150.377(B).
   (A)   In making a determination for such a reduction, the Planning
Commission shall consider the following criteria:
      (1)   The character of the proposed use and the ability of the proposed
use to reinforce the central business district environment;
      (2)   The availability and accessibility of public parking spaces, both
on-street and within public parking lots;
      (3)   The availability of parking spaces on adjacent and nearby sites,
considering the hours of operation of the proposed use compared to adjacent
uses; and
      (4)   The potential negative impact to the character of Downtown Swanton
if the requisite number of parking spaces are provided.
   (B)   The parking assessment shall include a description of the use and its
anticipated relationship to, and impact on, the surrounding parcels. At a
minimum, the assessment shall include the following:
      (1)   The nature of the proposed use(s), activities and events that will
be accommodated, including hours of operation and peak hours of occupancy.
      (2)   The estimated number of parking spaces required at peak capacity.
      (3)   The number of parking spaces required according to
Schedule 150.376 compared to the number of spaces proposed.
      (4)   The current supply and utilization of public parking spaces in the
immediate area.
      (5)   How available spaces meet the needs of the proposed use.
      (6)   Suggested parking management solutions to address any anticipated
discrepancy between the number of parking spaces available and anticipated
parking demand.
   (C)   The Planning Commission may authorize additional reductions in parking
spaces in the B-2 District in compliance with §
150.380, Allowance for Shared Parking, and with §
150.381, Allowance for Off-Site Parking.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.378 MODIFICATION OF STANDARDS.
   Off-street parking requirements may be reduced in the Village based on the
provisions of this Section.
   (A)   A reduction of up to ten percent (10%) of the number of required
parking spaces may be permitted administratively by the Zoning Administrator
when the applicant demonstrates that the reduction in parking will not impact
adjacent uses.
   (B)   The Planning Commission may approve a reduction in required parking
spaces by up to forty percent (40%) as a conditional use in accordance with the
procedures set forth in
Article 150.67, when the applicant demonstrates in a parking assessment,
prepared by a traffic consultant in accordance with §
150.377(B)(1)(6), or in parking data from comparable sites provided that:
      (1)   The use of transportation demand management programs and/or special
characteristics of the customer, client, employee or resident population will
reduce expected vehicle use and parking space demand for this development, as
compared to the minimum Village parking requirements; and
      (2)   The reduction in parking will not impact adjacent uses.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.379 DEFERRED CONSTRUCTION OF REQUIRED SPACES.
   If the number of parking spaces required by this Article for a
nonresidential use is substantially larger than the number anticipated by the
applicant and the applicant provides sufficient evidence that supports the
reduced parking needs, a development plan may be approved with an allowance for
the construction of a lesser number of parking spaces provided that:
   (A)   The total number of spaces initially constructed on the site of the
principal use shall not be less than 70% of the spaces required by this
Article.
   (B)   Suitable area is reserved for the construction of the balance of the
total number of spaces otherwise required by this Article. Such suitable areas
shall be illustrated on the development plan in locations and with landscaping
in full compliance with this Zoning Code.
   (C)   The Planning Commission, upon reevaluation of the project’s parking
needs, may at any time direct that some or all of the parking spaces identified
in subsection (B) be constructed, and shall notify the property owner of such
determination.
   (D)   When additional parking is determined necessary, it shall be provided
according to the approved development plan.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.380 ALLOWANCE FOR SHARED PARKING.
   Developments that contain a mix of uses on the same parcel or two or more
uses on separate parcels may share parking spaces to satisfy a portion of the
minimum off-street parking requirement in compliance with the requirements of
this Section.
   (A)   The required number of parking spaces for the combined uses may be
reduced by 30% for shared parking when hours of operation overlap.
   (B)   The parking facility to be shared shall be owned by the owner of one
of the uses or leased for at least a 20-year term or through a permanent
easement by the owner of the uses being served. Such lease or easement shall be
approved by the Village Solicitor.
   (C)   No changes shall be made to the shared parking facility that would
reduce the number of parking spaces provided for the uses, unless the owner of
one of the uses makes other arrangements to provide parking. No such changes
shall be made without Zoning Administrator approval prior to any changes taking
place.
   (D)   Handicap parking spaces shall not be shared, unless the uses that are
to share the spaces are adjacent to the handicap spaces and no inconvenience to
the users of such spaces would be created.
   (E)   Any proposed change in the use of a structure that shares a parking
facility will require proof to the Zoning Administrator that adequate parking
is available.
   (F)   Parking facilities to be shared shall be located on the same lot or
lots as the use for which the parking spaces are intended, except when the
parking facility complies with all the requirements of §
150.381, Allowance for Off-Site Parking.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.381 ALLOWANCE FOR OFF-SITE PARKING.
   All off street parking spaces shall be located on the same lot as the
structure or use unless parking spaces are provided in compliance with all the
requirements of this Section.
   (A)   The use shall provide at least 50% of the required parking spaces on
the site. The Planning Commission may grant an exception to this requirement
under the following criteria:
      (1)   Proximity of the proposed parking area to the use served;
      (2)   Ease and safety of access between the proposed parking area and the
use served;
      (3)   The use to be served by the offsite parking; and
      (4)   The hours of operation of the use to be served by the off-site
parking.
   (B)   Offsite spaces shall be within 500 feet walking distance, measured
along the pedestrian route to a building entrance or use. Safe and convenient
pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk or path, shall exist or be provided from
the structure or use to the parking lot. Appropriate safety measures shall be
provided if the pedestrian must cross an arterial street.
   (C)   Contiguous lots providing off-street parking for more than one use
shall provide sufficient parking spaces to comply with the combined total
parking requirements for all uses unless an allowance for shared parking is
granted under §
150.380.
   (D)   The offsite lot may be located in another business or industrial
zoning district than the structure or use it serves.
   (E)   The lot used as an off-site parking facility shall be owned or leased
for at least a 20 year term or acquired through a permanent easement by the
owner of the use being served. The Village Solicitor shall approve the lease or
easement. Such lease or easement shall require the owner of the land on which
the parking facilities are to be located to be bound by a covenant filed and
recorded in the office of the County Recorder of Fulton or Lucas County,
requiring each such owner, his or her heirs, or assigns to maintain the
required number of parking facilities for the duration of the use served as a
condition to the continuation of such use. If the term of the use is limited by
a conditional use permit, then the term of the lease agreement for parking may
be limited accordingly. At the expiration of the term of a lease or extensions
thereof, the owner shall provide other suitable parking with sufficient parking
spaces or end the use that required the parking.
   (F)   The number of off-site parking spaces shall not be reduced, unless
other sufficient parking spaces are provided by the owner of the use. The
Zoning Administrator’s approval is required prior to changing the approved
parking plan.
   (G)   All required handicapped parking spaces for a use shall be located on
site.
   (H)   All required loading spaces shall be located on site.
   (I)   An existing nonconforming parking lot used under this Section as off-
site parking shall be landscaped, paved and striped according to the standards
of this Article and the Zoning Code.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.382 PARKING SPACES FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES.
   In compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) of 1990, all
new construction and alterations to places of public accommodation and
commercial/industrial facilities shall provide parking spaces that are designed
and constructed to be readily accessible to persons with disabilities.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.383 LOCATION OF REQUIRED PARKING SPACES.
   (A)   In addition to specific requirements contained in each zoning
district, accessory parking facilities shall be provided at locations as set
forth herein, except as may be modified in this Article.
      (1)   Residential Uses. Accessory, enclosed or open parking facilities as
required shall be provided on the same lot as the dwelling unit served.
         (a)   In multi-family developments, parking facilities shall be
provided within a walking distance of 300 feet of the building entrance of the
unit to be served.
         (b)   All residential driveways installed or altered after the
effective date of this section shall be a minimum width of 12 feet and shall be
constructed of asphalt, concrete or masonry type material, or of alternative
paving materials, such as porous/ permeable pavement, Grasscrete (or other
pervious paving system) or a synthetic material designed for residential
driveway use. Stone or gravel is not permitted.
      (2)   Nonresidential Uses. Accessory parking facilities shall be provided
on the same lot as the principal use served, except where modified in
accordance with the provisions of this Article, as set forth in
Article 150.27 Business and Industrial District Regulations.
   (B)   All required off street parking spaces shall have direct access to an
aisle or driveway without the need to move another vehicle, except as otherwise
specifically permitted in this Article.
   (C)   Any off-street parking spaces dedicated to temporary parking for
customers waiting for order pick-up or for delivery vehicles shall be located
so as to not cause congestion and interfere with traffic circulation on the
site or in the public right-of-way. Such spaces shall be clearly designated as
temporary parking/waiting spaces.
   (D)   Parking Lots Adjacent to Buildings. Off street parking spaces for a
use other than a single or two-family dwelling shall be located at least ten
(10) feet from any building wall containing ground floor openings other than a
garage door providing access, light, or ventilation to the building.
   (E)   Parking in Designated Areas Only. In any district, a vehicle
customarily or seasonally parked shall be parked only in a parking area
specifically constructed for such purpose, and shall not be parked on tree
lawns on the lot, sidewalks, yards or other areas required to be landscaped.
See also §
150.221, Outdoor Parking And Storage Of Trucks And Recreational Vehicles in
Residential Districts.
   (F)   Areas Computed as Parking Spaces. Areas that may be computed as open
or enclosed off-street parking spaces include any private garage, carport or
other area available for parking, other than a street or driveway, except as
specifically permitted below:
      (1)   For a one-family detached, one-family attached, or two-family
dwelling, a driveway in the front or side yard shall be permitted to count as
eligible parking space(s) up to a maximum of two (2) parking spaces per
dwelling unit.
      (2)   In a multi-family development including attached one-family
dwellings and units in a Planned Residential Development Overlay District, a
dwelling unit that has a separate and individual private driveway that can
accommodate two automobiles without encroaching on the public right-of-way may
be counted as two parking spaces.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.384 OFF-STREET STACKING SPACES FOR DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITIES.
   A drive-thru establishment or other establishment which, by its nature,
creates lines of customers in vehicles waiting to be served shall provide off-
street stacking spaces on the same lot as the use, in addition to the required
number of parking spaces in
Schedule 150.376, in accordance with the requirements in
Schedule 150.384(A).
   (A)   Schedule 150.384(A) Minimum Number of Stacking Spaces:
SCHEDULE 150.384(A) MINIMUM NUMBER OF STACKING SPACES
Use Minimum Requirement
SCHEDULE 150.384(A) MINIMUM NUMBER OF STACKING SPACES
Use                                     Minimum Requirement
                                        Six (6) stacking spaces per drive-thru
(1) Establishments selling food/drinks: window as measured from the first
                                        window
(2) Automatic car wash facilities where
a chain conveyor or other similar       Ten (10) stacking spaces, not counting
method is used to move the vehicle      the washing bay
through the structure:
                                        Four (4) stacking spaces for the first
(3) Banks, ticket booths, drive-up ATM  drive-thru window or stall plus two (2)
machines and other similar facilities   stacking spaces for each additional
with service windows or service         window or stall, which may be
entrances:                              distributed as determined by the
                                        applicant
(4) Self-serve car wash facilities:     Two (2) stacking spaces per stall, not
                                        counting the washing bay
(5) Gasoline stations:                  Two (2) stacking spaces per accessible
                                        side of a gasoline pump island
(6) All other uses, such as retail      Three (3) stacking spaces for each
pick-up windows:                        window, stall, and entrance
 
   (B)   Off-street stacking spaces, which includes the space for the vehicle
being waited upon at the service window or fuel pump, shall be clearly
delineated on the development plan.
   (C)   The number of stacking spaces required by
Schedule 150.384(A) shall be required for each separate stacking lane. If two
or more stacking lanes converge into one lane (e.g., two separate lanes for
ordering at a restaurant converge to one lane after the menu board), the
stacking spaces shall be required in accordance with
Schedule 150.384(A) with the spaces located after the convergence point
counting toward both stacking lanes.
   (D)   Stacking Space Dimensions. The area of an off-street stacking space
shall be at least 144 square feet (measuring 8 feet by 20 feet) exclusive of
access drives and parking aisles and shall not interfere with parking or
circulation.
   (E)   Stacking lanes shall be designed to prevent circulation congestion,
both on site and on adjacent public streets. The circulation shall separate
drive-through traffic from site circulation traffic, not impede or impair
access into or out of parking spaces, minimize conflicts between pedestrian and
vehicular traffic by physical and visual separation between pedestrian ways and
stacking lanes and driveways, or at the crossing of the two.
   (F)   Vehicles shall not be permitted to wait within the public right-of-way
for service at any drive- through facility.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.385 OFF-STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS.
   Accessory loading and unloading facilities shall be provided prior to the
occupancy of all business, service and industrial buildings hereafter erected
and altered, and shall be maintained as long as such building is occupied or
unless equivalent facilities are provided in conformance with the regulations
of this Article.
   (A)   Authority of the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission may
waive the requirement for a loading and unloading facility based on the nature
of the proposed use or the practical difficulties of adding such facilities to
an existing building.
   (B)   Allocation of use. Space required and allocated for any off-street
loading facility shall not, while so allocated, be used to satisfy the space
requirements of off-street parking, nor be used for repairing or servicing
motor vehicles.
   (C)   Location of facility. All required off-street loading areas shall be
related to the building and use to be served to provide for loading and off-
loading of delivery trucks and other service vehicles and shall be so arranged
that they may be used without blocking or otherwise interfering with the use of
access driveways, parking facilities, public streets or sidewalks.
   (D)   Minimum size criteria. Each loading space shall be sufficient to
accommodate the largest vehicle anticipated.
   (E)   Required Loading Spaces. Accessory off-street loading spaces shall be
provided as required in
Schedule 150.385(E):
 
SCHEDULE 150.385(E)
REQUIRED LOADING FACILITIES
Gross Floor Area of Building            Required Number of Loading Spaces
3,000 to 40,000 square feet             1 space
40,001 to 100,000 square feet           2 spaces
For each additional 100,000 square feet 1 additional space
 
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.386 ACCESS DRIVES.
   (A)   Access drives for parking spaces. The location and width of entrance
and exit driveways to parking facilities shall be planned to interfere as
little as possible with the use of nearby property and with pedestrian and
vehicular traffic on the nearest streets.
   (B)   Access drive loading spaces. Each required off-street loading space
shall be designed for direct vehicular access by means of a driveway, or
driveways, to a public street in a manner which will least interfere with
adjacent traffic movement and shall be located so that the driveway centerline
shall not be less than 100 feet from the nearest intersecting street right-of-
way line.
   (C)   Width of Driveways. For all nonresidential uses, driveways shall be a
minimum width of 22 feet.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.387 CONSTRUCTION, USE, IMPROVEMENT, AND MAINTENANCE STANDARDS.
   All driveways and parking facilities shall be constructed in accordance with
standards established by the Village Engineer and the following:
   (A)   Grading and Pavement. Parking facilities and access driveways shall be
so graded and drained so as to dispose of all surface water and drainage so
that such surface water and drainage shall not be allowed to flow onto adjacent
properties including the right-of-way or remain standing in said driveways or
parking facilities.
      (1)   All parking facilities and driveways improved or constructed shall
be shall be asphalt, concrete or masonry type material. Stone or gravel is not
considered a masonry type material. Alternative paving materials, such as
porous/ permeable pavement, Grasscrete (or other pervious paving system) may be
considered by the Village Engineer and the Planning Commission during
development plan review.
      (2)   An adequate storm drainage system shall be provided for all parking
lots in excess of eight thousand (8,000) square feet. For the purpose of square
footage computation, all parking areas, access lines and truck loading areas on
the same lot shall be considered as a contiguous total square footage.
      (3)   The design of a storm water drainage system shall be prepared by
using the rational method and shall be based on a minimum five (5) year
frequency. Rainfall intensity, runoff coefficients and concentration time used
in computing flows and structure sizes shall be in accordance with the tables,
charts, and data in the Village Storm Water Management Plan and shall be
subject to approval by the Village Engineer and conform to all applicable
county regulations. All areas that contribute storm water to the proposed storm
drainage system shall be considered on the determination of the sizes of pipe,
structures, and channels.
      (4)   Drainage plans shall be accompanied by two (2) copies of the design
computations. Hydraulic gradient checks for less frequent storms may also be
required by the Village Engineer were deemed appropriate.
      (5)   Culvert sizes shall be based on a minimum ten (10) year frequency
rainfall, or other less frequency storms or greater number of years, or other
more stringent methodology as required by the Village Engineer where deemed
appropriate.
      (6)   Detention ponds or basins shall be provided where necessary to
control the volume and velocity of storm water leaving the site. Detention
ponds and basins shall be designed in accordance with any master watershed
drainage plans. Where such plans do not exist, facilities shall be based on
criteria established by the Village Engineer and approved by the applicable
County Soil and Water Department.
   (B)   Marking. Any off-street parking facility for five (5) or more off-
street parking spaces shall indicate the location of each parking space, the
location of spaces for persons with disabilities, and the location and
direction or movement along the aisles and access drives providing access
thereto by painting upon the surface, by raised directional signs, or by
markers or other similar measures placed in the surface.
   (C)   Maintenance. All parking facilities shall be maintained in a manner to
keep it as free as practicable from rubbish, paper and other loose particles,
and snow and ice shall be promptly removed. All signs, markers or any other
methods used to indicate direction of traffic movement and location of off-
street parking spaces shall be maintained in a neat and legible condition. Any
walls, trees and shrubbery, as well as surfacing of the parking lot, shall be
maintained in good condition throughout its use for parking purposes. It shall
be the responsibility of the property owner to maintain and repair parking lots
as may be necessary, in the opinion of the Village, so as to provide a surface
free of excess dust that is in good condition, properly drained, and free of
obstructions and nuisances in accordance with the requirements of this Article.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.388 LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING REQUIREMENTS.
   Screening and landscaping of the interior and perimeter of all parking areas
shall comply with the requirements set forth in
Article 150.39, Landscaping, Buffering, Fences and Lighting Regulations.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.389 APPROVAL OF FACILITIES.
   Detailed drawings of accessory off-street parking and loading facilities
shall be submitted for review and approval in accordance with all the
provisions of this Zoning Code.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
ARTICLE 150.39
LANDSCAPING, BUFFERING, FENCES, AND LIGHTING REQUIREMENTS
   
150.391   Intent.
   
150.392   Scope of Application.
   
150.393   Flexibility.
   
150.394   Definitions.
   
150.395   General Landscaping.
   
150.396   Landscaping Along the Street Frontage and Building Foundations.
   
150.397   Screening and Landscaping of Parking Facilities.
   
150.398   Buffering and Screening Between Districts and Uses.
   
150.399   Screening of Accessory Uses and Structures.
   
150.400   General Requirements and Maintenance.
   
150.401   Lighting Requirements.
   
150.402   Fences and Walls on Residential Property.
   
150.403    Approval Process for Required Landscaping, Fences and Walls.
§ 150.391 INTENT.
   The regulations in this Article are designed to foster development that will
protect, preserve, and enhance the appearance and character of the Village as
well as promote the health, safety, and welfare of the community by:
   (A)   Promoting the proper utilization of landscaping and screening as a
buffer between certain land uses to minimize the possibility of nuisances
including potential noise, glare as well as the visual clutter associated with
parking and service areas;
   (B)   Providing landscaping within and along the perimeter of the parking
facility in order to break up large expanses of pavement, reduce reflected heat
and glare, and improve the appearance of off-street parking facilities and
properties abutting public rights-of-way;
   (C)   Controlling the installation of exterior lighting fixtures to prevent
light trespass and glare and to preserve, protect and enhance the character of
the Village and the lawful nighttime use and enjoyment of property located
within the Village;
   (D)   Providing areas of permeable or synthetic surfaces in order to:
      (1)   Allow the infiltration of surface water into groundwater resources;
      (2)   Reduce the quantity of storm water discharge, which helps to reduce
the hazards of flooding and aids in the control of erosion and storm water
runoff;
      (3)   Preserve air quality through the preservation and replacement of
trees and significant vegetation removed in the course of development; and
      (4)   Improve the quality of storm water discharge.
   (E)   Establishing minimum standards for the consistent appearance of plant
material in the community landscape;
   (F)   Establishing regulations controlling the use of fences, hedges and
walls whereby the owner of a residential lot may have the privilege of privacy
and landscape design with due consideration to the environment of neighbor(s),
the appearance of the community, and the safety of the public.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.392 SCOPE OF APPLICATION.
   (A)   The provisions of this Article shall apply to:
      (1)   New Development. All new development on vacant land that requires
the submission of a development plan and issuance of a zoning permit or
certificate of zoning compliance. The required landscaping shall be so
indicated on plans submitted as part of the application.
      (2)   Existing Sites. The entire site of existing development when
substantial expansion or alteration is conducted and one of the following
criteria exists. An alteration or expansion of an existing property is
substantial when:
         (a)   The expansion of an existing building exceeds twenty-five
percent (25%) of the gross floor area of the existing building;
         (b)   The expansion of the parking facility exceeds twenty-five
percent (25%) of the total existing vehicular use area;
         (c)   The land area of the development site is increased by twenty-
five percent (25%) or more.
      (3)   When the expansion or alteration of an existing building, structure
or parking facility is less than that governed by §
150.392(A)(2) above, the minimum landscaping and screening required by this
Article shall be provided to the portion of the site devoted to the alteration
or expansion, but not for the entire property of which the alteration or
expansion is a part.
   (B)   One-family detached dwellings and two-family dwellings shall be exempt
from the requirements of this Article.
   (C)   The requirements of this Article are minimum landscaping requirements,
and nothing herein shall preclude a developer and the Village from agreeing to
more extensive landscaping.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.393 FLEXIBILITY.
   The standards and criteria in this Article establish the Village’s
objectives and landscaping intensity expected. The Zoning Administrator and the
Planning Commission may exercise discretion and flexibility with respect to the
placement and arrangement of the required elements to ensure that the
objectives of the zoning district and the proposed development or redevelopment
are satisfied.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.394 DEFINITIONS.
   Terms related to required landscaping and screening shall have the following
meanings:
   (A)   Berm. An earthen mound designed to provide visual interest, screen
undesirable views, and/or decrease noise. The height of a berm shall be
measured from the average natural grade at the base of the berm.
   (B)   Caliper. The American Association of Nurserymen standard for trunk
measurement of nursery stock. Caliper of the trunk shall be taken at diameter-
at-breast-height.
   (C)   Diameter-at-breast-height (DBH). The diameter of a tree trunk measured
in inches at a height 4.5 feet above ground. If a tree splits into multiple
trunks below 4.5 feet, the trunk is measured at its most narrow point below the
split.
   (D)   Tree, Small. A tree of a species that normally reaches a height of 15
feet or less in Northwest Ohio upon maturity.
   (E)   Tree, Medium. A tree of a species that normally reaches a height
exceeding 15 feet but less than 30 feet and an average mature crown spread of
at least 15 feet upon maturity in Northwest Ohio.
   (F)   Tree, Large. A tree of a species that normally reaches a height
exceeding 30 feet and an average mature crown spread of at least 15 feet upon
maturity in Northwest Ohio.
   (G)   Shrub. A woody plant, smaller than a tree, consisting of several small
stems from the ground or small branches near the ground.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.395 GENERAL LANDSCAPING.
   (A)   Placement of Landscape Materials.
      (1)   All portions of the lot not covered by permitted structures or
impervious surfaces shall be landscaped with grass, trees, shrubbery and/or
other appropriate ground cover or landscaping material with weed barriers where
applicable, which at all times shall be maintained in good and healthy
condition. Landscaped areas shall not contain bare soil, aggregated stone or
decorative rock.
      (2)   Vehicular and Pedestrian Movement. Landscape materials shall be
located on the site so as to not restrict pedestrian or vehicular access or
otherwise constitute a traffic hazard.
      (3)   Vision Clearance. Landscape materials shall be located to avoid
interference with visibility per §
150.360(C) (Vision Clearance Triangle).
      (4)   Distribution. Required landscape materials shall be reasonably
distributed in the area where required. The required plant materials should be
planted in clusters or irregular patterns, and that native grasses and
herbaceous perennial species be used for ornamentation in addition to the
required plantings.
   (B)   Plant Materials.
      (1)   Live Plants. All plant material shall be living and healthy. Dead,
diseased or artificial plants shall not be used to meet the required landscape
treatments.
      (2)   Use of native plant species is encouraged. If native species are
not used, then an irrigation system is required.
      (3)   Invasive and Prohibited Species. Applicants shall not install
invasive, detrimental, noxious species nor any other prohibited plant species
so designated by the Ohio Department of Natural Resources.
      (4)   Minimum Size for New Planting at time of installation.
         (a)   Small deciduous trees shall have a minimum caliper of two (2)
inches and a clear trunk height of at least five (5) feet at the time of
installation.
         (b)   Medium and Large deciduous tree shall have a minimum caliper of
2.5 inches and a clear trunk height of at least six (6) feet at the time of
installation.
         (c)   Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of six feet high, with a
minimum caliper of one and one-half inches and a minimum spread of three feet
at the time of installation with a maximum mature height 25 feet.
         (d)   Shrubs and hedges shall be at least 30 inches average height and
24 inches in width at time of planting.
      (5)   Selection of landscape materials shall contribute to the overall
character of the building and be relative to the size of the lot and building.
The Village Tree Commission can assist in the selection of plant materials.
      (6)   Landscape materials shall be compatible with the existing
neighboring landscaping selections or in compliance with existing property
requirements, such as industrial and business parks’ landscape plans.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.396 LANDSCAPING ALONG THE STREET FRONTAGE AND BUILDING FOUNDATIONS.
   In addition to the requirements in §
150.397(C), all areas within the required front building and parking setback,
shall be landscaped as required below, except for access drives. The following
minimum plant materials shall be provided and maintained on all lots or
developments:
   (A)   Street Frontage. Landscaping along the street frontage is required for
every multi-family and non-residential development when the minimum required
front setback is greater than five feet, and the minimum width of this
landscape strip shall be not less the minimum setback required for the district
in which the lot is located.
      (1)   Three (3) medium or large deciduous trees shall be provided for
every 100 linear feet of lot frontage or fraction thereof, not including drive
entrances.
      (2)   Twenty shrubs shall be provided for every 100 linear feet of lot
frontage or fraction thereof, not including drive entrances.
      (3)   All areas in the landscaping strip not devoted to trees, shrubs,
steps, walks, terraces and driveways shall be planted with grass, ground cover
or other live landscape treatment.
      (4)   Trees and shrubs shall be arranged to create varied and attractive
views and do not have to be equally spaced along the street frontage. Plant
material should provide a variety of color displayed throughout the year.
      (5)   Innovative treatments are encouraged in this area, but the design
shall not interfere with adequate sight distance.
   (B)   Foundation Plantings. Foundation plantings are required for all
exterior building walls that are visible from a road. Foundation plantings
shall be placed within five feet of the building perimeter. Ten shrubs shall be
required for every 100 lineal feet of horizontal exterior building wall visible
from the road, street or highway in groups of varying material. If foundation
plantings are deemed not practical due to unique features of the site and/or
building, an alternative plan may be considered as part of the development plan
review process.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.397 SCREENING AND LANDSCAPING OF PARKING FACILITIES.
   (A)   Landscaping in the Interior of Parking Lots. Interior landscaping of
parking lots shall be provided in accordance with the following requirements.
      (1)   For any parking facility designed to accommodate 30 or more
vehicles or containing 6,000 square feet of area (including loading areas), a
minimum of five percent (5%) of the parking facility shall be planted as
landscaped island areas, developed, and reasonably distributed throughout the
parking lot to define major circulation aisles and driving lanes and provide
visual and climatic relief from broad expanses of pavement, except perimeter
plantings may be used to satisfy the requirements in this Section when parking
facilities are less than sixty-two (62) feet in width.
      (2)   Each interior landscaped area shall be no less than 200 square
feet. The minimum width for each area shall be ten (10) feet. In all cases, the
minimum distance from a tree to the back of curb shall be four (4) feet;
      (3)   Within the landscaped islands, there shall be provided one medium
or large deciduous tree for every 10 parking spaces. Each interior landscape
island shall have at least one medium or large deciduous tree. A minimum of 50
percent of the required trees shall be large deciduous trees. Where sight
distance or maneuvering conflicts exist, trees shall have a clear trunk of at
least five feet above the ground and the remaining required landscape area
shall be planted with shrubs or ground cover not to exceed two feet in height.
      (4)   Shrubs or low, spreading plant materials may be planted within the
required landscaped islands provided there is no impairment to the visibility
of motorists or pedestrians.
      (5)   For parking facilities or areas over 30,000 square feet in size,
the required landscaping shall be designed to break up the visual expanse of
pavement with landscape features such as boulevards, larger landscape islands
or areas of preserved on-site native vegetation. This landscaping requirement
may also include storm water retention areas or drainage courses if designed to
provide an attractive natural asset to the site;
      (6)   If the specific application of the interior landscape requirements
will seriously limit functions of the building site, the Planning Commission
shall have authority to permit consolidation and relocation of these landscaped
areas on the building site.
      (7)   Landscaped areas along the perimeter of the parking area, or in any
part of a yard, shall not be counted as interior parking lot landscaped areas,
except as provided for in subsection (1) above.
      (8)   For the purpose of this Section, the area of a parking lot shall be
the total vehicular use area within the perimeter of the parking facility,
including the landscaped islands, parking spaces and all circulation aisles
except those with no parking spaces or landscaped islands located on either
side. See Figure 1, Parking Lot Interior Calculation.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/083b2827ca6deba1b1fb1d5dec2edfde91f29d3b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2510.png]
 
   (B)   Perimeter Landscaping Requirements. Perimeter landscaping shall be
required along any side of a parking lot that abuts adjoining property that is
not a right-of-way.
      (1)   The landscaped strip shall be the depth of the minimum parking
setback set forth in this Zoning Code for the district in which the lot is
located, except as otherwise regulated in
Article 150.33 Use-Specific Standards and shall be located between the parking
area and the abutting property lines.
      (2)   The landscaped strip shall be planted with one medium or large
deciduous or two small deciduous trees for every forty (40) lineal feet of
parking lot abutting the property line. The trees shall be arranged within the
landscaped strip to create varied and attractive views and do not have to be
equally spaced.
      (3)   This landscaping strip shall be free of any wall, fence, embankment
and/or walkway. Such wall, fence, etc. may exist or be constructed on the edge
of such landscape strip.
      (4)   The requirements of this subsection shall not apply where cross-
access and/or shared parking is provided between parking facilities on
adjoining lots and where planting is required for screening pursuant to §
150.398, Buffering and Screening between Districts and Uses.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.398 BUFFERING AND SCREENING BETWEEN DISTRICTS AND USES.
   (A)   Intent. This section is intended to buffer the effects of uses on
adjacent properties by requiring a screen and/or buffer between uses in order
to minimize the harmful impacts of noise, dust/debris, headlight glare and
other objectionable activities by an adjoining or nearby use. Any screening
buffer area must be maintained in good order at all times by the owner of the
property. When deemed necessary by the Planning Commission to provide a visual
screen, additional landscaping or other improvements may be required.
   (B)   Screening. Screening, as required by the provisions of this Code,
shall be of such nature and density that it will screen the activities on the
lot from view from the normal level of a first story window on an abutting lot.
   (C)   When Required. A buffer yard shall be required when:
      (1)   A lot in any Business, Industrial, or Public/Open Space District
abuts a Residential District;
      (2)   A lot in the Multi-family or the Manufactured Home Park Districts
abuts a One-Family Residential District;
      (3)   A lot in a Residential District is devoted to a nonresidential use;
      (4)   Required by the Use-Specific Standards in
Article 150.33; and
      (5)   When any wall of a nonresidential building in a Business/Industrial
District faces or is across the street from a Residential District, screening
shall be installed along the full length of such street frontage. No screening
shall be required when the Business/Industrial District lot is either not in
use or is used for residential purposes.
   (D)   Width of Buffer Yard. The width of the buffer yard shall be equal to
the minimum parking setback set forth in the applicable zoning district or
fifteen (15) feet, whichever is greater.
   (E)   Location. The buffer yard shall be located entirely within the higher
intensity zoning district or use and abutting the zoning district line or lot
line of lower intensity use. However, the buffer yard may be placed in the
lower intensity zoning district or partially within both zoning districts if
both sides of the zoning district line and the entire buffer yard width are
within common ownership and a permanent easement is provided over any portion
of the buffer yard not within the higher intensity zoning district. If a buffer
yard is located in a residential development that has an owners’ association or
other similar legal entity, all buffer yards shall be located in open space
owned by the association or in an open space easement controlled by the owners’
association.
   (F)   Screening. When the natural vegetation within the required buffer yard
does not form a solid, continuous, visual screen or does not have a minimum
height of six (6) feet along the entire length of the common boundary at the
time of occupancy, except as provided for in subsection (F)(3)(b) below,
screening shall be installed in compliance with the following:
      (1)   Screening Materials. Screening design and development shall be
compatible with the existing and proposed land use and development character of
the surrounding land and structures. Screening within the buffer yard shall
consist of one or more or combination thereof of the following:
         (a)   A dense vegetative planting incorporating trees and/or shrubs of
a variety which shall be equally effective in winter and summer. Trees and/or
shrubs shall be adequately spaced to form a solid, continuous visual screen
within one (1) year after the initial installation. At a minimum, at the time
of planting, the spacing of trees shall not exceed twelve (12) feet on center,
and the planting pattern shall be staggered. Shrubbery shall be more closely
spaced.
         (b)   Non-living opaque structures, such as a solid masonry wall, that
is compatible with the principal structure or a solid wood fence together with
a landscaped area at least fifteen (15) feet wide. For solid fences, fences
shall be designed, constructed, and finished so that the supporting members
face the property owner of the fence and they shall be maintained in good
condition, be structurally sound, and attractively finished at all times.
         (c)   An ornamental fence with openings through which light and air
may pass together with a landscaped area at least fifteen (15) feet wide. A
chain link fence shall not be permitted.
         (d)   A landscaped mound or berm at least seven feet wide, with a
slope no more than a 3:1. Where the mound or berm is to be mowed, the maximum
permitted slope is 4:1.
      (2)   Installation of Screening. Screening shall be continuous and in
place at the time of occupancy. If vehicular or pedestrian access through the
screen is necessary, the screening function shall be preserved.
      (3)   Height of Screening. The height of screening shall be in accordance
with the following:
         (a)   Visual screening by walls, fences, or mounds in combination with
vegetation, fences or walls shall be a minimum of six (6) feet high measured
from the natural grade on any adjacent residential lot, except as set forth in
subsection (b) below.
         (b)   Whenever the required screening is located within a front yard
or within twenty-five (25) feet of a parking lot, drive, or driveway entrance,
the required screening shall not exceed a height of three (3) feet.
         (c)   When used alone, vegetation shall be a minimum of six (6) feet
high, as measured from the natural grade on any adjacent residential lot, in
order to accomplish the desired screening effect. The required height shall be
achieved no later than one (1) year after the initial installation.
      (4)   Modifications to Buffering and Screening Requirements. Buffer yards
required by this Article shall be applied equally to all similarly situated
properties. The Planning Commission is empowered to modify the above buffer
yard and screening requirements when it determines that:
         (a)   Natural land characteristics, such as topography or existing
vegetation on the proposed building site, would achieve the same intent as this
Section.
         (b)   Innovative landscaping or architectural design is employed on
the building site to achieve an equivalent screening and buffering effect.
         (c)   The required screening and landscaping would be ineffective at
maturity due to the proposed topography of the site, and/or the location of the
improvements on the site.
         (d)   The topography of adjacent and surrounding sites is such as to
render required screening ineffective at maturity.
         (e)   It can be clearly demonstrated that it is highly improbable that
the abutting property will be developed for residential purposes due to
circumstances that have taken place since the adoption of this Code.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.399 SCREENING OF ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.
   Screening of accessory uses shall be provided according to the following:
   (A)   Trash Collection Areas.
      (1)   Trash and/or garbage collection and service areas shall be enclosed
on all sides by a solid wall or fence and a solid gate at least 1 foot higher
than the highest refuse container in the collection area if such area is not
within an enclosed building or structure, but in no case shall the wall or
fence be less than six (6) feet in height. Such solid wall or solid fence shall
be situated so as to screen the view of the collection area from adjacent
properties and visibility from the street.
      (2)   The wall or fence shall be constructed of wood, brick, decorative
concrete, split face block, stone, or a synthetic material manufactured to look
like the approved material.
      (3)   These enclosures shall be located at least five (5) feet from the
property line, unless otherwise specifically regulated in this Code.
      (4)   The screen shall provide access to the trash and/or garbage
collection area by using a wooden fence or other opaque device to serve as a
gate.
      (5)   Trash receptacles and enclosures serving commercial or industrial
uses shall be located on the same lot as the use served and shall not be
located in residential districts.
   (B)   Ground mounted Mechanical Equipment. Ground mounted mechanical
equipment shall be screened with evergreen plant material so the equipment is
completely obscured from view within four (4) years.
   (C)   Outdoor Loading Areas. Permitted outdoor loading areas for vehicles
other than step vans and other light-duty trucks shall be enclosed with a solid
fence or wall and solid gates. The wall or fence shall be high enough to
conceal all operations and materials from the view of an observer standing at
the grade level of an abutting lot or a public street, but in no case shall the
wall or fence be less than six (6) feet in height. The wall or fence shall be
constructed of wood, brick, decorative concrete, split face block, stone, or a
synthetic material manufactured to look like the approved material.
   (D)   Landscaping. No interior landscaping shall be required within an area
screened for accessory uses.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.400 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Screening. All screening and buffer yards shall be free of advertising
or other signs, except for directional signs and other signs for the efficient
flow of vehicles.
   (B)   Parking. Vehicle parking shall not be permitted in landscaped areas.
   (C)   Vehicular Encroachment on Landscaping Islands. All required
landscaping areas shall be protected by curbing or a suitable barrier to
prevent vehicle encroachment assuring that vehicles overhang into landscape
areas no more than one and one-half (1.5) feet.
   (D)   Damage to Public Works. In no case shall any plant material interfere
with or cause damage to underground utility lines, public roadways, or other
public works.
   (E)   Maintenance. The lot owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of
all landscaping materials (grass, plants, trees, stone, fencing, mulch, etc.).
      (1)   The owner shall maintain such landscaping in good condition so as
to present a healthy, neat and orderly appearance, free from refuse and debris
and to prevent soil erosion.
      (2)   No plant material required by this Zoning Code shall be removed for
any reason unless replaced with like kind and size, at the time of removal.
Prior to such removal, a revised landscape plan shall be submitted to the
Zoning Administrator for review and approval per §
150.653, Minor Alterations Approved by Zoning Administrator.
      (3)   All landscape materials shall be maintained so as not to cause
tripping hazards in walkways or obstruction to entrances of buildings.
      (4)   If within two years of installation (or incorporation of existing
vegetation), any plant material, such as but not limited to trees, shrubs,
ground covers and other plants materials fails to thrive, the property owner
shall replace the plants with the plant materials shown on the approved
development plan. All replacement plants shall conform to the approved plan.
Dead or unhealthy plants shall be replaced within the next planting season.
      (5)   As part of development plan review, a bond, escrow or other
suitable performance guarantee shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator to
ensure the landscape material is installed and maintained for a two-year
period. No zoning certificate shall be issued until the bond, escrow or other
suitable guarantee is received.
      (6)   If the installation of plantings is not completed in a planting
season and/or prior to occupancy, a Temporary Certificate of Zoning Compliance
may be issued pursuant to §
150.634(D)(3).
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.401 LIGHTING REQUIREMENTS.
   A lighting plan demonstrating compliance with the following exterior
lighting standards shall be approved by the Village for all uses that are
required to file a development plan.
   (A)   All plans submitted shall include the following minimum lighting
standards:
      (1)   0.5 foot-candles minimum maintained light level at grade in all
vehicular use areas and connecting pedestrian paths;
      (2)   Location of all fixtures, controllers and transformers;
      (3)   Property boundaries, building location(s), parking lot layout,
vehicular traffic roadways and driveways, pedestrian paths, adjacent right-of-
ways, north arrow, scale;
      (4)   Specifications of the proposed light fixtures including the
manufacturer’s information regarding fixture style, pole and mounting details,
lamp type, wattage, light distribution information, pole height and pole
foundation; and
      (5)   Photometric plan of light levels.
   (B)   Lighting restrictions:
      (1)   Any lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking shall be so
arranged as to deflect the light away from adjoining premises in any
residential district.
      (2)   All exterior fixtures to be “total cut-off” type fixtures as
defined by the Illuminating Engineer’s Society Standards except: architectural/
accent lighting, street lighting, landscape lighting, area lighting for
recreational uses and exterior residential lighting may be semi-cutoff or non-
cutoff luminaries, but shall be located or provided such that no lamp or
reflector image is directly visible from any site boundary at or above grade
when the initial lumen output exceeds 2,850 lumens (equivalent to a 150 watt
incandescent A lamp). Luminaries required by the Building Code which operate
only in an emergency model are exempt from these standards.
      (3)   No portion of the lamp, reflector, lens, or refracting system may
extend beyond the housing or shield so as to be visible from off site or cause
disabling glare. Exterior residential lights are exempt from this requirement
when the initial lumen output does not exceed 2,850 lumens (equivalent to a 150
watt incandescent A lamp). Street lights are exempt.
      (4)   Height limitations for exterior lighting which shall be measured
from surrounding natural grade:
         (a)   Residential including multi-family: 25 feet;
         (b)   Office/commercial: 28 feet;
         (c)   Industrial: 30 feet;
         (d)   Outdoor recreational facility: All recreational/sports facility
lighting will be reviewed for compliance with the intent to minimize the impact
on all surrounding properties and public right-of-ways.
      (5)   All outdoor light poles shall be metal, fiberglass or finished
wood, approved by the Village Planning Commission and Engineer. Light poles on
private, commercial or industrial property shall be located a minimum distance
of the pole’s height from any adjoining residential district.
      (6)   Where used for signs or for decorative effects or recreational
facilities, such as for building landscaping or sports field illumination, the
outdoor light fixtures shall be equipped with automatic timing devices and
shielded and focused to minimize light pollution.
      (7)   Except for security lighting, all commercial, industrial,
recreational, and institutional use exterior lighting shall be extinguished
within one hour of closing.
      (8)   No color or flashing lights shall be used to light the exterior of
building or other site facilities.
   (C)   Light pollution standards. Light pollution shall be defined as any
measurable exterior artificial illumination that strays beyond the site
boundary both horizontally at grade and vertically to the building height
limitation. Artificially produced light straying beyond the property boundaries
shall be considered a public nuisance when intensity levels exceed the
following maximum illumination levels at or beyond five feet into the adjoining
property and shall be adjusted, modified, or removed accordingly. Lighting
required exclusively to illuminate entrance drive and pedestrian ways from the
public right-of-way shall be permitted to illuminate to the far limit of the
right-of-way.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.402 FENCES AND WALLS ON RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   Scope. This Section shall apply to all residential districts and to
residential properties located in other zoned districts. The fence regulations
herein shall not apply to any permanent fence erected prior to the effective
date of this Zoning Code. However, the replacement of a permanent fence,
erected prior to the effective date of this Zoning Code, by a different type or
use shall abide by the regulations of this Section. Fences constructed in other
zoning districts shall be considered on an individual basis by the Planning
Commission or Zoning Administrator, as applicable.
   (B)   Walls. Retaining and landscaping walls that do not exceed a height of
30 inches may be placed in a front, side and rear yard not less than six (6)
inches from the property line.
   (C)   Permits. Any fence permitted by this Section shall require the
issuance of a zoning permit prior to installation. Property owners must sign
all permits.
   (D)   Location and Height. Fences shall be located on a residential lot in
compliance with the location regulations below:
      (1)   Front Yards.
         (a)   In the R-1 and R-E zoning districts, fences shall be set back a
minimum of 40 feet from the right-of-way, with a maximum height of four (4)
feet.
         (b)   In all other districts, fences shall be set back a minimum of 25
feet from the right-of-way, with a maximum height of four (4) feet.
         (c)   Fences surrounding public utilities are exempt from the minimum
setback from rights-of-way requirements.
      (2)   Corner Side Yards on Corner Lots.
         (a)   Corner Side Yard abuts Neighbors Front Yard. When the rear lot
line of a corner lot abuts the front yard of an adjacent interior lot, the
location of the fence shall comply with §
150.402(D)(1) above. See Figure 150.402(D)(2)(a).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/083b2827ca6deba1b1fb1d5dec2edfde91f29d3b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2512.png]
 
         (b)   Corner Side Yard abuts Neighbors Corner Side Yard. When the rear
lot line of a corner lot abuts the rear lot line of an adjacent corner lot, the
fence shall be located a minimum of 10 feet from the side street right-of-way,
with a maximum height of six (6) feet. See Figure 150.402(D)(2)(b).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/083b2827ca6deba1b1fb1d5dec2edfde91f29d3b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2514.png]
 
      (3)   Side and Rear Yards. Fences in a side or rear yard may be built
adjacent to but not upon the lot line, and shall be located entirely on the
owner’s property. The Zoning Administrator may approve a fence to be placed
upon the property line when the fence connects to an existing fence on an
abutting property and the abutting property owner has agreed in writing to the
connection of the fences.
         (a)   Fences that surround the yard’s accessory uses (deck, patio,
garden, etc.) shall be not less than four (4) feet and no more than six (6)
feet in height and all opening, doorways and entrances shall be equipped with
gates of equal height with said fence.
         (b)   At least one unlocked gate or fence opening of a minimum of
three feet in width shall be provided in each yard to permit emergency access.
   (E)   Fence in Front Yard as Conditional Use.
      (1)   Notwithstanding the location regulations in §
150.402(D), the Planning Commission may authorize the installation of a fence
in the required front yard of a residential lot under the following
circumstances:
         (a)   The lot is located on a major street or collector street.
         (b)   The lot is located across the street from nonresidential zoning.
         (c)   The lot has a lot area of one acre or larger, a minimum lot
width of 200 feet, and is not located within a residential subdivision.
      (2)   The fence be an open ornamental fence that does not exceed six (6)
feet in height.
   (F)   Permitted Fence Types. The following types of fences are permitted in
compliance with the location requirements set forth in §
150.402(D).
      (1)   Chain Link and Pipe Fences.
      (2)   Open Ornamental Fences: Picket, Rail, or Split Rail.
      (3)   Privacy Fences: Basket Weave or Woven, Louver or Ventilating,
Stockade/Palisade.
      (4)   Similar Fences. The Planning Commission may permit other fences
that are similar in character and design to one or more of the fences permitted
by this Zoning Code.
   (G)   Prohibited Fence Materials. Barbed wire, electric fences, chicken
wire, hog fencing, snow fences, agricultural fences and fences comprised of
similar materials are prohibited, except that a snow fence or fence of similar
type may be erected or placed in any yard during the period from November to
March for the sole purpose of preventing the drifting of snow on roadways,
driveways and sidewalks, but such fence shall not be used at any time as a
temporary or permanent fence or enclosure.
   (H)   Maintenance. Such permitted fences shall be maintained in good
condition, be structurally sound and attractively finished at all times. Any
grounds between such fences and property lines shall be well maintained. Any
such fence permitted on the property line shall be designed, constructed and
finished so that the supporting members thereof shall face the property of the
owner of the fence.
   (I)   Inspection.
      (1)   It shall be the duty of each property owner to determine property
lines and to ascertain that the fence, thus constructed, does not deviate from
the plans as approved by the Village Administrator or his or her designee.
Fences shall not encroach upon another lot or parcel of land.
      (2)   The Village shall furnish such inspection as deemed necessary to
determine that such said fence is constructed in accordance with plans
submitted for the permit. The issuance of a permit, by the village, shall not
be construed to mean that the village has determined said fence is not
encroaching upon another lot, nor shall it relieve the property owner of duty
imposed upon him or her herein.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.403 APPROVAL PROCESS FOR REQUIRED LANDSCAPING, FENCES AND WALLS.
   (A)   The location of landscaping, fences, or walls required to fulfill the
standards and criteria of this Article shall be reviewed and approved as part
of a development plan pursuant to
Article 150.65 Development Plan Review except for residential fences that shall
be reviewed pursuant to §
150.402. The Zoning Administrator shall refer landscape plans for large
construction projects to the Tree Commission for review and recommendations.
   (B)   A fence or wall proposed without new construction, additions or site
renovation may be approved administratively by the Zoning Administrator when
the fence or wall:
      (1)   Complies with the requirements of this Article and other applicable
provisions in this Zoning Code;
      (2)   Is consistent with any previously approved plan;
      (3)   Is compatible with the current site development if there is no
approved plan; and
      (4)   Will have a minimal adverse impact to the surrounding areas.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
ARTICLE 150.41
NONCONFORMING USES, LOTS, BUILDINGS, AND SITES
   
150.411   Intent.
   
150.412   Lawful Nonconformance.
   
150.413   Nonconforming Use of Buildings, Structures, or Land.
   
150.414   Nonconforming Buildings & Structures.
   
150.415   Nonconforming Lots.
   
150.416   Nonconforming Parking Facilities.
   
150.417   Nonconforming Site Conditions Existing at Time of Development Plan
Review.
   
150.418   Nonconforming Signs.
   
150.419    Existing Use Deemed Conditional Use; Application Required for
Change.
§ 150.411 INTENT.
   Regulations for the continuance, maintenance, repair, restoring, moving and
discontinuance of a nonconforming structure, site condition, building or land
use are established in order to achieve, among others, the following purposes:
   (A)   To permit the continuance but control a nonconformity so as to
minimize any adverse effect on the adjoining properties and development;
   (B)   To regulate their maintenance and repair;
   (C)   To restrict their rebuilding if substantially destroyed;
   (D)   To establish regulations for the development of nonconforming lots,
and lots containing nonconforming site conditions;
   (E)   To establish regulations for the use, restoration, reconstruction, and
expansion of structures that do not conform to the standards set forth in this
Zoning Code;
   (F)   To require the permanent discontinuance of a nonconforming use when
not operated for certain periods of time; and require eventual conformity in
accordance with the objectives of this zoning code.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.412 LAWFUL NONCONFORMANCE.
   The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to any building, structure, land,
site condition, or use of such building, structure or land, hereafter becoming
nonconforming as a result of the adoption of this Zoning Code as well as
amendments made to this Zoning Code or the Official Zoning Map.
   (A)   The lawful use of any dwelling, building or structure and of any land
use or premises as existing and lawful at the time of enacting this Zoning
Code, may be continued, although such use does not conform to the provisions of
this zoning code. The completion, restoration, reconstruction, extension or
substitution of such nonconforming use shall be subject to the provisions and
conditions as set forth in this Article.
   (B)   A nonconforming lot, use, site condition, building or structure does
not constitute a nonconformity with regulations if such nonconformity was
permitted pursuant to a legally granted variance from a zoning regulation.
   (C)   Ordinary repairs, or repair or replacement of non-bearing walls,
fixtures, wiring, or plumbing may be performed on a nonconforming structure or
on any portion of a structure that contains a nonconforming use provided that
the cubic content shall not be increased and no structural parts shall be
replaced except when required by law to restore such building or structure to a
safe condition or to make the building or structure conform to the regulations
of the district in which it is located. For the purpose of this Zoning Code,
ordinary repairs shall also include the replacement of equipment which is
required for safety of operation, and the replacement or substitutions of
machinery or equipment.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.413 NONCONFORMING USE OF BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, OR LAND.
   A nonconforming use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful
and does not constitute a public nuisance, subject to the following
regulations:
   (A)   Change or Substitution of Nonconforming Use.
      (1)   A nonconforming use of a building, structure or land shall not be
changed or substituted to another nonconforming use unless the Planning
Commission finds that the use proposed is equally appropriate or more
appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming use, and that the
use proposed is in less conflict with the character of uses permitted in the
applicable zoning district than the existing nonconforming use.
      (2)   In permitting such change, the Planning Commission may prescribe
appropriate conditions and safeguards in accordance with other provisions of
this Zoning Code and when made a part of the terms under which the change is
granted.
      (3)   Violation of any conditions and/or safeguards prescribed shall be
deemed a violation of this Zoning Code and shall be punishable under
Article 150.71, Enforcement and Penalties.
      (4)   If the Planning Commission permits a change or substitution of a
nonconforming use, whenever a nonconforming use is changed to a less intensive
use, such use shall not thereafter be changed to a more intensive nonconforming
use.
   (B)   Change of Nonconforming Use to Permitted Use. Whenever a nonconforming
use is changed to a use permitted in the district in which the lot is located,
it shall cease to be considered a nonconforming use. Whenever such a change is
made, no nonconforming use shall be resumed or reinstated.
   (C)   Land Occupied by Nonconforming Use.
      (1)   Expansion of Nonconforming Use of Land. A nonconforming use of land
shall not be physically enlarged, increased, nor extended to occupy a greater
area of land than was occupied by the use at the time it became nonconforming,
unless otherwise specified.
      (2)   Relocation of Nonconforming Use of Land. A nonconforming use of
land shall not be moved in whole or in part to any portion of the lot or parcel
other than those portions occupied by the use at the time it became
nonconforming.
   (D)   Structures Occupied by Nonconforming Use.
      (1)   Extension of Nonconforming Use within Building. A nonconforming use
of an existing structure may be extended throughout any parts of a building
that were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption
or amendment to this Zoning Code. However, no such use shall be extended to
occupy any land outside such building not previously occupied by such
nonconforming use.
      (2)   Expansion of Building(s). No building occupied by a nonconforming
use shall be enlarged or expanded to increase the nonconforming use, and no
additional structures shall be constructed in connection with such
nonconforming use unless the Planning Commission determines that the proposed
expansion and/or improvements shall upgrade the activity and make the resulting
development more compatible to the district for which it is zoned and more
compatible with the adjacent uses. In making this determination, the Planning
Commission shall consider the following:
         (a)   Hours of operation;
         (b)   Volume and type of sales;
         (c)   Type of processing activity;
         (d)   Nature and location of storage;
         (e)   Traffic generation by volume, type, and characteristics;
         (f)   Parking and loading characteristics; and
         (g)   Noise, smoke, odor, glare, vibration, radiation, and fumes.
      (3)   Reconstruction of a Building Occupied by a Nonconforming Use.
Except as provided for in subsection (D)(4) below, no building or structure
occupied by a nonconforming use shall be reconstructed except when the use is
changed to a use permitted in the district in which it is located, or upon
prior approval of the Planning Commission determines that the proposed
improvements shall upgrade the activity and make the resulting development more
compatible to the district for which it is zoned and more compatible to the
adjacent uses.
      (4)   Damage or Destruction of Building Occupied by a Nonconforming Use.
         (a)   Any building or structure occupied by a nonconforming use that
has been destroyed or damaged by fire, other casualty, act of God or by a
public enemy to the extent of 50% or more of its cost of restoration to the
condition in which it was before the occurrence, shall thereafter conform to
all the provisions of this zoning code.
         (b)   The total structural repairs, improvements and alterations
including repairs occasioned by fire, other casualty, act of God or by a public
enemy to the extent of less than 50% of its cost of restoration, shall not,
exceed 50% of the current reproduction value of the structure, unless the
structure or use be permanently changed to a conforming use.
         (c)   Determination of the reproduction value shall be made by three
practicing building construction contractors, one to be appointed by the owner,
one to be appointed by the village, and the third to be selected by the mutual
consent of the two parties.
         (d)   In the case of repair or replacement of partial destruction of
the structure, a zoning permit shall be applied for within six months of the
destruction and repairs shall be completed within six months of the issuance of
the permit or the nonconforming use shall be considered to be abandoned.
   (E)   Discontinuance and Abandonment. Any nonconforming use of land or a
building or structure shall be considered abandoned when the owner, lessee or
tenant has voluntarily discontinued such use for two consecutive years.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.414 NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.
   A nonconforming building or structure may continue to be used or occupied by
a use permitted in the district in which it is located so long as it remains
otherwise lawful and does not constitute a public nuisance, subject to the
following provisions:
   (A)   Enlargement, Repair, and Alterations. A nonconforming building or
structure may be enlarged, maintained, repaired, or structurally altered
provided the additions are made to conform to all the regulations of the
district in which it is located. However, no such enlargement, maintenance,
repair, or structural alteration shall either create any additional
nonconformity or increase the degree of the existing nonconformity of all or
any part of such building or structure with respect to the regulations in this
Zoning Code.
   (B)   Moving. A nonconforming building or structure may be moved to a
different location on the same lot or other parcel of land within the district,
with approval of the Planning Commission, after a hearing, and provided proper
and adequate alterations are scheduled to make the building or structure
conform to the regulations of the district where it is to be located.
   (C)   Restoration of Damaged Building or Structure. If a nonconforming
building or structure is damaged or destroyed by any means, those portions so
destroyed or damaged may be restored to the original footprint and floor area
of the building or structure, provided the reconstruction is begun within six
(6) months of the damage or destruction. Any restoration that exceeds the
original footprint and/or floor area shall comply with §
150.413(D)(4)(b)-(d).
   (D)   Change in Principal Use of Building. The principal use of a
nonconforming building may be changed to any other use permitted in the
district in which it is located so long as the new use complies with all
regulations of this Zoning Code specified for such use, except the regulations
to which the building did not conform prior to the change in use.
   (E)   Variances. Variances from district regulations on area, lot coverage,
lot width, height, setbacks, location on the lot may be granted by the Planning
Commission where necessary and where such variance meets the requirements of an
area variance.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.415 NONCONFORMING LOTS.
   A lot of record that on the effective date of this Zoning Code, or any
amendment thereto, does not comply with the lot area and/or lot width
regulations of the district in which the lot is located may be used as follows:
   (A)   Existing Buildings on Nonconforming Lots of Record.
      (1)   Existing Building on a Nonresidential Nonconforming Lot. If a
nonconforming lot is occupied by a building, such building shall be maintained
and may be repaired, modernized or altered, provided that the building shall
not be enlarged in floor area unless the enlarged section(s) complies with all
regulations of this Zoning Code, except the lot area and lot width regulations
of the district in which the lot is located.
      (2)   Existing Dwelling on a Residential Nonconforming Lot. If a
nonconforming lot is occupied by a dwelling, such dwelling may be maintained,
repaired or altered; provided, however, the dwelling shall not be enlarged in
floor area unless the expansion complies with the depth of the front setback,
width of side setbacks and the rear setback regulations. No portion of the new
building shall increase the nonconforming condition.
   (B)   Vacant Nonconforming Lot(s) of Record.
      (1)   Nonconforming Lot(s) of Record in a Residential District. A
nonconforming lot in a Single-family or Multi-family Residential District may
be used provided that:
         (a)   No adjoining vacant lot or parcel of land was owned by the same
owner on the effective date of this zoning code;
         (b)   No adjoining land, or other vacant land can be equitably
acquired; and
         (c)   All other regulations of this zoning code, except the lot area
and width regulations, shall be complied with.
      (2)   Vacant Nonconforming Lot in a Nonresidential District. A vacant
nonconforming lot in a nonresidential district may be used for any use
permitted in the district in which it is located when the development of such
lot meets all development requirements of the district in which it is located,
including the maximum lot coverage and minimum setback requirements, except for
the minimum lot area and lot width requirements, except that no use that
requires a greater lot size than the established minimum lot size for a
particular district shall be permitted on a nonconforming lot. Review and
approval of development on such lots of record shall be conducted according to
the development plan review requirements set forth in Article 150.65.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.416 NONCONFORMING PARKING FACILITIES.
   A building, use or structure existing lawfully at the time this zoning code
or any amendment thereto became effective, but which does not conform with the
off-street parking or off-street loading regulations, may be occupied by the
existing use or a use of similar intensity as determined by the Planning
Commission without such parking and/or loading facilities being provided;
however, any parking spaces that may be provided thereafter shall comply with
the applicable regulations set forth in
Article 150.37.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.417 NONCONFORMING SITE CONDITIONS EXISTING AT TIME OF DEVELOPMENT PLAN
REVIEW.
   If a nonconforming site condition(s) exists when a revised development plan
is required pursuant to
Article 150.65, then such site condition(s) shall be brought into compliance
with district regulations, unless the Planning Commission determines that such
conformance cannot be reasonably achieved because of existing site conditions.
Existing site conditions include, but are not limited to, the existing lot
configuration and patterns of surrounding development; inability of the
applicant to acquire additional property; location of the existing structures
on the site in question; the location of parking and access on the site in
question, and the location of utilities both on and off-site. In such case, the
Planning Commission shall approve a site plan that reduces the existing
nonconforming site condition(s) to the maximum extent practicable.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.418 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   A sign, lawfully existing at the time this Zoning Code, or any amendment
thereto, became or becomes effective, but which fails to conform to the sign
regulations of the district in which it is located is a nonconforming sign.
Non-conforming signs shall comply with the regulations set forth in
Article 150.35, Sign Regulations.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.419 EXISTING USE DEEMED CONDITIONAL USE; APPLICATION REQUIRED FOR CHANGE.
   Any lawfully existing use that, at the time of its establishment, was not
classified as a conditional use, but which now, because of the passage of this
Zoning Code, or amendment thereto, is listed as a conditional use in the
district in which it is located, shall be deemed without further action to be a
conditional use. Any change, modification, enlargement or alteration of such
use, site development conditions or signs, or change in operations shall only
be permitted upon review and approval according to the procedures for
conditional uses set forth in
Article 150.67.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
ARTICLE 150.43
DEMOLITION
   
150.431   Purpose.
   
150.432   Permit Required.
   
150.433   Disconnection Of Utilities.
   
150.434   Bond or Other Surety Required.
   
150.435   Site Conditions.
   
150.436   Regulation of Demolition Contractors.
   
150.437   Permitted Hours Of Demolition.
   
150.438   Required Notification Of Neighboring Properties.
   
150.439   Time Limit For Permit.
   
150.440    Penalty.
§ 150.431 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this article is to establish regulations concerning the
demolition of buildings and structures so as to ensure that buildings and
structures that have had utilities such as gas, electric, water and sewer are
properly disconnected. These regulations reduce risk to public health and
safety.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.432 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall demolish any building or structure or facility over
600 square feet in size and connected to utilities, without securing a permit
in advance from the Village Administrator’s Office.
   (B)   A demolition permit shall be issued only to a demolition contractor
duly registered with the state of Ohio accompanied by a notarized statement of
the owner of the subject property that said registered demolition contractor is
the agent for such demolition.
   (C)   A demolition permit application shall be completed. The Village
Administrator may revise the permit form from time to time as deemed necessary
or appropriate.
   (D)   The applicant shall pay the demolition permit fee established by
Village Council at the time the demolition permit application is submitted.
   (E)   At the time of application, the applicant shall specify when the
building will be demolished, where the materials will be hauled, and the
measures to be taken to secure the property during the demolition.
   (F)   Prior to starting demolition, the demolition contractor shall provide
proof of current, valid liability insurance coverage, written with an insurance
company registered to do business in the state of Ohio. The liability insurance
shall afford limits of liability no less than one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000) for damages to a single person, and three hundred thousand dollars
($300,000) for one (1) occurrence.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.433 DISCONNECTION OF UTILITIES.
   As a condition of receiving a demolition permit, the owner, agent or person
in control of the building or structure to be demolished shall notify, in
writing, the appropriate utilities or public authorities serving the building
or structure regarding the person’s intentions to demolish the building or
structure. Such notice shall include a request that the utilities be
disconnected. The owner, agent or person in control of the building or
structure to be demolished, or the utility company, shall provide evidence to
the village that the utilities have been discontinued. The permit will not be
issued until all proper verification has been received. Proof of verification
that services have been discontinued may be evidenced on the application for a
demolition permit.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.434 BOND OR OTHER SURETY REQUIRED.
   Prior to the issuance of a demolition permit, the owner, agent or person
with control of the property subject to demolition shall post with the village
a minimum of $5,000 performance bond, cash deposit, or other surety approved by
the Village Administrator to assure the village that the demolition work will
proceed as permitted.
   (A)   The terms of the surety shall provide that the village may retain or
claim the surety proceeds if the permit holder fails to perform the demolition
activities in accordance with the permit granted.
      (1)   In the event that the planned demolition is of such a size or scope
that the $5,000 bond, deposit or surety will be insufficient to assure
completion for the demolition and site restoration activity, the Village
Administrator may request a larger value performance bond, cash deposit, or
other surety to assure the village that the demolition work will proceed as
permitted, such larger value to be set on a case-by-case basis, upon majority
vote of Council.
      (2)   In any event, the value of the surety shall not exceed the cost
associated with the demolition and site restoration.
   (B)   Bonds must be approved as to form by the Village Solicitor,
indemnifying the Village for all liability arising by reason of the acts of the
demolition contractor or his employees while in the pursuit of his business
under a demolition permit issued by the Village.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.435 SITE CONDITIONS.
   (A)   During the course of the demolition activity, the owner, agent or
person in control of the property subject to the demolition shall take steps to
ensure the safety of the general public including dust and hazardous material,
as governed by Ohio Administrative Code. The proposed steps shall be in
compliance with generally accepted building industry safety practices as may be
reflected in building codes applicable in the village and State of Ohio.
   (B)   The demolition of any structure shall include the removal of all
elements of the building, to include structural and roof parts, various and
sundry debris generated by the demolition of the structure itself, any contents
of the structure that remain at the time of demolition, and the building
foundation.
      (1)   Removal of the foundation shall not be deemed complete unless and
until every element of the foundation has been broken up and removed from the
site, including all footers and material below grade.
      (2)   All surface irregularities, wells, septic tanks, basements,
cellars, sidewalks, vaults and coal chutes shall be completely removed.
      (3)   Once all the debris has been removed from the site, all holes shall
be filled with environmentally clean compactable materials approved by the
Village Administrator or designee.
   (C)   Following the completion of demolition work, the owner, agent or
person in control of the property or facility (industrial, commercial, public,
and institutional) subject to the demolition activity shall provide for the
restoration of the site so as to address safety and nuisance concerns. All such
sites shall be brought to a level or other grade determined to be appropriate
by the Village Administrator or designee.
   (D)   The demolition contractor shall provide for the disposal of the debris
associated with the demolition and/or rehabilitation work including dust
control during demolition in compliance with OEPA requirements. The debris
shall be placed in an appropriate container for removal by a private
contractor, or another approved arrangement shall be made for the disposal of
the debris on at least a weekly basis. No property owner or permit holder shall
permit the non-containerized accumulation of demolition debris on any property
in the village for a period in excess of seven calendar days. All debris and
material associated with the demolition work shall be removed from the
property.
   (E)   All sanitary sewer leads that served the subject demolished building
or structure shall be removed or grouted solid from structure to property line
and shall be capped at the property line, or as may be required by the Village
Administrator or designee. Applicants securing the demolition permit who choose
to permanently terminate the water and/or sanitary sewer service must follow
the guidelines of the Village Abandonment Procedures.
   (F)   As soon as weather permits, the site, and adjacent public property
that has been affected by the demolition activity, shall be restored (including
the application of topsoil if necessary to ensure growth). Sod, grass seed or
other ground cover material shall be installed to address soil erosion control.
The Village Administrator or designee may require that straw or mulch material
be placed on the site that is seeded to prevent erosion and enhance the
likelihood of successful growth.
   (G)   Any damage to public property such as but not limited to a public
sidewalk shall be properly repaired and restored to its original condition.
This work shall be accomplished within two weeks after the building has been
demolished.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.436 REGULATION OF DEMOLITION CONTRACTORS.
   In undertaking any demolition work as defined in this article, the
demolition contractor during his entire employment under a contract, whether
public or private, shall be responsible and liable for:
   (A)   Faithful compliance and adherence to all Federal, State and local laws
and regulations relating to safe demolition and construction processes and
procedures including equipment, apparel and individual protective device
regulations, and requirements for pedestrian protection, adjoining property
protection, vacant lot conditions, water accumulation, and utility
disconnections in accordance with the Ohio Building Code. The Ohio EPA Division
of Air Pollution shall be notified even if no asbestos or other hazardous
materials are present.
   (B)   Securing all necessary licenses, permits, easements and rights of way.
   (C)   Early and adequate notice to the Village and utility companies for
appropriate disconnections and the safeguarding thereof.
   (D)   Minimization of air pollution and contamination through wetting,
soaking and other dust and debris settling techniques, incompliance with all
OEPA requirements.
   (E)   Installation, erection and maintenance of barricades, warning lights
and signals, pedestrian cautions and walkways in accordance with safety codes,
regulations and ordinances. When necessary for the public protection, the
contractor shall employ guards and watchmen.
   (F)   Continuity of service to adjacent property by the replacement or
repair of overhangs, cornices, downspouts, etc., which overhang from adjacent
property and which have been removed or damaged by the contractor.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.437 PERMITTED HOURS OF DEMOLITION.
   Demolition activity shall be permitted between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 7:
30 p.m. Monday through Saturday only. Noise generating from demolition activity
shall be in compliance with the village Noise Ordinance.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.438 REQUIRED NOTIFICATION OF NEIGHBORING PROPERTIES.
   Applicants who receive a demolition permit shall provide two business days
advance written notification to all abutting property owners and occupants of
the abutting properties prior to commencement of demolition.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.439 TIME LIMIT FOR PERMIT.
   The party receiving the demolition permit shall complete the demolition
activity, including site restoration, within 30 calendar days from the receipt
of the permit. The time limit may be extended at the discretion of the Village
Administrator. The petitioner shall provide evidence to show that extenuating
circumstances prohibited the completion of the demolition work in the 30-day
time period.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.440 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this article is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100 for each offense. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
ARTICLE 150.61
ADMINISTRATIVE POWERS AND DUTIES
   
150.611   Intent.
   
150.612   Zoning Administrator.
   
150.613   Planning Commission.
   
150.614   Committee of Zoning Appeals.
   
150.615    Village Council.
§ 150.611 INTENT.
   This Article sets forth the powers and duties of the Zoning Administrator,
Planning Commission, Committee of Zoning Appeals, and the Village Council with
respect to the administration of the provisions of this Zoning Code.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.612 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   Establishment. The Zoning Administrator, and his or her designee,
shall act as the administrative officer for the purpose of effecting the proper
administration of the Zoning Code, and may promulgate the necessary forms for
carrying such duties.
   (B)   Powers and Duties. The Zoning Administrator shall have the following
powers and duties:
      (1)   To enforce the provisions of this Code, unless specifically stated
otherwise. The Zoning Administrator shall have all necessary authority on
behalf of the Village to administer and enforce the provisions of this Code.
The Administrator can appoint a qualified person to do inspections when
necessary;
      (2)   To determine the meaning and application of this Zoning Code and
its provisions;
      (3)   To accept, review for completeness, and respond to questions
regarding applications upon which the Zoning Administrator is authorized by the
provisions of this Zoning Code to review, including amendments to the Zoning
Code, development plan review, variances, conditional uses, plats, and appeals;
      (4)   To coordinate the Village’s administrative review of applications
required by this Zoning Code;
      (5)   To issue Zoning Permits and Certificates of Zoning Compliance as
provided by this Zoning Code and keep a record of the same with a notation of
any special conditions involved;
      (6)   To review and act on sign applications, as provided for in Article
35, Sign Regulations, according to the procedures, standards, and criteria
stated in this Zoning Code;
      (7)   To provide such technical and consultation assistance as may be
required by the Planning Commission, the Committee of Zoning Appeals, the
Village Council, and other boards and commissions, in the exercise of their
duties relating to this Code;
      (8)   To maintain any records required by this Zoning Code including, but
not limited to, inspection documents, records of all variances, amendments,
development plan applications, and similar use determinations;
      (9)   To make such records available for the use of Council, the Planning
Commission, the Committee of Zoning Appeals, and the public according to Ohio
Law;
      (10)   To conduct or cause the inspection of buildings and uses of land
to determine compliance with this Zoning Code;
      (11)   To determine the existence of any violations of this Zoning Code
and cause such notifications of violations or revocation notices, stop work
orders to be issued, or initiate such other administrative or legal action as
needed to address such violations;
      (12)   To maintain in current status the “Official Zoning Map” of the
Village of Swanton, as same may be amended; and
      (13)   To perform such other functions as are referred or delegated by
the Village Council or the Mayor.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.613 PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   Establishment. In accordance with R.C. § 713.01, there is established
a Village Planning Commission of five members consisting of the Mayor; one
member of the Village Council to be elected thereby for the remainder of his/
her term as such member of Village Council; and three electors of the
municipality who shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to the approval of a
majority of the members elected to Council. Each appointee shall serve for a
term of six years, except that the term of one of the members of the first
commission shall be for four years and one for two years, so that the terms of
the three appointed members are staggered.
   (B)   Officers and Rules. The Planning Commission shall elect a Chairperson
and Vice Chairperson from its members. The Zoning Administrator shall serve as
Secretary to the Commission. The Commission shall adopt rules or by-laws for
the holding of regular and special meetings, the transaction and disposition of
its business and the exercise of the powers of the Commission, such procedure
shall be followed.
   (C)   Quorum. All meetings of the Planning Commission shall be open to the
public. A majority of its members shall constitute a quorum at any meeting. No
action of the Commission shall be deemed taken unless concurred in by a
majority of its members.
   (D)   Employment of Consultants. The Planning Commission may control,
appoint or employ professional services, and may appoint clerks, craftsmen and
other subordinates as it finds necessary in connection with the performance of
its functions and duties. Expenditures for such service and employment shall be
within the amount appropriated for such purpose by the Council.
   (E)   Planning Commission Powers and Duties. The Planning Commission shall
have such powers as are conferred by the general laws of the state, by
ordinance of the Village Council as well as the following powers and duties:
      (1)   To review and act on all development plans as required by this
Zoning Code;
      (2)   To review and act on Conditional Use Permits according to the
procedures, standards and criteria stated in this Zoning Code;
      (3)   To make a determination that a proposed use not listed or provided
for in this Zoning Code is substantially similar to a principal use that is
listed and provided for in this Zoning Code and refer such determination to the
Village Council for confirmation;
      (4)   To review and act on proposed subdivision plats according to the
procedures, standards and criteria stated in
Articles 151.30 and
151.40 of the Subdivision Regulations;
      (5)   To hear and decide appeals from the refusal by the zoning
administrator to issue a zoning permit or certificate of zoning compliance;
      (6)   To authorize in specific cases exceptions to and variations from
the terms of this Zoning Code as will not be contrary to the public interest,
according to the review criteria set forth in this Zoning Code;
      (7)   To review all proposed amendments to this Zoning Code and make
recommendations to the Village Council as provided in this Zoning Code;
      (8)   To investigate and propose on its own initiative such amendments to
the Zoning Code, as it may deem consistent with the purposes of this Zoning
Code and which further the public health, safety, and general welfare of the
Village of Swanton;
      (9)   To resolve any disputes with respect to the precise location of a
zoning district boundary, using, where applicable, the standards and criteria
of §
150.155, District Boundary Lines;
      (10)   To review nonconforming uses, structures, buildings, site
conditions in accordance with the provisions of this Zoning Code; and
      (11)   To perform such other functions as are referred or delegated to it
by the Village Council or the Mayor.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.614 COMMITTEE OF ZONING APPEALS.
   (A)   Establishment. In accordance with R.C. § 713.11, there is hereby
established a Council Committee of Zoning Appeals consisting of the four
Village Council members who do not serve on the Planning Commission.
   (B)   Powers and Duties. The Committee of Zoning Appeals shall have the
following powers and duties:
      (1)   To hear appeals and decide any issue involving the application of
impartial considerations and judgments in regard to decisions made by the
Planning Commission on matters relating to this Zoning Code, for relief from
any order, requirement, decision or determination, including the refusal,
granting or revocation of permits; and
      (2)   To hear and decide all matters specifically referred to it for
decisions in other sections of this Zoning Code.
      (3)   This does not include zoning text or map amendments.
   (C)   Officers. Committee membership shall not include the Mayor or the
Council member serving as a member of the Village Planning Commission. The
Committee shall elect a Chairperson and Secretary from among its members.
   (D)   Meetings.
      (1)   All hearings conducted by the Committee shall be open to the
public.
      (2)   Any person may appear and testify at a hearing either in person or
by duly authorized agent or attorney.
      (3)   The Committee shall have the power to subpoena and require the
attendance of witnesses, to administer oaths, to compel testimony, to produce
reports, findings and other evidence pertinent to any issue referred to it for
decision.
      (4)   The concurring vote of three members of the Committee shall be
necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of any
duly authorized administrative officer.
      (5)   A member of the Committee shall not be qualified to vote, if he or
she has a direct or indirect interest in the issue appealed.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.615 VILLAGE COUNCIL.
   For the purposes of this Zoning Code, the Village Council shall have the
following powers and duties:
   (A)   To investigate and propose on its own initiative such amendments to
the Zoning Code as it may deem consistent with the purposes of this Zoning Code
and which further the public, health, safety, and general welfare of the
Village of Swanton;
   (B)   To hold public hearings and vote upon proposed amendments to this
Zoning Code Zoning Map;
   (C)   To approve the dedication of any public land, streets, or easements,
and the vacation of dedicated street right-of-ways; and
   (D)   To hear and decide all other matters upon which it is required to pass
by this Zoning Code.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
ARTICLE 150.63
ZONING PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES
   
150.631   Intent.
   
150.632   General Provisions for Application Filing.
   
150.633   Zoning Permit Required.
   
150.634   Certificate of Zoning Compliance Required.
   
150.635    Determination of Similar Uses.
§ 150.631 INTENT.
   In order to accomplish the purposes for which this Zoning Code is adopted,
it is essential that its regulations be soundly and consistently applied, and
that this Code be vigorously enforced. This article stipulates the general
procedures to be followed in obtaining zoning approval.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.632 GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR APPLICATION FILING.
   The requirements of this section shall apply to all applications and review
procedures set forth in this Zoning Code, unless otherwise stated.
   (A)   Applicant. A person having legal authority to take action in
accordance with the approval sought shall file an application for review in
accordance with this Zoning Code. Persons having such legal authority include
the legal owner of the premises and the legal owner’s representative who has
express written authority to act on behalf of the owner. Consent shall be
required from the legal owner of the premises.
   (B)   Zoning Application Required. Prior to Filing Application for a
Building Permit. All applicants for commercial and industrial construction
shall submit an application for zoning permit review and approval prior to
submitting for state building plan approval.
   (C)   Application Filing Requirements. Applications required under this
Zoning Code shall be submitted in a form and in such numbers as established by
the Zoning Administrator and shall be accompanied by:
      (1)   An application form provided by the Village, completed and signed
by the applicant.
      (2)   The appropriate information, plans, studies and other documents
that are required by this Zoning Code based on the type of application
submitted. Such list of filing submission requirements shall be made readily
available to the public.
      (3)   Payment of fee(s). Applications shall be accompanied by the fee
required in the Official Village of Swanton Zoning Code Fee Schedule as
established by the Swanton Village Council. The schedule of fees shall be
available at Village Hall, and may be altered or amended only by Council. Until
all such appropriate fees, charges, and expenses have been paid in full, no
action shall be taken on any application, appeal, or administrative procedure
that is referred to the Planning Commission for review. For all other
applications, the zoning permit or certificate of zoning compliance shall not
be issued until all fees have been paid in full.
   (D)   Application Filing Deadline. For applications requiring review by the
Planning Commission, the applicant shall file an application with the Zoning
Administrator at least 15 business days before the date of the Planning
Commission’s regularly scheduled meeting at which such application is to be
considered.
   (E)   Complete Application Determination. The Zoning Administrator shall
initiate the review and processing of a submitted application only after such
application is determined to be complete.
      (1)   The Zoning Administrator shall make a determination of application
completeness within five (5) business days of the application filing.
      (2)   If the application is determined to be incomplete, the Zoning
Administrator shall notify the applicant of necessary changes or additional
information needed. No further processing of an incomplete application shall
occur until the deficiencies are corrected.
      (3)   Once an application is determined to be complete, the Zoning
Administrator shall process the application according to the procedures set
forth in this Zoning Code.
      (4)   If any false or misleading information is submitted or supplied by
an applicant on an application, that application shall be deemed incomplete.
   (F)   Review Meeting Date. For applications requiring review by the Planning
Commission, a complete application shall be placed on the Commission’s agenda
for the next regularly scheduled meeting occurring not less than five (5) days
from the date the application is determined complete.
   (G)   Refund of Fees. Application or review fees are not refundable except
where the Zoning Administrator determines that an application was accepted in
error, or the fee paid exceeds the amount due; in which case the amount of the
overpayment will be refunded to the applicant.
   (H)   Submission Schedule. The Zoning Administrator is authorized to and
shall establish the submission and review schedule for applications. The Zoning
Administrator may amend and update these requirements as determined necessary.
   (I)   Required Times for Action and Inaction. Whenever the provisions of
this Zoning Code require that reviewers or decision-makers take action on an
application within a specified period and such action is not taken within that
time-frame, such inaction shall be deemed a denial of the application unless
the applicant agrees to an extension of the review period.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.633 ZONING PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No excavation, grading, or improvement shall be commenced, and no
building or structure shall be erected, constructed, enlarged, structurally or
otherwise materially altered, or moved in whole or in part, no use of buildings
or land shall be established or changed, and no building demolished in the
Village of Swanton prior to the issuance of a Zoning Permit. The Zoning
Administrator shall issue a Zoning Permit only when the plans for the proposed
use, building, or structure fully comply with the regulations set forth in this
Zoning Code and other codes of the Village.
   (B)   Approval Required. A Zoning Permit and related approvals shall be
required for the following circumstances, unless specifically exempted in this
Zoning Code:
      (1)   One-Family Detached and Uses Accessory Thereto. An application for
a zoning permit for a one-family detached dwelling, including any accessory
structure, accessory use or any other activity related to such dwelling, shall
be reviewed according to the procedures in this Article.
      (2)   All Other Permitted Uses. An application for any other permitted
use not described in subsection (A)(1) shall be reviewed according to the
development plan review procedures set forth in
Article 150.65, Development Plan Review Procedures or reviewed and approved
pursuant to any other applicable procedures set forth in this Zoning Code.
      (3)   Variance Requests. A Zoning Permit for a building or use requiring
a variance from a requirement of this Zoning Code shall not be issued until
such variance has been applied for and approved according to the procedures set
forth in
Article 150.69, Appeals and Variances.
      (4)   Conditional Use Permit. A Zoning Permit for a building or use
requiring a Conditional Use Permit shall not be issued until such Conditional
Use Permit has been applied for and approved by the Planning Commission.
      (5)   Similar Uses. An application for any use not specifically listed in
this Zoning Code as a permitted use has been reviewed and approved by the
Planning Commission according to the procedures set forth in this Article.
   (C)   Approval of Zoning Permit.
      (1)   For applications not requiring review by the Planning Commission:
         (a)   The Zoning Administrator shall either approve or disapprove the
application in conformance with the provisions of this Section within 15
business days after a complete application is accepted.
         (b)   In conducting the review of the application, the Zoning
Administrator may consult with any department, agency, public body, official,
company, or individual necessary to determine whether the application complies
with the regulations of this resolution. Any costs of review shall be borne by
the applicant, as stated in the Village of Swanton fee schedule.
      (2)   For applications requiring review by the Planning Commission, upon
receiving a report of approval from the Planning Commission, the Zoning
Administrator shall issue the zoning permit.
      (3)   In the event an application is disapproved, the Zoning
Administrator shall state in writing the reasons for the action taken. Such
statement of disapproval shall include, but not be limited to, a list of
regulations that would be violated by the proposed use and shall be transmitted
to the applicant. The applicant may submit a revised application for review in
accordance with this Article, or the applicant may appeal the decision to the
Planning Commission in accordance with Article 150.69.
   (D)   Expiration of Zoning Permit. All zoning permits shall expire if work
there under does not progress as follows, unless the Planning Commission finds
due cause to extend such deadlines:
      (1)   Within six (6) months from issuance, work shall have begun (e.g.,
ground shall have been broken).
      (2)   Within two (2) years from issuance, work shall be complete as shown
on the approved development plan.
      (3)   An applicant with an approved Zoning Permit may, prior to the
expiration of said permit, apply for approval in writing of one six-month
extension to commence the work described in the original Zoning Permit without
the payment of additional zoning fees.
      (4)   Any zoning permit that has expired shall require a new application,
and the applicant shall comply with all provisions of this Code in effect on
the date of the new application.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.634 OF ZONING COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   No land, new building, or structure shall be occupied or used, in whole or
in part, and no change in the use of an existing building or structure, or any
part thereof, shall be permitted, until a Certificate of Zoning Compliance has
been applied for and issued by the Zoning Administrator. A Certificate of
Zoning Compliance shall also be required prior to the use or occupancy of any
building or land, if §
150.633, Zoning Permit Required, requires said land or building to receive a
Zoning Permit.
   (A)   Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall be applied for and issued as
follows:
      (1)   Occupancy of a Building. A Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall
be required before a building that has been constructed, or an existing
building that has been altered, moved, changed in use, changed in tenancy, or
changed as to off-street parking or loading requirements may be occupied. A
Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall only be issued after the completion of
the erection or alteration, or change in use of the building and the building
is found, upon inspection, to conform to the provisions of this Zoning Code and
any other applicable Village regulations, policies, and specifications.
      (2)   Occupancy of Land. A Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall be
required before occupancy of the land or where use of the land has been changed
to a use different from the prior use. A Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall
be issued when it is determined upon inspection that the use conforms to the
provisions of this Zoning Code.
      (3)   Change in Use of Nonconforming Building or Use. A Certificate of
Zoning Compliance shall be required whenever a nonconforming building,
structure, or land is changed to another nonconforming use, and shall not be
issued until the Planning Commission has approved the change in accordance with
the provisions of
Article 150.41 Nonconforming Uses, Lots, Building, and Sites.
   (B)   An application for Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall include, in
addition to the plans required for the Zoning Permit, accurate information as
to the size, location, drawings and description of the lot, the dimensions of
yards and setbacks, the use of land, and the application fee.
   (C)   After receiving an application for a Certificate of Zoning Compliance,
the Zoning Administrator shall inspect the premises to determine whether such
use/construction conforms to all provisions of this Zoning Code and the
approved final development plan as applicable, or if it is a lawfully existing
nonconforming use.
   (D)   Action by Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator review the
application. In evaluating the application, the Zoning Administrator may
consult with any department, agency, public body, official, company, or
individual necessary to determine whether the application complies with the
regulations of this Zoning Code. Following the Zoning Administrator’s review,
the Zoning Administrator shall:
      (1)   Approve. The Zoning Administrator shall issue a Certificate Zoning
of Compliance upon finding that the building, structure or use, as proposed,
complies with the provisions of this Zoning Code, if the maintenance and
performance guarantees have been provided, as applicable.
      (2)   Denial. If it is determined by the Zoning Administrator that the
proposed building, structure or use would violate one or more provisions of
this Zoning Code, then the Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall not be
issued. Upon disapproval of any application, the Zoning Administrator shall
notify the applicant in writing of the reasons for disapproval.
      (3)   Temporary Certificate of Zoning Compliance. Pending the issuance of
a permanent Certificate of Zoning Compliance, a temporary certificate may be
issued, to be valid for a period not to exceed (6) six months from its date,
pending the completion of any required improvements, provided a performance
guarantee has been provided to the Village from a banking institution of
sufficient amount to cover the estimated cost of materials and labor and in a
form acceptable to the Village Solicitor.
   (E)   Construction Staking Field Verification and Certification.
      (1)   For all construction requiring a zoning permit, prior to the start
of any construction activity, the contractor installed construction staking
indicating the perimeter of the structure must be physically verified that it
is in compliance with any and all setback requirements expressed in this code.
      (2)   This field inspection shall be performed by a surveyor/civil
engineer currently registered in the State of Ohio.
      (3)   Construction shall not commence until the field inspection is
performed and a copy of the site plan bearing the signature, stamp/seal of the
surveyor/civil engineer doing the field verification is received by the Zoning
Inspector and a permit issued.
      (4)   All costs associated with such inspection/certification shall be
borne and paid for by the property holder or his agent along with any fees for
the zoning permit. Proof of payment shall be presented to the Zoning Inspector
along with the permit application.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023; Ord. 2023-19, passed 11-13-2023)
§ 150.635 DETERMINATION OF SIMILAR USES.
   Each zoning district established by this Zoning Code, and amendments
thereto, includes a list of uses of land or structures that are permitted in
the district because they are considered compatible with one another. To the
extent that new types of uses are created which have not been addressed by this
Zoning Code, this Section provides the procedure by which the Planning
Commission may make a determination that a new use is similar to a use
permitted in a district.
   (A)   Determination. A proposed use may be permitted as a similar use when
the Planning Commission determines that such proposed use is in compliance with
the following provisions:
      (1)   The proposed use is not listed as a permitted use in any district
within the Village;
      (2)   The proposed use is not explicitly prohibited in any district or
the Zoning Code;
      (3)   The proposed use conforms to and is consistent with the purpose
statement of the district in which it is proposed;
      (4)   The proposed use is of the same general character as the permitted
uses in the district to which it is proposed or is similar to a specific use
permitted in that district;
      (5)   Such proposed use does not create dangers to health and safety, and
does not create offensive noise, vibration, dust, heat, smoke, odor, glare or
other objectionable influences to an extent greater than normally resulting
from other uses listed in the district to which it is proposed; and
      (6)   Such proposed use does not create traffic to a greater extent than
the other uses listed in the district to which it is proposed.
   (B)   Assignment to Districts. If the Planning Commission approves the
proposed similar use, then the similar use shall be added to the appropriate
districts, as identified in the Planning Commission’s determination.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
ARTICLE 150.65
DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW PROCEDURES
   
150.651   Intent.
   
150.652   Development Plan Review Required.
   
150.653   Minor Alternations Approved by Zoning Administrator.
   
150.654   Development Plan Process.
   
150.655   Pre-Application Meeting Encouraged.
   
150.656   Plan Submission Requirements.
   
150.657   Criteria for Reviewing Preliminary Development Plans.
   
150.658   Criteria for Reviewing Final Development Plans.
   
150.659   Request for Additional Information.
   
150.660   Development Plan Review Procedures.
   
150.661   Significance of an Approved Plan; Plan Revisions.
   
150.662   Expiration of Development Plan Approval.
   
150.663    Equivalency Provision.
§ 150.651 INTENT.
   (A)   The purpose of this Article is to provide adequate review by the
Planning Commission of proposed developments in those zoning districts where
the uses permitted are of such a nature, because of their size, scale or effect
on surrounding property, that review of specific plans is deemed necessary to
protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the community.
   (B)   Development plan review provides a procedure with specific standards
for development proposals. Items to be considered include, but are not limited
to, safe and efficient access for pedestrians and vehicles, storm water
management, preservation of existing natural features, adjacent land uses and
general welfare and safety.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.652 DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW REQUIRED.
   Review of a preliminary development plan and a final development plan shall
be conducted in compliance with the following:
   (A)   Development Plan Review Required. A development plan that indicates,
among other things, the exact location of buildings, landscaping, parking
areas, access drives, signs, and outdoor storage areas shall be required for
the following:
      (1)   New construction of all permitted uses in the Business/Industrial,
and Public/Open Space Districts;
      (2)   New Construction in the Planned Residential Development and Airport
Highway Corridor Overlay Districts;
      (3)   New construction of all conditional uses; and
      (4)   Any existing or previously approved development meeting the
criteria of subsections (1) through (3) above that proposes to alter,
reconstruct, or otherwise modify a use or site including expanding the floor
area of the permitted use in excess of 5,000 square feet or 25% of the existing
gross floor area, whichever is greater; increasing the number of dwelling units
in a multi-family development; changing the use which requires an increase in
the amount of parking or a change in the site’s circulation; or when the
parking surface changes from a pervious to an impervious surface.
   (B)   Exceptions:
      (1)   A change of occupancy in an existing structure, or in a previously
approved final development plan, when there is no change in the bulk of the
structure, and no change in the parking required and no change in use, shall be
exempt from the development plan review procedures.
      (2)   One-family detached dwelling and related structures and buildings
are exempt from the development plan review procedure, except when the
application requires a conditional use permit.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.653 MINOR ALTERATIONS APPROVED BY ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   When a minor alteration is proposed to an existing building, structure or
site arrangement on a lot otherwise subject to development plan review pursuant
to §
150.652, the Zoning Administrator may approve the development plan application
as specified in this Section:
   (A)   For the purposes of this Section, a minor alteration shall include:
      (1)   Small, incidental alterations of existing off-street surface
parking lots;
      (2)   Small, incidental construction of accessory structures;
      (3)   Incidental alterations to principal buildings on large zoning lots;
and
      (4)   Minor design modifications that will have no discernible impact on
neighboring properties, the public, or those intended to occupy or use the
proposed development.
   (B)   The Zoning Administrator shall review the application to determine
that the proposal is not contrary to and complies with all applicable
regulations in this Zoning Code and will not result in any material adverse
impact to the site or surrounding areas.
   (C)   After reviewing the application, the Zoning Administrator shall:
      (1)   Approve the development plan as submitted; or
      (2)   Deny the development plan when the application does not demonstrate
that the required standards have been met.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.654 DEVELOPMENT PLAN PROCESS.
   Development plan reviews should proceed and generally move in phases to
include:
   (A)   Pre-application meeting with the Zoning Administrator;
   (B)   Preliminary development plan review by the Planning Commission. The
preliminary development plan phase may be omitted when, in the opinion of the
Zoning Administrator, the project is too minor to warrant preliminary
development plan review;
   (C)   Final development plan review by the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.655 PRE-APPLICATION MEETING ENCOURAGED.
   The applicant is encouraged to meet with the Zoning Administrator prior to
submitting an application for development plan review. The purpose of this
meeting is to discuss early and informally with the applicant the purpose and
effect of this Zoning Code and the criteria and standards contained within.
However, no action shall be taken at such a meeting and no opinions,
suggestions, or recommendations discussed shall be relied on by the applicant
to indicate subsequent approval or disapproval of the development plan.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.656 PLAN SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   General Requirements. An applicant for development plan review, both
preliminary and final shall file with the Zoning Administrator the following
along with the application fee.
      (1)   A letter of submittal from the property owner or an agent
authorized in writing by the property owner shall accompany the development
plan which contains the applicant’s phone number and mailing address;
      (2)   The development plan documents shall include a complete legal
description of the property and a general location sketch showing nearby
section lines and/or residential and major roadways;
      (3)   All development plans shall have the title “Development Plan
Review” and include the site address; date of submittal and the submitter’s
name and address, and shall bear the seal and signature of a professional civil
engineer/surveyor registered to practice in the state of Ohio. The site plan
shall indicate the scale of the drawing and shall use an engineer’s scale. The
scale of the site shall not exceed one inch to 40 feet. The site plan shall
have the north arrow pointing toward the top of the drawing. The location map
and site plan orientation shall be the same;
      (4)   The documents shall be ten blue-line or black-line prints of the
site plan on paper no smaller than 24 inches by 36 inches; and
      (5)   The development plan documents shall include a color aerial
photograph of the site to be developed from a publicly obtainable source such
as Google maps, Google earth, map.live.com and the like of sufficient size and
resolution to clearly illustrate property details, attributes and all abutting
streets and roadways.
   (B)   Requirements for Preliminary Development Plan. An application for
preliminary development plan review shall include a plan for the entire area of
the proposed project and shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator. The
preliminary development plan shall include:
      (1)   The location of all existing structures and access points;
      (2)   The general location of existing buildings, parking areas and
access drives on parcels within 200 feet of the site;
      (3)   The general location of all proposed construction including
buildings, structures, accessory buildings and structures, parking areas, and
access points;
      (4)   The location of existing and proposed topography, major vegetation
features, and wooded areas;
      (5)   The general layout of the proposed internal road system, indicating
the proposed vehicular right-of-way of all proposed public streets and
pedestrian circulation;
      (6)   The general location of common open space; and
      (7)   A summary table showing total acres of the proposed development,
the number of acres devoted to each type of land use including streets and open
space, and the number of proposed dwelling units by type.
   (C)   Requirements for Final Development Plan Review. A final development
plan shall indicate, among other things, the exact location of buildings,
landscaping, parking areas, access drives, signs, and outdoor storage areas as
well as the following:
      (1)   The zoning classification(s) and existing uses of the property and
all abutting property, the approximate location of buildings and driveway
locations, opposite to and adjacent to the property;
      (2)   The dimensions indicating the area of the property, the dimensions
of the existing and planned buildings to be constructed and any buildings to be
removed or other alterations to occur to the property;
      (3)   The distance of existing and proposed structure(s) to all right-of-
way lines and distances of the structure(s) to the front, side and rear
property lines;
      (4)   The name for all adjacent roadways and rights-of-way and pavement
widths measured from the centerline of the roadway;
      (5)   The locations, height and material of all existing and proposed
fencing and/or walls on the property;
      (6)   The location, height, lighting, type and dimensions of existing or
proposed signs on the property;
      (7)   The width(s) and location(s) of existing or proposed sidewalks, if
any, and drive approach aprons. The drive approach width(s) shall be indicated
where the apron meets the roadway pavement and shall be dimensioned at the
throat;
      (8)   All ditches, creeks and other natural features that may affect the
development of the property. When appropriate, two-foot contours and the 100-
year high water elevation shall be shown on the site plan. Information on this
requirement may be obtained from the Fulton County or Lucas County Engineer’s
office;
      (9)   The existing and proposed method of storm water drainage and/or
areas to be used for storm water detention;
      (10)   Existing and proposed sanitary and storm sewers, water mains and
the location(s) of fire hydrants if present. In the event these improvements
are not proposed, the development plan shall indicate the location of proposed
or existing wells and sewage systems both on-site and on abutting parcels;
      (11)   The location of existing or proposed off-street parking spaces and
drive aisles with complete dimensions, the number and size of the proposed
parking stalls including handicap spaces and the type of pavement composition
of the parking area (asphalt or concrete) and if the off-street parking area is
located next to an existing parking area or on another parcel, the method of
circulation, if any, between the two areas;
      (12)   The location of proposed plant material, mulch beds and other
landscape improvements such as, but not limited to, berms, fences and the like,
plant schedules with botanical and common plant names, quantity of plants to be
installed, plant size at installation and on-center planting dimensions where
applicable, and all existing plant material to be removed or retained and all
new landscaping materials to be installed;
      (13)   A development plan with a proposed drive-through window operation
shall indicate where the vehicles will be lined up and how many vehicles can be
stored at one time while waiting to use the order board and drive-through
window, as required in §
150.335(E);
      (14)   Exterior building elevation(s) for all building walls visible from
all abutting streets and highways;
      (15)   The submittal of a traffic impact study and or access management
plan, if required, pursuant to §
150.297, Access to Individual Parcels;
      (16)   Architectural Drawings. For buildings in the Business and
Industrial Districts and the Airport Highway Corridor Overlay District,
detailed architectural drawings for all proposed principal and accessory
buildings including floor plans and elevations of the front, rear and two (2)
sides of the building, together with additional views or cross sections, as
necessary, to completely depict the exterior appearance of the structure.
         (a)   All elevations shall be drawn to the same scale, and be drawn at
a reasonable scale to enable the Planning Commission to adequately review the
information submitted.
         (b)   Each elevation shall show the accurate location of windows,
doors, portals and other architectural features and all materials and finishes.
         (c)   Samples of colors and building materials, colored renderings,
and photographs of the site shall accompany the elevations as necessary to
convey the appearance of the structure.
      (17)   The plans and drawings shall be created by and bear the seal and
signature of a professional architect and/or a professional engineer registered
to practice in the state of Ohio.
   (D)   Waiver of Submittal Requirements. The Zoning Administrator may waive
any of the submittal requirements in this Section if, in his or her opinion,
and based on recognized planning or engineering principles, they are
unnecessary to determine compliance with appropriate Code provisions. Such
waiver shall not be construed to authorize the reduction or waiver of any of
the zoning standards, regulations, or other requirements of the Zoning Code.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.657 CRITERIA FOR REVIEWING PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT PLANS.
   The Planning Commission shall review a preliminary development plan to
determine if such application complies with the review criteria set forth
below. The Planning Commission shall take into consideration the comments and
recommendation of staff and consultants. In order to approve a preliminary
development plan, the Planning Commission shall determine that:
   (A)   The preliminary plan is consistent with this Zoning Code and the
Zoning Map of the Village;
   (B)   The development will result in a harmonious grouping of buildings
within the proposed development and in relationship to existing and proposed
uses on adjacent property; and
   (C)   The development will preserve and be sensitive to the natural
characteristics of the site in a manner that complies with the applicable
regulations set forth in this Zoning Code.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.658 CRITERIA FOR REVIEWING FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLANS.
   In reviewing final development plans, the Planning Commission shall review
the development plan to determine if such application complies with the review
criteria set forth below. The Planning Commission shall take into consideration
the comments and recommendation of staff and consultants when reviewing the
application. In order to approve a final development plan, the Planning
Commission shall determine that:
   (A)   The plan is consistent with any plan for the orderly development of
the Village and, when applicable, conforms in all respects to the approved or
provisionally approved preliminary development plan and the regulations of this
Zoning Code;
   (B)   The appropriate use and value of property within and adjacent to the
area will be safeguarded;
   (C)   The development will result in a harmonious grouping of buildings
within the proposed development and in relationship to existing and proposed
uses on adjacent property;
   (D)   Adequate provision is made for safe and efficient pedestrian and
vehicular circulation within the site and to adjacent property;
   (E)   The development will have adequate public service, parking; and open
spaces, when applicable;
   (F)   The development will preserve and be sensitive to the natural
characteristics of the site in a manner that complies with the applicable
regulations set forth in this Zoning Code, if applicable;
   (G)   The development will provide adequate lighting for safe and convenient
use of the streets, walkways, driveways, and parking areas that is designed to
minimize direct light, glare, and excessive glow, which unreasonably interferes
with the use and enjoyment of adjacent property;
   (H)   Points of ingress/egress to the development shall be controlled and
designed in such manner as to minimize conflicts with adjacent properties and
developments;
   (I)   Adequate provision is made for emergency vehicle access and
circulation. Adequate provision is made for fire hydrants and firefighting
water supply;
   (J)   Site lighting is designed to minimize direct light, glare, and
excessive glow, which unreasonably interferes with the use and enjoyment of
adjacent property;
   (K)   The proposed signs, if applicable, comply with
Article 150.35, Sign Regulations, and:
      (1)   Are of an appropriate size, scale, and design in relationship with
the principal building, site, and surroundings;
      (2)   Adequately identify the use; and
      (3)   Are located to maintain safe and orderly pedestrian and vehicular
circulation.
   (L)   The landscape plan comply with the requirements of
Article 150.39, Landscaping, Buffering, Fences & Lighting, and will adequately:
      (1)   Enhance the principal building and site;
      (2)   Maintain existing trees to the extent possible;
      (3)   Buffer adjacent incompatible uses;
      (4)   Break up large expanses of pavement with natural material; and
      (5)   Provide appropriate plant materials considering the ultimate mature
size and shape of plants relative to the buildings and site, and the climate of
the area, including typical weather conditions.
   (M)   Adequate provision is made for storm drainage within and through the
site so as to maintain, as far as practicable, usual and normal swales, water
courses and drainage areas, and shall comply with the applicable regulations in
this Zoning Code, and any other design criteria established by the Village or
any other governmental entity which may have jurisdiction over such matters;
and
    (N)   If the project is to be carried out in progressive stages, each phase
shall be so planned that the foregoing criteria are complied with at the
completion of each phase.
   (O)   All utilities shall be extended to the perimeter of the development.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.659 REQUEST FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION.
   In their review of an application, the Planning Commission may request that
the applicant supply additional information that the Commission deems necessary
to adequately review and evaluate the proposed development.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.660 DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW PROCEDURES.
   Preliminary and Final Development Plans shall be reviewed and distributed
according to the following procedures:
   (A)   Review for Completeness. The Zoning Administrator shall review the
submitted application for completeness according to §
150.632. When the application is deemed complete and the application fee paid,
the Zoning Administrator shall officially accept the application for
consideration of the action(s) requested on the date such determination is made
and place it on the Planning Commission’s agenda.
   (B)   Distribution of Plans. When the Zoning Administrator determines that
the application for preliminary or final development plans is complete, the
Zoning Administrator shall forward the application to the appropriate Village
departments, the Village Engineer, appropriate government agencies, and
professional consultants for review, report and recommendation. Any reports,
comments, or expert opinions shall be returned to the Zoning Administrator.
   (C)   Transmission to the Planning Commission. For Preliminary and Final
Development Plan Reviews, the Zoning Administrator shall distribute the
application for development plan review, along with all applicable plans/data
and any reports prepared by the individuals and agencies in subsection (B)
above to the Planning Commission for the Commission’s review at their next
regularly scheduled meeting.
   (D)   Action by the Planning Commission.
      (1)   The Planning Commission shall review the site plan according to the
applicable criteria in §
150.657 and §
150.658.
      (2)   Following its review, for a preliminary or final development plan,
the Planning Commission shall:
         (a)   Approve the development plan as submitted; or
         (b)   Approve the plan subject to specific conditions not included in
the plan as submitted, such as, but not limited to, improvements in the setback
layout, open space arrangement, on-site control of access to streets, or such
features as fences, walls and plantings to further protect and improve the
proposed and surrounding developments; or
         (c)   Deny the development plan when the application does not
demonstrate that the required standards have been met.
   (E)   As part of the development plan review, a suitable performance
guarantee to ensure the implementation of site improvements may be required.
   (F)   For a preliminary or final development plan, the Planning Commission
may also postpone action on the development plan, providing guidance to the
applicant regarding alterations to the proposed development plan that may
address the concerns expressed by the Planning Commission.
   (G)   The Village shall promptly furnish the applicant with its written
report on the preliminary development plan or its decision on the final
development plan.
   (H)   Failure of the Planning Commission to Act. Failure of the Planning
Commission to act within ninety (90) days from the date the application was
deemed complete, or an extended period as may be agreed upon, shall be deemed a
denial of the application.
   (I)   Re-application after Denial. The Zoning Administrator shall accept a
reapplication for the proposed development plan only when the reapplication
addresses the reasons for the denial of the initial application. The
reapplication shall comply with all the requirements of this Article, including
payment of the required fee. If an application is denied as a result of §
150.660(H), the Zoning Administrator shall accept a reapplication for
development plan review even if it has not been revised from the previous
submittal.
   (J)   Issuance of Zoning Permit. If the final site plan is approved or
approved with conditions, the Zoning Administrator shall issue a Zoning Permit
pursuant to
Article 150.63, Zoning Permit and Certificates of Zoning Compliance. However,
the Zoning Permit shall not be issued until:
      (1)   When required by the Planning Commission, there shall be executed
by the owner or applicant an agreement to construct required physical
improvements located within the public rights-of-way or easements or connected
to any public facility; and the applicant shall execute and deliver to the
Village a performance guarantee approved by the Village Engineer in the amount
of the estimated cost of the required physical improvements as determined by
the Village Engineer. The agreement and the performance guarantee shall provide
for completion of all work within a time specified by the Village Engineer or
before occupancy is allowed in any structure, whichever shall occur first.
      (2)   The approval of the final development plan or the installation of
improvements as required by this Zoning Code shall not obligate the Village to
accept improvements for maintenance, repair, or operation. Acceptance shall be
subject to local or state regulations where applicable, concerning the
acceptance of each type of improvement.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.661 SIGNIFICANCE OF AN APPROVED PLAN; PLAN REVISIONS.
   (A)   An approved Final Development Plan shall become for the proposed
development a binding commitment of the specific elements approved for
development. The approved Final Development Plan may be transferred to another
person, corporation, or group of individuals or corporations prior to the
issuance of a building permit. If an approved Final Development Plan is
transferred to another entity, the Zoning Administrative shall be noticed so
he/she can retain a copy of said transfer for the Village files. Any new entity
that obtains the approved final development plan by means of transfer assumes
all the administrative, financial, legal, and all other performance guarantees
approved with the original, final development plan.
   (B)   All construction and development under any zoning permit shall be in
accordance with the approved final development plan. Any departure from such
plan shall be cause for revocation of the zoning permit, and the property owner
or other responsible parties are subject to penalties as prescribed by this
Zoning Code.
   (C)   Modification after Approval. Changes to the approved development plan
shall require resubmittal for review pursuant to this section; provided,
however, that the Zoning Administrator may administratively approve minor
changes to the approved plan which do not:
      (1)   Result in an increase in the number of units.
      (2)   Encroach into the setback areas;
      (3)   Encroach into parking areas through an increase in its height,
length or width that would magnify its effect on an adjoining area;
      (4)   Create a larger building mass that would magnify its effect on the
adjoining area either through an increase in its height, length or width; and
      (5)   Alter specific conditions approved by the Village Planning
Commission.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.662 EXPIRATION OF DEVELOPMENT PLAN APPROVAL.
   (A)   Preliminary Development Plan. An approved preliminary development plan
shall remain valid for a period of twelve (12) months following the date of its
approval, unless the Planning Commission authorizes a longer period at the time
of approval or grants an extension to the above stated time frame for good
cause. If, at the end of that time, a final development plan has not been
submitted to the Zoning Administrator, then approval of the preliminary
development plan shall expire and shall be of no effect unless resubmitted and
re-approved in accordance with this Article.
   (B)   Final Development Plan.
      (1)   If construction of any phase of the approved development plan
begins within one year after approval is granted, the approval shall be valid
until the development is completed; provided, however, if the performance of
the development plan is not substantially completed after the second year, the
development plan is void.
      (2)   If no construction has begun within one year after the approval is
granted, the site plan’s approval shall be void. An extension of time may be
approved at the sole discretion of the Village Planning Commission.
      (3)   For this purposes of this Section, construction is deemed to have
begun when all necessary excavation and piers or footings of one or more
principal buildings included on the final development plan have been completed.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.663 EQUIVALENCY PROVISION.
   In reviewing the application, the Planning Commission may find that a final
development plan either adheres to or is equivalent to the requirements of this
Zoning Code.
   (A)   The Planning Commission may consider elements of a final development
plan to be equivalent to a requirement if:
      (1)   The proposed final development plan substantially complies with all
specific requirements and with the purposes, intent and basic objectives of the
zoning district;
      (2)   Through imaginative and skillful design in the arrangement of
buildings, open space, streets, access drives and other features, as disclosed
by the application, the proposal results in a development of equivalent or
higher quality than that which could be achieved through strict application of
such standards and requirements; and
      (3)   The development, as proposed, shall have no adverse impact upon the
surrounding properties or upon the health, safety or general welfare of the
community.
   (B)   It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to demonstrate to the
Planning Commission that the provisions of this Section have been satisfied.
When evaluating the application with respect to this Section, the Planning
Commission shall make any finding of equivalency in writing which explains how
and why the proposal has satisfied the above criteria. When making such a
finding, the Commission may approve the proposed application, including waivers
from the numerical standards herein, as if the application were in strict
compliance with the standards and requirements in this Zoning Code.
   (C)   Approval under this Section is not a variance. Instead, this Section
allows applicants to satisfy zoning requirements in ways not anticipated by the
Village.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
ARTICLE 150.67
CONDITIONAL USE REVIEW PROCEDURES
   
150.671   Conditional Use Permit Required.
   
150.672   Designation As A Conditional Use.
   
150.673   Conditional Use Permit Application.
   
150.674   Public Hearing And Review By Planning Commission.
   
150.675   Decision.
   
150.676   General Criteria For Conditional Uses.
   
150.677   Terms And Duration Of Approval.
   
150.678    Revocation Of Conditional Use Approval.
§ 150.671 CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT REQUIRED.
   When a proposed use is permitted in a zoning district as a conditional use
as set forth in the district regulations, a conditional use permit is required
and the application for such conditional use permit shall be submitted and
reviewed according to the following review procedures.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.672 DESIGNATION AS A CONDITIONAL USE.
   (A)   Certain types of uses are classified as conditional uses because of
their uncommon or unique characteristics, infrequency of occurrence, large area
requirements, or potential for significant impact on a particular district. The
village has determined that such use may be permitted and desirable in certain
districts but not without consideration in each case of the effect of the use
upon neighboring land and the public need for a particular use at the
particular location. The application of the planning standards for determining
the location and extent of such use is a planning function and not in the
nature of a variance or appeal. Consequently, the conditional use procedures
call for a more flexible and equitable procedure for properly accommodating
such activities in the community.
   (B)   The purpose of this Article is to provide controllable and reasonably
flexible requirements for certain kinds of uses that will allow practicable
latitude for the investor, but that will, at the same time, maintain adequate
provisions for the health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the
Village’s inhabitants.
   (C)   In order to accomplish such a dual objective, this chapter sets forth
a review procedure that enables a more detailed consideration of each
conditional use. The review considers the proposal in terms of existing zoning
and land use in the vicinity of the proposed use; the design, size, operation,
processes and equipment employed, and intensity of the proposed use; the
impacts of the proposed use at the proposed location on the public health,
safety, convenience, comfort, prosperity and general welfare, including traffic
generation and movement, the amount and kinds of public facilities and services
required; and whether and to what extent all appropriate feasible steps have
been taken by the permit applicant to minimize or mitigate any adverse impacts
of the proposed use.
   (D)   Review of this information by the Planning Commission is required to
ensure that each proposed conditional use is consistent with the intent and
objectives of the particular district in which it is to be located.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.673 CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT APPLICATION.
   An application for a conditional use permit shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator on a form prescribed by the village, accompanied by an
application fee as established by Village Council.
   (A)   The application for a conditional use permit shall include the
following items:
      (1)   A development plan and associated documentation as required in §
150.652.
      (2)   A description of all uses proposed for the development, the
location, extent and characteristics.
      (3)   A statement or diagram showing compliance with any use-specific
requirements specified in
Article 150.33.
      (4)   Any other material and/or information as may be required by the
Planning Commission to fulfill the purposes of this Article and to ensure that
the application is in compliance generally with the ordinances of Swanton.
   (B)   The Zoning Administrator may waive certain submittal requirements in
order to reduce the burden on the petitioner and to tailor the requirements to
the information necessary to review a particular petition. The Zoning
Administrator may waive such requirements upon finding that the project size,
complexity, anticipated impacts, or other factors associated with the proposed
development clearly, in his or her opinion, support such waiver. Any such
waivers shall be authorized in writing and retained in the project file.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.674 PUBLIC HEARING AND REVIEW BY PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   Application for such conditional use permits received from the
applicant shall be submitted by the Zoning Administrator to the Planning
Commission.
   (B)   The Planning Commission shall hold a hearing thereon, notice of which
shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation, or mailed to the
owners of property contiguous to and across the street from the parcel of which
a conditional use permit is requested at least 20 days before the hearing.
   (C)   The Planning Commission may require additional plans and documents
further clarifying the nature and extent of the use or any aspect of the
application.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.675 DECISION.
   (A)   The Planning Commission shall take action upon such application within
45 days after the date of receiving said application; failure to act within
such period shall be deemed approval, unless an extension of this time is
agreed to by the applicant.
      (1)   Approval. The Planning Commission may approve or approve with
conditions the application for a conditional use permit.
      (2)   Denial. The Planning Commission may deny the application for a
conditional use permit. If the Planning Commission denies the application, the
application process ends. Disapproval of the application for a conditional use
permit shall include a statement of the reasons for the denial.
      (3)   Failure of the Planning Commission to act within the time, or an
extended period as may be agreed upon, shall at the election of the applicant
be deemed a denial of the application.
   (B)   All conditions imposed upon any conditional use approval, with the
exception of conditions made applicable to such approval by the terms of this
Zoning Code, shall be set forth expressly in the resolution granting the
conditional use permit.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.676 GENERAL CRITERIA FOR CONDITIONAL USES.
   A conditional use, and uses accessory to such conditional use, shall be
permitted in a district only when specified as a conditional use in such
district, and only if such use conforms to the following criteria. Furthermore,
the Planning Commission shall review the particular facts and circumstances of
each proposed use shall not approve the permit unless the following conditions
and standards are complied with as set forth for the following districts.
   (A)   Residential Districts and the Public/Open Space District.
      (1)   The proposed use shall be properly located in relation to the
Comprehensive Plan or other adopted land use plans for the area, particularly
to the secondary and local streets and pedestrian circulation;
      (2)   When located on a local street the proposed use will generate the
least possible traffic through a residential neighborhood and shall contain
vehicular approaches to the property, so designed as not to create interference
with traffic on surrounding public thoroughfares;
      (3)   The proposed use is necessary to serve the surrounding residential
areas which cannot be served satisfactorily if the same use is located in a
nearby less restrictive district where it may be permitted by right;
      (4)   The location, design and operation of such use will not discourage
the appropriate development or impair the value of the surrounding residential
district;
      (5)   The proposed use will not create excessive additional requirements
at public cost for public facilities and services and will not be detrimental
to the economic welfare of the community;
      (6)   The proposed use will be designed, constructed, operated and
maintained so as to be harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the
existing or intended character of the general vicinity and that the use will
not change the essential character of the same area; and
      (7)   For temporary structures every conditional use permit shall be
reviewed every six months and may be renewed only while the construction
operations are pursued diligently.
   (B)   Business and Industrial Districts.
      (1)   The proposed use shall be necessary to serve the community needs
and existing similar facilities located in a less restrictive, or more remote
district in which the use may be permitted by right, are inadequate;
      (2)   The proposed use shall be no closer than appropriate in the
particular situation to schools, churches and other places of assembly;
      (3)   The location, extent and intensity of the proposed use shall be
such that its operation will not be objectionable to nearby dwellings by reason
of noise, smoke, dust, odors, fumes, vibrations or glare than is normal or is
permitted by the performance standards of the district;
      (4)   The proposed use may be permitted in a more restrictive district
than in which it is permitted by right only because of its limited extent,
modern equipment and processes;
      (5)   The hours of operation and concentration of vehicles in connection
with the proposed use will not be more hazardous or dangerous than the normal
traffic of the district;
      (6)   The proposed use will have vehicular approaches to the property
which shall be so designed as not to create an interference with traffic on
surrounding public thoroughfares;
      (7)   The proposed use will not be hazardous or disturbing to existing or
future neighboring uses; and
      (8)   The proposed use will not create excessive additional requirements
at public cost for public facilities and services and will not be detrimental
to the economic welfare of the community.
   (C)   Electronic Message Center Signs.
      (1)   The location, extent and intensity of the proposed sign shall be
such that its operation will not be objectionable to nearby residential
dwellings by reason of light, glare, intensity or brilliance than is normal for
the standards of the zoning district;
      (2)   The proposed use will not be hazardous or disturbing to existing
residential uses; impair the vision of the drivers of motor vehicles or
interfere with the effectiveness of an official traffic sign, device or signal;
      (3)   All signs must be equipped with a means to immediately turn off the
display or lighting if it malfunctions, and the sign owner or operator must
immediately turn off the sign when notified to do so by the village if a
malfunctioning sign does not turn off automatically;
      (4)   The Planning Commission may permit a larger pole or ground sign in
commercial zoning districts only, if the applicant agrees to consolidate
multiple or nonconforming signs into a single sign; but in no case can any sign
be greater than 150% of the size of a pole or ground sign permitted by right in
any commercial zoning district. The Planning Commission may also require
additional setbacks from rights-of-way, residential zoning districts or
property lines to accommodate larger signage.
   (D)   Safeguards and conditions. In addition to complying with the general
standards set forth in this section, conditions appropriate to each particular
application may also be set forth in the permit.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.677 TERMS AND DURATION OF APPROVAL.
   (A)   Conditional use approval shall authorize a particular conditional use
on the specific parcel for which it was approved. Approval of a conditional
use, pursuant to this Article, shall be valid only for the use and the
operation of such use as specified when granted by the Planning Commission. The
breach of any condition, safeguard, or requirement shall constitute a violation
of this Zoning Code.
   (B)   A conditional use permit issued pursuant to this Article shall be
valid only to the applicant to whom the permit is issued, unless the new owner
agrees to all conditions, safeguards and requirements in the conditional use
permit and a transfer of such permit is approved by the Zoning Administrator.
   (C)   The conditional use permit shall become null and void within a six-
month period after the date of approval, unless:
      (1)   In the case of new construction, work upon the structure shall have
begun above the foundation walls;
      (2)   In the case of occupancy of land, the use has commenced;
      (3)   As otherwise specifically approved by the Planning Commission at
the time the conditional use approval is granted; or
      (4)   The Zoning Administrator grants an extension for good cause shown,
upon the request of the applicant.
   (D)   A conditional use permit may be considered abandoned and void if, for
any reason, the conditional use is not conducted for more than six months.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.678 REVOCATION OF CONDITIONAL USE APPROVAL.
   A conditional use permit may be revoked if the established conditions for
approval are violated. The Zoning Administrator is responsible for advising the
Planning Commission of any violations.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
ARTICLE 150.69
APPEALS AND VARIANCES
   
150.691   Appeals To Planning Commission.
   
150.692   Initiation Of Appeal.
   
150.693   Planning Commission Hearing Of Appeal.
   
150.694   Stay Of Proceedings.
   
150.695   Decision of Planning Commission on Appeals.
   
150.696   Variances.
   
150.697   Variance Application Requirements.
   
150.698   Planning Commission Review Of Variance Request.
   
150.699   Decision on Variance Application.
   
150.700   Review Of Nonconforming Uses, Structures And Lots.
   
150.701   Appeal To Committee of Zoning Appeal.
   
150.702    Appeal To Court of Common Pleas.
§ 150.691 APPEALS TO THE PLANNING COMMISSION.
   Appeals may be made by any applicant aggrieved by a decision of the Zoning
Administrator to refuse to issue a zoning permit or certificate of zoning
compliance. Such appeal shall be made in writing to the Zoning Administrator
for referral to the Planning Commission, and shall be submitted in writing
within twenty (20) days after the decision.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.692 INITIATION OF APPEAL.
   (A)   Upon the filing of an appeal, the Zoning Administrator shall transmit
to the Planning Commission all the papers constituting the record upon which
the action appealed from was taken.
   (B)   All appeals shall be submitted with the required fees, as established
in the Village of Swanton fee schedule.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.693 PLANNING COMMISSION HEARING OF APPEAL.
   (A)   Upon the filing of appeal with the Planning Commission, the Planning
Commission shall fix a reasonable time for the public hearing of the appeal,
notice of which shall be mailed to the applicant and to the affected property
owners as they appear in the current records of the County Auditor or be
published for two successive weeks prior thereto, in a newspaper of general
circulation in the village.
   (B)   The Planning Commission may recess such hearings from time to time,
and, if the time and place of the continued hearing is publicly announced at
the time of the adjournment, no further notice shall be required.
   (C)   The appellant and the officer whose act or omission is the subject
matter of appeal shall have the right to appear in person and with legal
counsel as well as any person in interest may appear at the public hearing in
person or by attorney.
   (D)   The Planning Commission shall have the power to subpoena persons,
records and other pertinent data, on its own motion or at the request of the
appellant or the administrative officer.
   (E)   In considering the appeal, competent evidence may be presented
directly affecting the subject matter of appeal.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.694 STAY OF PROCEEDINGS.
   An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed
from, unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the Planning Commission
after the notice of the appeal has been filed, that by reason of facts stated
in the application, a stay would, in his/her opinion, cause imminent peril to
life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a
restraining order which may be granted by the Planning Commission or by a court
of record on application, on notice to the Zoning Administrator from whom the
appeal is taken on due cause shown.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.695 DECISION OF THE PLANNING COMMISSION ON APPEALS.
   (A)   The Planning Commission shall take action upon such application within
45 days after the date of receiving said application;
   (B)   Within its powers, the Planning Commission may reverse or affirm,
wholly or in part, the decision being appealed, and to that end shall have all
the powers of the officers from whom the appeal is taken, and it may direct the
issuance of a permit or certificate.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.696 VARIANCES.
   The Planning Commission may authorize upon appeal in specific cases a
variance from the terms of this Zoning Code as will not be contrary to the
public interest according to the following procedures.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.697 VARIANCE APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   Application for a variance shall be received from the applicant by the
Zoning Administrator and referred to the Planning Commission. The application
shall include all such forms, maps, and information, as may be prescribed for
that purpose by the Zoning Administrator to assure the fullest practicable
presentation of the facts for the permanent record, including:
   (A)   The completed application form, along with the appropriate review fee;
   (B)   Legal description of property or portion thereof;
   (C)   Description or nature of variance requested;
   (D)   Narrative statements establishing and substantiating the justification
for the variance pursuant to the criteria in §
150.698(B); and
   (E)   A plan, neatly and legibly drawn to adequately depict the information
showing the following, where applicable:
      (1)   The lot/parcel identification of the subject site and the adjacent
parcels;
      (2)   The street providing access to the lot as well as the location and
setback of driveways;
      (3)   The actual dimensions of the lot, the setbacks and other open space
dimensions thereof and the location and size of any existing structures
thereon;
      (4)   The location and size of the proposed structure, and/or the
proposed enlargement of existing structures;
   (F)   List of all owners of the property contiguous to and directly across
the street from the property for which the variance is requested.
   (G)   Any other information, including but not limited to floor plans and
other drawings at a reasonable scale to convey the need for the variance,
which, in the judgment of the Zoning Administrator, may be necessary to provide
for the enforcement of this Code.
   (H)   If a verbatim record is desired by the appellant, he/she shall furnish
the court reporter and bear the expense of typing said record.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.698 PLANNING COMMISSION REVIEW OF VARIANCE REQUEST.
   (A)   Hearing and Notice. The Planning Commission shall schedule a hearing
to review the variance application and give notice of the same.
      (1)   Upon such application being filed, the Zoning Administrator shall
provide written notice to the owners of all properties directly contiguous to
the property for which the variance is requested; or be published for two
successive weeks prior thereto, in a newspaper of general circulation in the
village.
      (2)   Such notice shall be provided by first class mail or hand delivery,
at least ten (10) days before the date of the Planning Commission hearing at
which the variance will be considered. Such notice shall be mailed to the
address of such property owners appearing on the County Auditor’s current tax
list. The failure of delivery of such notice shall not invalidate any
determination made by the Planning Commission.
   (B)   Factors for Review of Variance Application. The Planning Commission
shall review each application for a variance to determine if it complies with
the purpose and intent of this Zoning Code and the evidence demonstrates that
the literal enforcement of this Zoning Code will result in practical difficulty
or unnecessary hardship, depending on the type of variance requested.
      (1)   Unnecessary Hardship for Use Variance. Where the literal
application of the provisions of this zoning code would result in unnecessary
hardships peculiar to the property involved, the Planning Commission may grant
a use variance in the application of the provisions of the Zoning Code only if
all of the following findings are made:
         (a)   That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of lot size or shape, or
exceptional topographical or other physical conditions generally created by the
provisions of the Zoning Code in the neighborhood or district in which the
property is located.
         (b)   That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there
is no possibility that the property can be developed, further developed, or
used in strict conformity with the provisions of the Zoning Code and that the
authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use
of the property.
         (c)   That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
appellant.
         (d)   That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the property is located, nor
substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use of development of
adjacent property, nor be detrimental to the public welfare.
         (e)   That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance that will afford relief and will represent the least modification
possible of the regulation in issue.
      (2)   In determining practical difficulty, the Planning Commission shall
consider and weigh the following factors when determining whether the applicant
will experience practical difficulties:
         (a)   Whether the property in question will yield a reasonable return
or whether there can be any beneficial use of the property without the
variance.
         (b)   Whether the variance is substantial.
         (c)   Whether the essential character of the neighborhood would be
substantially altered or whether adjoining properties would suffer a
substantial detriment as a result of the variance.
         (d)   Whether the variance would adversely affect the delivery of
governmental services.
         (e)   Whether the property owner purchased the property with knowledge
of the zoning restriction.
         (f)   Whether the property owner’s predicament feasibly can be
obviated through some method other than a variance.
         (g)   Whether the spirit and intent behind the zoning requirement
would be observed and substantial justice done by granting the variance.
      (3)   The Planning Commission shall not grant a variance unless it shall,
in each case, make specific findings of fact directly based upon the particular
evidence presented to it from the factors above.
   (C)   Requests for Additional Information. The Planning Commission may
request that the applicant supply additional information that the Planning
Commission deems necessary to review and evaluate the request for a variance.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.699 DECISION ON VARIANCE APPLICATION.
   (A)   The Planning Commission shall take action upon such application within
45 days after the date of receiving said application. The Planning Commission
shall: approve; approve with supplementary conditions; or disapprove the
request.
   (B)   The Planning Commission may further prescribe any conditions and
safeguards that it deems necessary to ensure that the objectives of the
regulation(s) or provision(s) to which the variance applies will be met.
Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms
under which the application is granted, shall be deemed a violation punishable
under
Article 150.71, Enforcement and Penalties.
   (C)   If the Planning Commission fails to act within 45 days from the date
of receiving the application, or an extended period as may be agreed upon by
the Planning Commission and applicant, then the application shall be considered
denied.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.700 REVIEW OF NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES AND LOTS.
   The Planning Commission shall review applications regarding a nonconforming
use, structure, or lot as specified in
Article 150.41, as an appeal, and may authorize such application with such
conditions and limitations as the Planning Commission shall deem in the public
interest.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.701 APPEAL TO COMMITTEE OF ZONING APPEAL.
   Any party adversely affected by a decision of the Planning Commission may
appeal such decision to the Committee of Zoning Appeals.
   (A)   An appeal from a decision of the Planning Commission with regard to an
application for a development plan, conditional use permit, similar use
determination, specific referral, or some similar action may be made to the
Committee by any person believing himself or herself aggrieved or by any such
decision.
   (B)   To be considered, the appellant shall, within ten days after the date
of such decision, file in the office of the Zoning Administrator, a notice of
appeal specifying the decision or section of this Zoning Code from which the
appeal is sought, the error alleged and all relevant data.
   (C)   Hearings.
      (1)   Before making any decisions on any appeal, the Committee shall hold
a public hearing or hearings during a regularly scheduled or special Village
Council meeting.
      (2)   Notices of the time and place of hearings shall be mailed to the
appellant and to the affected property owners as they appear in the current
records of the County Auditor of Fulton or Lucas County or be published for two
successive weeks prior thereto, in a newspaper of general circulation in the
village.
      (3)   All hearings conducted by the Committee shall be open to the
public. Any person may appear and testify at a hearing either in person or by
duly authorized agent or attorney. The Committee shall have the power to
subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses, to administer oaths, to
compel testimony, to produce reports, findings and other evidence pertinent to
any issue referred to it for decision.
   (D)   Action. The Committee of Zoning Appeals shall act within 45 days after
receipt of all required information and failure to act within such period shall
be considered approval of the appeal unless an extension of time is mutually
agreed upon.
   (E)   Record of decisions. The Committee Secretary shall provide a detailed
report of all its proceedings, setting forth its reasons for decisions, the
vote of each member participating therein the absence of a member, or a
member’s failure to vote. Immediately following the Committee’s decision, such
record, including any conditions prescribed by the Committee, shall be filed
and posted for two weeks in the office of the Fiscal Officer. The report shall
be open for public inspection and copies shall be provided to the appellant or
any interested party noted therein.
   (F)   Notice to Council and Planning Commission. Upon issuance by the
Committee of Zoning Appeals of any ruling, determination or order, the
Chairperson of the Committee shall send within 14 days of the date of such
ruling, determination or order, a copy thereof to the Fiscal Officer and to the
Chairperson of the Planning Commission who shall present such report at its
next regular meeting.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.702 APPEAL TO COURT OF COMMON PLEAS.
   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Committee of Zoning Appeals may,
within 30 days after the filing of such decision, appeal such decision to the
Court of Common Pleas of Fulton or Lucas County, as provided in R.C. Chapter
2506. Such appeals may be either on questions of law or on questions of fact.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
ARTICLE 150.71
ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
   
150.711   Enforcement By Zoning Administrator.
   
150.712   Construction And Use Shall Be As Approved.
   
150.713   Violations.
   
150.714   Inspection, Stop Work and Order for Removal.
   
150.715   Penalties For Violations.
   
150.716    Records and reports.
§ 150.711 ENFORCEMENT BY ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   This Zoning Code shall be enforced by the Zoning Administrator.
   (B)   The Zoning Administrator is hereby authorized to enforce as well as
issue orders to prevent and stop violations of the provisions of this code.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.712 CONSTRUCTION AND USE SHALL BE AS APPROVED.
   Permits, certificates and other approvals issued or granted as set forth in
this Zoning Code on the basis of approved plans and applications authorize only
the use and arrangement set forth in such approved plans and applications, or
amendments thereto. Use, arrangement or construction contrary to that
authorized shall be deemed a punishable violation of this Code.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.713 VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful to:
   (A)   Construct, reconstruct, enlarge, change, maintain or use any building
or to use any land in violation of any regulation or any provision of this
Zoning Code or any amendment thereto;
   (B)   Use or occupy any land or place, build, erect, alter, remodel, restore
or rebuild thereon any building or structure, or permit any building or
structure to remain on such land or use, occupy or operate such building or
structure, in any way or for any use or purpose which is not permitted by the
provisions of this zoning code;
   (C)   Aid, assist or participate with any person placing, building,
erecting, altering, remodeling, restoring or rebuilding any building or
structure which is not permitted by the provisions of this zoning code;
   (D)   Violate or fail to perform any condition, stipulation or safeguard set
forth in any permit issued pursuant to this zoning code or continue to use or
occupy the premises or building as previously authorized by such permit beyond
the duration limit therein stated;
   (E)   Knowingly make any materially false statement of fact in an
application to the Zoning Administrator or his or her assistants for a permit
or in any plans or specifications submitted in relation to any application
under this zoning code; or
   (F)   Being an owner or lessee of any premises, knowingly suffer or permit a
violation of this zoning code to occur or exist on such premises.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.714 INSPECTION, STOP WORK AND ORDER FOR REMOVAL.
   (A)   Inspection. The Zoning Administrator is hereby empowered to enter any
premises at a reasonable time to inspect a reported violation of this zoning
code, examine and to order, in writing, the remedying of any condition found to
be existing in violation of any provisions of this zoning code.
   (B)   Stop Work. After such an order is served or posted on the premises, no
work, except to correct or comply with said violation, shall proceed on any
building or tract of land until said violation is corrected.
   (C)   Injunction. No person shall erect, construct, alter or repair or
maintain any building or structure, or use any land in violation of this zoning
code or the regulations enacted pursuant thereto. In the event of any such
violation, or imminent threat thereof, upon the request of the Mayor or
Council, the Village Solicitor, on behalf of the village, shall institute a
suit for injunction to prevent or terminate such violation.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.715 PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Offense of noncompliance. A person or corporation shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor where any violation of any of the provisions of this zoning code
exists in any structures, building or tract of land; where an order to remove
any such violation has been served on the owner, agent, lessee or tenant of the
structure, building or tract of land, or part thereof, or upon the architect,
building contractor or any person who commits or assists in any such violation;
and where such person shall fail to comply with such order within 30 days after
the service of notice thereon.
   (B)   Any person who violates any provisions for this section or other
applicable sections of this zoning code shall be charged with a violation of
this chapter for each such action or omission and upon conviction thereof shall
be fined not more than $100 together with the costs of prosecution. Each day
during which a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. The
imposition of any sentence shall not exempt any offender from compliance with
the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Civil action. In the event any building or structure is being erected,
constructed, altered, repaired or maintained in violation of the provisions of
this zoning code, or there is an imminent threat of violation, the village or
the owner of any contiguous or neighboring property who would be especially
damaged by such violation may institute and maintain, in addition to any other
remedies provided by law, a suit in the Court of Common Pleas of Fulton County
or Lucas County for injunction to terminate or prevent such violation as a
public nuisance.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.716 RECORDS AND REPORTS.
   The Zoning Administrator shall keep or cause to be kept, a record of any
decisions, determinations or conclusions reached by the Inspector in connection
with the enforcement of this zoning code. Such records shall be open to public
inspection during regular business hours.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
ARTICLE 150.73
AMENDMENTS
   
150.731   Authority For Amendments.
   
150.732   Initiation Of Zoning Amendments.
   
150.733   Amendments Initiated Property Owner(s).
   
150.734   Planning Commission Review And Recommendation.
   
150.735   Public Hearing And Action By Council.
   
150.736    Effective Date Of Amendment.
§ 150.731 AUTHORITY FOR AMENDMENTS.
   The regulations imposed and the districts created under this Zoning Code may
be amended from time to time by resolution duly enacted by the Village Council
according to the procedures in this Chapter of the Zoning Code.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.732 INITIATION OF ZONING AMENDMENTS.
   Amendments to this Zoning Code shall be initiated in one of the following
ways:
   (A)   By adoption of a resolution by Village Council.
   (B)   By adoption of a motion by the Planning Commission.
   (C)   By the filing of an application to the Planning Commission by at least
one owner or lessee of property or developer with an option to purchase
property within the area proposed to be changed or affected by said amendment.
The owners of at least fifty percent (50%) of the land in the affected zoning
district shall be able to present a petition duly signed and acknowledged to
Council requesting an amendment of the regulations prescribed for such area.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.733 AMENDMENTS INITIATED PROPERTY OWNER(S).
   An application for a zoning text or zoning map amendment initiated by at
least one owner or lessee of property or developer with an option to purchase
such property within the area proposed to be changed or affected by said
amendment shall be submitted and reviewed according to the following:
   (A)   Discussion with Planning Commission. Prior to submitting an
application for an amendment to the Zoning Code and/or the Zoning Map, the
applicant shall appear before the Planning Commission to informally discuss the
proposed amendment. However, no action shall be taken at such a meeting and no
discussions, opinions, suggestions, or recommendations of the Planning
Commission shall be relied upon by the applicant to indicate subsequent
approval or disapproval of the proposed amendment.
   (B)   Submission Requirements. An application for amendment to the Zoning
Code and/or the Zoning Map shall be in such form and contain such information
as shall be prescribed from time to time by the Zoning Administrator, including
the information listed below:
      (1)   The name, address and phone number of the applicant and the
property owner if other than the applicant;
      (2)   A statement of the reason(s) for the proposed amendment;
      (3)   A statement on the ways in which the proposed amendment relates to
the adopted plans and policies of the Village;
      (4)   Additional information, including:
         (a)   The parcel numbers and the exact dimensions of the properties
involved;
         (b)   Legal description of the parcel(s) to be rezoned, drawn by an
Ohio registered/licensed surveyor;
         (c)   Present use and zoning district; and the proposed use and zoning
district;
         (d)   A vicinity map at a scale approved by the Zoning Administrator
showing the existing conditions including: zoning, property lines, streets,
structures, and such other items as the Zoning Administrator may require;
      (5)   When the application includes an amendment to section(s) of the
Zoning Code, the application shall include the proposed amendment or addition
to the Code, specifying the existing and proposed section number(s);
      (6)   Payment of the application fee as established by Council.
   (C)   Acceptance of Application and Transmittal to Planning Commission. The
Zoning Administrator shall review the submitted application for completeness in
accordance with §
150.632. When the application is determined complete, the Zoning Administrator
shall officially accept the application for consideration and transmit the
application to the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.734 PLANNING COMMISSION REVIEW AND RECOMMENDATION.
   (A)   Referral to Planning Commission.
      (1)   A proposed amendment to the Zoning Code initiated by Council or
initiated by a property owner through a completed application shall be referred
to the Village Planning Commission for their consideration and recommendation
thereon.
      (2)   If the Planning Commission has initially proposed the matter to
Council in the form of an ordinance, then the provisions herein of referral to
the Planning Commission for recommendation shall not be applicable.
   (B)   The Commission shall be allowed a reasonable time, to be not less than
45 days after referral or submittal, for consideration and report.
   (C)   The Planning Commission shall recommend one of the following:
      (1)   That the amendment be approved as requested;
      (2)   That the amendment be approved as modified by the Planning
Commission as the Commission may deem reasonable or necessary; or
      (3)   That the amendment be denied.
   (D)   Planning Commission Action. It shall be the duty of the Secretary of
the Planning Commission to forthwith file with the Fiscal Officer, a report of
the action and recommendation of the Commission with respect to any referral or
submittal. Failure to file such report within 60 days after any referral or
submittal by Council, shall be accepted as and be deemed an approval of the
proposed change or amendment submitted.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.735 PUBLIC HEARING AND ACTION BY COUNCIL.
   (A)   Council shall, upon receipt of such recommendation, set a time for a
public hearing on such proposed amendment, which date shall not be more than
one hundred and twenty (120) days nor less than thirty (30) days from the date
of the receipt of such recommendation from the Planning Commission.
      (1)   Notices shall be provided according to the following:
         (a)   Notice of the public hearing shall be given by Council once a
week for two consecutive weeks on the same day of the week, in a paper of
general circulation and on the Village website, the first of such publication
to take place not less than thirty (30) days in advance of the public hearing.
The notice shall adequately describe the nature of the pending legislation;
         (b)   If the amendment intends to rezone ten or fewer parcels of land,
as listed on the tax duplicate, written notice of the hearing shall be mailed
by the Fiscal Officer, by first class mail or hand delivered, at least twenty
20 days before the date of the public hearing to all owners of property within
the village and contiguous to and directly across the street from such parcel
or parcels, to the addresses of such owners appearing on the County Auditor’s
current tax list, the County Treasurer’s mailing list or to such other list or
lists that may be specified by Council. The failure of delivery of such notice
shall not invalidate any such ordinance, measure, or regulation.
      (2)   Notices shall include the time and place of the public hearing, a
summary of the proposed amendment and a statement that the opportunity to be
heard will be afforded to any person interested.
      (3)   During such 30 days, the text of such ordinance, measure,
regulation or proposed change, together with the map, plans or copies forming
part of or referred to in such ordinance, measure, regulation or proposed
change, and the reports submitted by the Planning Commission, shall be on file
for public examination in the office of the Fiscal Officer.
      (4)   Council may recess such hearing from time to time, and, if the time
and place of the continued hearing is publicly announced at the time of the
adjournment, no further notice shall be required.
   (B)   After the conclusion of the public hearing, Council shall take action
within 90 days on the proposed amendment.
      (1)   Council’s action shall either:
         (a)   Adopt the recommendation of the Planning Commission;
         (b)   Deny the recommendation of the Planning Commission; or
         (c)   Adopt some modification thereof.
      (2)   In the event Council adopts the recommendation of the Planning
Commission, concurrence by a majority of the full Council members shall be
required.
      (3)   In the event Council elects to overrule the recommendation of the
Planning Commission, concurrence by not less than two-thirds of the membership
of the Council members shall be required. Wherein Council fails to obtain such
two-thirds vote, the recommendation of the Commission shall be considered as
approved.
      (4)   Any such proposal may be amended by majority vote, prior to the
voting thereon by the Council, without further notice or postponement if such
amendment shall be germane to the subject matter and is in accordance with the
recommendation of the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.736 EFFECTIVE DATE OF AMENDMENT.
   Such amendment adopted by Village Council shall become effective thirty (30)
days after the date of such adoption, unless within such thirty (30) days after
the adoption of the amendment there is presented to Council a referendum
petition, the rules for such a petition being governed by the Ohio Revised
Code.
ARTICLE 150.90
DEFINITIONS
   
150.901   Definitions and Rules of Interpretation.
   
150.902   Defined Words.
§ 150.901 DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   This
Article 150.90 includes definitions for words and phrases used in this Zoning
Code. The general rules of interpretation are in §
150.114 Rules of Interpretation. Any words or phrases not defined in this
Article 150.90 shall be given their customary meanings, as determined by the
Zoning Administrator.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 150.902 DEFINED WORDS.
   Words and terms with specific defined meanings are set forth below, listed
in alphabetical order.
   ACCESSORY LIVING SUITE. A secondary living space that is located wholly
within the same building as the one-family detached dwelling. This definition
shall not include a mobile home, camper, or recreational vehicle.
   ACCESSORY, BUILDING. A subordinate building detached from, but located on
the same lot as the principal building or principal use, the use of which is
incidental and accessory to that of the principal building or principal use,
and which is constructed subsequent to the principal building or principal use
of the land.
   ACCESSORY, STRUCTURE. A detached subordinate structure located on the same
zoning lot as a principal building or use, the function of which is supportive
of and accessory to the principal use, and which is constructed subsequent to
or simultaneously with the principal building or principal use of the land.
   ACCESSORY, USE. A use located on the same zoning lot with the principal use
of the lot, which is customarily incidental, subordinate, and related to that
of the principal building or principal use, and which is established subsequent
to or simultaneously with the construction of the principal building or
establishment of the principal use of the land.
   ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS. Bookstores, bars, lounges,
restaurants, theaters or shops which have more than 20% of their stock in
trade, or fare, books, pictures, slides, films, media of electronic visual
portrayal or live entertainment, which are distinguished or characterized by
their emphasis on matter or live conduct depicting, describing, exposing or
relating to sexual activities or anatomical areas.
   AGRICULTURE (CROPS). Includes plowing, tillage, cropping, seeding,
cultivating, or harvesting food and fiber products, including silviculture and
viticulture. The term agricultural activity as used herein excludes the
husbandry of livestock, agricultural animals, or fur-bearing animals for food
or other purposes.
   ALLEY. A minor way which is used primarily for vehicular service access to
the back or the side of properties whose lot frontage is on some other street.
   ANIMAL BOARDING/KENNEL. A commercial establishment wherein three (3) or more
domesticated animals more than four (4) months of age are kept or maintained
overnight for commercial purposes such as boarding, breeding, and selling, and
which may offer minor medical treatment. This use includes commercial kennels
and pet shelters but excludes animal hospitals or clinics where animals are
kept only for treatment by licensed veterinarians.
   ANIMAL GROOMING/ANIMAL DAY CARE. A facility where the care and supervision
of cats and dogs is provided but which does not include any overnight boarding
or outdoor kennel. This use type shall also include establishments where the
primary service provided is the cleaning and grooming of domestic pets
including bathing, brushing, combing, nail and hair trimming, etc., and where
there are no boarding facilities. The facility may also provide services such
as obedience classes, training, or behavioral counseling.
   ANIMAL HOSPITAL/VETERINARIAN OFFICE. A facility operated under the
supervision of a licensed veterinarian where domestic animals are given medical
or surgical treatment and the boarding of animals incidental to treatment does
not exceed 30 days.
   APPLICANT. The owner of the land proposed for application of a zoning permit
or zoning certificate, or his/her representative who shall have express written
authority to act on behalf of the owner. The authority of the representative
shall be established to the satisfaction of the Zoning Administrator. Consent
to subdivide shall be required from the legal owner of the premises.
   APPLICATION. A formal submission by an applicant to obtain a permit,
certificate or other approval pursuant to this Zoning Code and in such form and
containing complete information, plans and specifications required by this
Code.
   ARTISAN STUDIO/WORKSHOP. An establishment or business where an artist,
artisan, or craftsperson teaches, makes, or fabricates crafts or products by
hand or with minimal automation and may include direct sales to consumers.
   AUCTION WAREHOUSE, SHOWROOM. A building used for the storage of goods and
materials which are to be sold by public auction and for the sale of said goods
and materials by public auction via in person or internet, on an occasional
basis.
   AWNING. A roof like cover that projects from the wall of a building for the
purpose of shielding a doorway or window from the elements.
   BASEMENT. The portion of a building that is partly or completely below
grade.
   BED AND BREAKFAST INN. A one-family detached house, or portion thereof,
where overnight lodging and meals are offered to the public for compensation at
a daily rate, containing guest rooms, each of which is open to occupancy for
periods of less than one week, and with not more than one kitchen facility to
serve and/or be available for use by guests. The term “bed and breakfast” does
not include: “rooming house”, “hotel (or motel)”, “inn”, “restaurant-table
service”, or “restaurant counter service”.
   BREWERY, DISTILLERY OR WINERY PRODUCTION FACILITY. An establishment that
produces a quantity that exceeds the allowance for a “micro-brewery”, “micro-
distillery”, or “micro-winery” production facility, as defined in this zoning
code.
   BREWPUB. A restaurant with an onsite micro production facility that sells 25
percent or more of its product on site.
   BUFFER. An area adjacent to side and rear property lines, measured
perpendicularly from adjacent property lines, intended to reduce the impacts of
proposed uses on adjacent property and/or to screen incompatible uses from each
other, consisting of natural existing vegetation or created by the use of
trees, shrubs, fences and/or berms.
   BUILDING, HEIGHT. The vertical distance of a building measured from the
average finished grade within 20 feet of the building, structure, or wall
exposed above the ground surface to the highest point of the roof, parapet
wall, or uppermost part, not including any exceptions permitted by this zoning
code.
   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. A building occupied by the main use or activity of the
lot on which building is located.
   BUILDING. A completely enclosed structure having one or more floors and a
roof supported by columns or walls and designed or intended for the shelter,
housing or enclosure of persons, animals or property.
   CLINIC. An establishment where patients who are not lodged overnight are
admitted for examination and treatment by a group of physicians practicing
medicine together.
   CLUB. A building or portion thereof or premises owned or operated by a
corporation, association, person or persons for a social, educational or
recreational purpose, but not primarily for profit or to render a service which
is customarily carried on as a business.
   CODE. The zoning code of the Village of Swanton.
   COMMITTEE. The Committee of Zoning Appeals of the Village of Swanton.
   COMMON AREA. Land in a subdivision or development area, with or without
structures, that is held in common ownership by the owners or occupants of the
dwellings or buildings in such subdivision or development area through a
homeowners’ association, community association, or other legal entity, or which
is owned by the individual members of a condominium association as tenants-in-
common; includes, but is not limited to common open space and restricted open
space.
   CONDOMINIUM. A form of real property ownership, whether comprised of
buildings with multiple units in one building or single-family detached units,
containing individually owned dwelling units and jointly owned and shared areas
and facilities, which dwelling or development is subject to the provisions of
state law.
   CONGREGATE CARE FACILITY. A residential facility that provides for the needs
of individuals who are elderly or handicapped. The facility shall consist of
residential dwelling units or rooms designed specifically for the elderly or
handicapped, and may have common social, recreational, dining and food
preparation facilities; and may provide for the needs of those able to live
independently or residents with a range of personal limitation and medical
impairments that require nursing care.
   COUNCIL. The legislative body of the Village of Swanton.
   COUNTY. The County of Fulton or the County of Lucas, Ohio.
   COURTYARD. An open space other than a yard, bounded on two or more sides by
exterior walls of the building, or bounded by exterior walls of a building and
lot lines.
   DAY CARE CENTER. A commercial facility that provides individuals with care
for less than 24 hours per day including, but is not limited to a day nursery,
nursery school, preschool, adult day care center, or other supplemental care
facility. This term does not include a family day care home, or care that is
provided in a residence.
   DECK. A flat surface that is not paved, which is capable of supporting
weight similar to a floor, constructed outdoors and elevated from the ground
that is either freestanding or attached to a building. Decks may also include
stairways. Decks are unenclosed by solid or nonsolid walls or a roof. If a
pergola or other roof structure is attached to the principal building and
extends over the deck, then the deck and roofing shall be considered a porch.
When fully enclosed by a roof and walls (including screening), such use shall
be considered a part of the principal building as established in this zoning
code.
   DENSITY, GROSS. Unless otherwise defined, gross density shall be the total
number of dwelling units divided by the gross area of a site (including
streets, easements, rights-of-way, open space set-asides, and/or other public
dedications established as part of the development).
   DEVELOPER. A person commencing proceedings under this zoning code to effect
the development of land for himself, herself or for another.
   DEVELOPMENT AREA. The minimum area of land permitted by this zoning code to
be developed by a single owner or a group of owners, acting jointly, which may
consist of a parcel or assembled parcels, and includes a related group of
buildings planned and developed as an entity.
   DRIVE-THROUGH ESTABLISHMENT. A commercial facility which provides a service
or product directly to a customer remaining in a motor vehicle either by
allowing a motor vehicle into the premises or to a window or mechanical device
on the premises to receive a service or product without exiting the vehicle.
This shall not include the selling of fuel at a gasoline filing station or the
accessory functions of a carwash facility such as vacuum cleaning stations.
   DRIVEWAY. A paved or unpaved area used for ingress or egress of vehicles,
allowing access from a street to a building, structure or other facility.
   DWELLING. A building designed or occupied exclusively for residential use
and permitted accessory uses.
   DWELLING UNIT. Space, within a dwelling, comprising living, dining, sleeping
room or rooms, storage closets, as well as space and equipment for cooking,
bathing and toilet facilities, designed for and intended to be occupied
exclusively by one family (see definition of FAMILY).
   DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY. A building consisting of three or more dwelling
units with varying arrangements or entrances and party walls.
   DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY ATTACHED. Two or more single-family dwelling units
attached side by side under one roof that share a common vertical side or rear
wall reaching from the building foundation to the roof structure, each of which
is occupied by one family.
   DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY DETACHED. A single building on a single lot on a
permanent foundation containing one residential dwelling unit designed for and
occupied by one family and that is completely separate from any other building.
A single-family detached dwelling may also include an “Accessory Dwelling Unit”
if it meets the requirements for that additional use under this Zoning Code.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A building consisting of two dwelling units which may
be either attached side by side or one above the other, and each unit having
either a separate or combined entrance or entrances.
   EASEMENT. The right of a person, public utility, or local government agency
to use common land or land owned by another for a specific purpose, within
which the owner of the property shall not erect any permanent structures.
   ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING FACILITY. A facility in which electric vehicle
charging services are made available to the public or to members for a fee,
including structures, machinery, and equipment necessary and integral to
support a passenger or light-duty electric vehicle, including battery charging
stations, rapid charging stations, and battery exchange stations.
   ESSENTIAL SERVICES. The erection, construction or maintenance by public
utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies of underground gas,
electrical or water transmission or distribution systems, collection,
communication, supply or disposal systems, including poles, wires, mains,
drains, sewers, pipes, traffic signals, hydrants and other similar equipment
and accessories in connection therewith; reasonably necessary for the
furnishing of adequate service by such public utilities or municipal or other
governmental agencies or for the public health or safety or general welfare,
but not including buildings.
   FAMILY. Either one individual, any number of individuals related by blood,
marriage adoption or foster children (see “foster child”) plus not more than
two additional persons not related as set forth above, or not more than five
persons not related by blood, marriage or adoption, occupying a dwelling unit
as their primary place of residence. In each situation, all members of such
family are living together as a single housekeeping unit and using one common
kitchen facility. FAMILY does not include groups occupying a hotel or motel or
other transient lodging facility as herein defined; nor a facilities manager or
house manager; nor persons currently illegally using or addicted to alcohol or
a controlled substance as defined in the Controlled Substances Act, 21 U.S.C. §
802(6); nor persons who are in a group living arrangement as a result of
criminal offenses; or persons in a society, club, fraternity, sorority,
association or lodge.
   FAMILY DAY CARE HOME, TYPE B. A permanent residence of the provider in which
child care is provided for one to six children at one time and in which no more
than three children are under two years of age at one time. In counting
children for the purposes of this division, any children under six years of age
who are related to the provider and who are on the premises of the type B home
shall be counted; or as defined in the Ohio Revised Code. “Type B family day-
care home” and “type B home” do not include any child day camp.
   FENCE. A structure constructed of wood, masonry, stone, chain link, non-
vinyl clad, wire, metal, horticulture, or other material or combination of
materials erected and positioned in such a manner to enclose or partially
enclose, screen all or part of a lot or premises.
   FISCAL OFFICER. The duly acting and qualified Fiscal Officer of the Village
of Swanton.
   FLEET VEHICLES. One or more cars, trucks, vans, and/or other vehicles,
including motorized equipment and associated trailer needed to transport the
equipment, which are owned by the operator of the principal use and used in the
operation thereof, but not including a privately owned customer or employee
vehicle.
   GARAGE, DETACHED. An accessory building the use of which is incidental to
that of the principal building and located on the same lot therewith, primarily
intended for and used for the enclosed storage or shelter of private motor
vehicles of the owned by the occupant of the principal building.
   GARAGE, PRIVATE. A building, accessory to a one- or two-family dwelling,
used exclusively for the parking or temporary storage of passenger automobiles.
   GARAGE, REPAIR. A main or accessory building used or designed for repairing
motor vehicles; a service garage if accessory to an automobile salesroom.
   GARAGE, STORAGE. A main or accessory building, other than a private garage,
used for the parking or temporary storage of passenger vehicles, and in which
no service shall be provided for remuneration.
   GAZEBO. A freestanding decorative roofed accessory structure that is not
enclosed and that is utilized for the purpose of relaxation in conjunction with
a residential dwelling.
    GROUP HOME, LARGE. A licensed residential facility that complies with the
regulations of either R.C. § 5119.341(B) for residential facilities for 6 to 16
persons with mental health issues or R.C. § 5123.19(N) residential facilities
for 9 to 16 persons with developmental disabilities.
   GROUP HOME, SMALL. A licensed residential facility that complies with the
regulations of either R.C. § 5119.341(A) for residential facilities
accommodating up to 5 persons with mental health issues or R.C. § 5123.19(M)
residential facilities accommodating up to 8 persons with developmental
disabilities, or an unlicensed residential facility accommodating up to 5
persons whose living arrangements constitute a family as defined in this Zoning
Code.
   INDUSTRIALIZED UNIT. A building unit or assembly of closed construction
fabricated in an off-site facility, that is substantially self-sufficient as a
unit or as a part of a greater structure and that requires transportation to
the site of intended use. INDUSTRIALIZED UNIT includes units installed on the
site as independent units, as part of a group of units, or incorporated with
standard construction methods to form a completed structural entity.
INDUSTRIALIZED UNIT does not include a manufactured or mobile home as defined
herein.
   INSTITUTION. Buildings or land occupied by a nonprofit corporation or
nonprofit establishment for public use.
   KENNEL. Any lot or premises on which three or more dogs, three months of age
or more, are kept for the purpose of breeding, permanently or temporarily
boarded, or for sale.
   LAND COVERAGE. That percentage of lot covered by the main and accessory
building.
   LANDOMINIUM. A type of condominium form of ownership, built as part of a
residential development, containing individually owned dwelling units whose
owner owns both the unit and the land on which it is built.
   LOADING SPACE. An open or enclosed space other than a street used for the
temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while its goods are being loaded or
unloaded.
   LOT. A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by plat,
subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, to be used, developed or built
upon as a unit.
   LOT AREA. The total horizontal area within the lot boundary lines of a
zoning lot.
   LOT DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance of a lot measured along the building
line at right angle to the mean lot depth line. Width at front lot line is
measured along the street line.
   LOT FRONTAGE. The width of contiguous land between property lines abutting
upon a street right-of-way. On a corner lot, the frontage is measured along the
front lot line.
   LOT LINE. A boundary of a lot separating it from adjoining public, common or
private land, including a public street.
   LOT LINE, FRONT. The lot line separating an interior lot from the street
upon which it abuts; or the shortest lot line of corner lot which abuts upon a
street. Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, it shall be
construed as synonymous with STREET LINE.
   LOT LINE, REAR. A lot line parallel or within 45 degrees of being parallel
to the front lot line.
   LOT LINE, SIDE. A lot line which is neither a front nor rear lot line.
   LOT OF RECORD. Land designed as a private parcel on a plat map or deed in
the records of Fulton County or Lucas County, Ohio.
   LOT WIDTH. The horizontal distance of a lot measured along the building line
at right angle to the mean lot depth line. Width at front lot line is measure
along the street line.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot abutting on two streets at their intersection, if the
interior angle of intersection is not more than 135 degrees.
   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot or through lot.
   LOT, THROUGH. A lot having a pair of opposite lot lines along two more or
less parallel public streets and that is not a corner lot, also referred to as
a double frontage lot.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/083b2827ca6deba1b1fb1d5dec2edfde91f29d3b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2516.png]
 
   LOT, ZONING. A parcel of land, composed of one or more recorded lots, that
is designated by its owner at the time of applying for a zoning permit as one
lot, all of which is to be used, developed or built upon as a unit under single
ownership, meeting all the requirements for area, buildable area, frontage,
width, yards, setbacks and any other requirements set forth in this Zoning
Code. Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, the term LOT is used
synonymously with ZONING LOT in this zoning code.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A non-self-propelled building unit or assembly of closed
construction fabricated in an off-site facility, and constructed in conformance
with the federal construction and safety standards established by the Secretary
of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) pursuant to the “Manufactured Housing
Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974,” 88 Stat. 700, 42 U.S.C.A. 5401,
5403, and that has a permanent label or tag affixed to it, as specified in 42
U.S.C.A. 5415, certifying compliance with all applicable federal construction
and safety standards.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. As specified by R.C. Chapter 4781, any tract of land
upon which three (3) or more manufactured or mobile homes used for habitation
are parked, either free of charge or for revenue purposes, and includes any
roadway, building, structure, vehicle, or enclosure used or intended for use as
a part of the facilities of the park.
   MAP. A drawing showing geographic, topographic or other physical features of
the land.
   MICRO-PRODUCTION FACILITY, INCLUDING MICRO-BREWERY, MICRO-DISTILLERY, MICRO-
WINERY. A small-scale facility that produces a limited amount of a ‘craft’ or
‘artisan’ alcoholic beverage, depending on the type of beverage produced, which
possesses the appropriate liquor permit from the State of Ohio, and which may
sell to the public by one or more of the following methods: the traditional
three-tier system (producer to wholesaler to retailer to consumer); the two-
tier system (producer acting as wholesaler to retailer to consumer); and,
directly to the consumer through carry-outs and/or on-site tasting-room or
restaurant sales, depending on the zoning district in which the use is located:
      (1)   “Micro-brewery” means a facility that produces less than 15,000
barrels (17,600 hectoliters) of beer per year (as defined by the Brewer’s
Association).
      (2)   “Micro-distillery” means a facility that produces less than 50,000
proof gallons per year (as defined by the American Distilling Institute).
      (3)   “Micro-winery” means a facility that produces less than 10,000
cases of wine per year, where all aspects of production occur within the
footprint of the structure.
   MOBILE HOME. A non-self-propelled a building unit or assembly of closed
construction that is fabricated in an off-site facility, is more than thirty-
five body feet in length or when erected on site, is three hundred twenty or
more square feet, is built on a permanent chassis, is transportable in one or
more sections, and does not qualify as a manufactured home or as an
industrialized unit as defined herein.
   MOTEL. A building or buildings, providing overnight accommodations
principally for travelers in which access to each rental unit is provided
directly through an exterior door.
   NONCONFORMING BUILDING. A building existing lawfully at the time this zoning
code, or an amendment thereto, became effective but which does not conform to
the lot area, width, access or other requirements of the district in which it
is located.
   NONCONFORMING LOT. A lot existing lawfully at the time this zoning code, or
an amendment thereto, became effective but which does not conform to the lot
area, width, access or other requirements of the district in which it is
located.
   NONCONFORMING SITE. Site improvements such as accessory off-street parking
and loading areas, signs and landscaping on a lot, existing lawfully at the
time this zoning code, or an amendment thereto, became effective but which does
not conform to the site improvement regulations of the district in which the
lot is located.
   NONCONFORMING USE. The use of a building or land, existing lawfully at the
time this zoning code, or an amendment thereto, became effective but which does
not conform to the use regulations, of the district in which it is located.
   NURSING HOME. A licensed extended or intermediate care facility that
provides skilled nursing and dietary care for persons who are ill or
incapacitated or which provides service for the rehabilitation of the persons
who are convalescing from illness or incapacitation. A hospital is not included
in this definition.
   OPEN SPACE, RESTRICTED. The portion of the common area within a planned
residential development that is of sufficient size and shape to meet the
minimum zoning requirements.
   OUTDOOR DINING FACILITY. An area outside but adjacent to the principal
building of an establishment where food or drink are consumed.
   OUTDOOR DISPLAY/SALES. Merchandise removed from its shipping packaging and
representative of merchandise that is available for purchase inside the
building placed in an outdoor area that is open to the general public or is
available for purchase by the general public directly from the display area.
   OUTDOOR STORAGE. The storage of goods, materials, merchandise or vehicles in
the same place for more than 24 hours in an area outside of a building or
structure, except for merchandise placed in an outdoor display in a manner that
complies with the regulations for outdoor display.
   PARKING AREA, ACCESSORY. An open or enclosed privately-owned area used for
passenger vehicles for occupants, their guests or customers, of a main
building.
   PARKING AREA, PUBLIC. An open or enclosed publicly-owned area used for
passenger vehicular parking, with or without a fee.
   PATIO. A level-surfaced area, which may or may not be directly adjacent to a
principal building, that has an average elevation of not more than thirty
inches above finished grade, and without walls or a roof, usually constructed
of concrete, brick, or other masonry material.
   PERSON. The individual, firm, association, corporation, trust or any other
legal entity, including his, her or its agents.
   PLAN, FINAL. The final plan prepared by a developer based upon the approved
preliminary plan of a proposed development or development area which consists
of detailed drawings and specifications.
   PLAN, PRELIMINARY. A drawing prepared by a developer, which may include
explanatory exhibits and text, submitted to the designated authority for the
purpose of study of a proposed development of land, or a PRELIMINARY PLAN of
land and buildings of a development area which, if approved by the designated
authority, provides the basis for proceeding with the preparation of the final
plan of a development or development area.
   PLAT. A map of a lot, parcel, subdivision or development area on which the
lines of each element are shown by accurate distances and bearings.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle that is built on a single chassis; with four
hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projection; is designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and is designed as temporary living quarters for recreational,
camping, travel or seasonal use.
   RESEARCH AND TESTING LABORATORY. A building or group of buildings for
scientific research, investigation, testing or experimentation, but not
facilities for the manufacture or sale of products, except as incidental to the
main purpose of the laboratory.
   RESTAURANT. A structure in which the principal use is the preparation and
sale of food and beverages.
   RESTAURANT, CARRY-OUT/TAKE-OUT. A restaurant where food, frozen dessert or
beverages are primarily sold in a packaged, ready-to-consume state, intended
for ready consumption by the customer on or off the premises.
   RETAIL SALES ESTABLISHMENT. A business which sells goods or merchandise to
the general public for personal or household consumption, with display areas
that are designed and laid out to attract the general public, provides services
incidental to the sale of such products and maintains regular business hours.
In determining whether a use is retail, the proportion of display area vs.
storage area and to the number of display windows in the building façade may be
considered. Adult oriented business is not a retail use.
   RETAIL, LARGE FORMAT. A retail establishment that sells primarily large,
oversized, bulky goods which consumers purchase relatively infrequently and
that generates a low volume of customer traffic compared to traditional retail.
Examples of such establishments include but are not limited to the sale of
lumber and other similar types of building materials, furniture, large
appliances, and swimming pools.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. All of the land included within an area which is dedicated,
reserved by deed or granted by easement for street purposes, which is occupied,
or intended to be occupied by transportation facilities, public utilities, or
other special public uses, including but not limited to streets, alleys, or
other public thoroughfares, and sidewalks, bicycle or pedestrian pathways.
   ROADWAY. That portion of a right-or-way available for vehicular travel,
including parking lanes.
   SELF-STORAGE UNIT FACILITIES. A building or group of buildings of
individual, self-contained units rented or leased for the storage of household
and other personal property with no commercial transactions permitted other
than the leasing or renting of units.
   SETBACK. The minimum required distance between a structure or parking area
and the lot lines of the lot or parcel on which such structure or parking area
is located. The setback line shall be parallel with the property line from
which it is required.
   SETBACK, FRONT. The line that defines the depth of the required front yard
measured from and parallel to the front property line to a regulated structure.
The front setback shall be measured from the existing street right-of-way line,
or proposed right-of-way as indicated on the thoroughfare plan.
   SETBACK, REAR. The line that defines the width or depth of the required rear
yard.
   SETBACK, SIDE. The line that defines the width or depth of the required side
yard.
   SHORT-TERM RENTAL. The rental of an entire one-family detached dwelling unit
or portion of a one-family detached dwelling unit for compensation at a daily
rate for periods of less than one week, not including a BED AND BREAKFAST or
HOTEL/MOTEL. This definition does not include offering the use of one’s
property where no fee is charged or collected.
   SMALL-SCALE SOLAR. For purposes of this zoning code, the term “small-scale
solar” refers to solar photovoltaic systems that produce up to ten kilowatts
(kW) per hour of energy or solar-thermal systems which serve the building to
which they are attached, and do not provide energy for any other buildings.
   SOLAR COLLECTOR SYSTEM, FREESTANDING OR GROUND-MOUNTED. A system of panels,
wiring, and related equipment used to transform direct solar energy into
thermal, chemical, or electrical energy that is mounted either to the ground or
to a building.
   STACKING LANE. An area of stacking space and driving provided for vehicles
waiting for drive-through service that is physically separated from other
traffic and pedestrian circulation on the site.
   STACKING SPACE. An area within a stacking lane for vehicles waiting to order
a service, product or finish a drive-through transaction.
   STREET. Any vehicular way which: is an existing state, county or municipal
roadway; or is shown on a plat approved pursuant to law; or is approved by
other official action; or is shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in the
office of the County Recording Officer prior to the appointment of a Planning
Board and the grant to such Board of the power to review plats; and includes
the land between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved.
   STREET, ARTERIAL. A principal or heavy traffic street of considerable
continuity and used primarily as a traffic artery, also referred to as a major
street. (i.e., Hallett Avenue).
   STREET, COLLECTOR. A street which carries traffic from minor streets to
arterial streets or major thoroughfares, including the principal entrance
streets of a residential development and principal streets for circulation
within such a development, also referred to as a secondary street. (i.e.,
Brookside Avenue).
   STREET, CUL-DE-SAC. A street, one end of which connects with another street
and the other end of which is a dead-end which allows space for turning of
vehicles.
   STREET, LOCAL. A street primarily for access to abutting residential,
business and industrial properties and to serve local needs, also referred to
as a minor street. (i.e., Lawrence Avenue).
   STREET, PRIVATE. A street held in private ownership.
   STRUCTURE. That which is constructed on or under the ground or attached or
connected thereto, including but not limited to: buildings, barriers, bridges,
bulkheads, chimneys, fences, garages, gazebos, greenhouses, outdoor seating
facilities, parking areas, platforms, pools, poles, streets, tanks, towers,
sheds, signs, walls and walks; and including mobile homes, trailers and other
vehicles whether on wheels or other supports.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER. A structure designed and constructed to support
one or more antennas used by commercial wireless telecommunication facilities
and including all appurtenant devices attached to it. A TOWER can be
freestanding (solely self-supported by attachment to the ground) or supported
(attached directly to the ground and with guy wire), of either lattice or
monopole construction.
   TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed
to be used for temporary human habitation and for travel and recreational
purposes, having a body not exceeding eight feet in width or 28 feet in length.
   USE. Any purpose of which buildings, other structures or land may be
arranged, designed, intended, maintained or occupied; or any activity conducted
in a building, other structure or on the land.
   USE, CONDITIONAL. A use specifically designated as such in this zoning code
that, because of its unique characteristics or infrequent use, cannot be
properly classified as a permitted use in a particular zoning district and that
may be conducted subject to compliance with certain standards and explicit
conditions as set forth in this zoning code and the granting of a conditional
use permit in accordance with this zoning code.
   USE, INSTITUTIONAL. A nonprofit or quasi-public use or institution such as a
church, library, public or private school, hospital, or municipally-owned or
operated building, structure or land use for public purpose.
   USE, PRINCIPAL. The main use of an activity conducted on a lot, whether in a
building, other structure or on the land.
   VARIANCE. A modification of the zoning regulations, permitted in instances
where a literal application of the provisions of the zoning code would result
in unnecessary hardships as a result of some peculiar or unique condition or
circumstances pertaining only to the zoning lot in question in accordance with
procedures and standards set forth in this zoning code.
   VEHICLE AND EQUIPMENT MAJOR REPAIR SERVICE. An establishment primarily
engaged in vehicle repair, rebuilding, reconditioning, or mechanical servicing
of motor vehicle engines, transmissions, frames, including auto body repairs,
framework, welding, and major painting. This use does not include VEHICLE FUEL
STATION or VEHICLE WASH.
   VEHICLE FUEL STATION. A facility limited to retail sales to the public of
gasoline, biodiesel, electricity, ethanol fuel blends, hydrogen, natural gas or
other fuels for motor vehicles, and which may include retail sales of minor
automobile accessories such as motor oil, lubricants.
   VEHICLE SALES. The use of any building, land area or other premises for the
display and sale of new or used automobiles, panel trucks, vans or trailers and
including any warranty repair work and other repair service conducted as an
accessory use.
   VEHICLE SERVICE STATION, MINOR. An establishment primarily engaged in
providing minor motor vehicle repair services such as lubrication, oil and tire
changes, engine tune-ups, brake repair, tire replacement, interior and exterior
cleaning and polishing, installation of after-market accessories such as
tinting, auto alarms, spoilers, sunroofs, headlight covers, and similar items.
This definition does not include major repairs as defined in this zoning code
or VEHICLE FUEL STATION or VEHICLE WASH.
   VEHICLE WASH. A building or enclosed area that provides facilities for
washing and cleaning motor vehicles, which may be a self-serve, a production
line with a conveyor, blower, or other mechanical devices and/or which may
employ hand labor.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Swanton.
   YARD. A space on the same lot with a principal use or building that is open
and unobstructed except as otherwise authorized by this zoning code.
   YARD, CORNER SIDE. On a corner lot, the horizontal space between the
foundation or structural appurtenance of a principal building and the side lot
line adjacent to the street, and extending from the front yard to the rear lot
line.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/083b2827ca6deba1b1fb1d5dec2edfde91f29d3b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2518.png]
 
   YARD, FRONT. The horizontal space between the foundation or structural
appurtenance of a principal building extending from the front wall of the
building to the front lot line across the full width of the lot.
   YARD, REAR. The horizontal space between the foundation or structural
appurtenance of a principal building extending from the rear wall of the
structure to the rear lot line across the full width of the lot.
   YARD, SIDE. The horizontal space between the foundation or structural
appurtenance of a principal building and a side lot line extending from the
front yard to the rear yard; provided, see also YARD, CORNER SIDE.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/083b2827ca6deba1b1fb1d5dec2edfde91f29d3b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2520.png]
 
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
CHAPTER 151: SUBDIVISION AND SITE CONSTRUCTION CODE
Section
   
151.01   Subdivision and Site Construction Code adopted
   
Appendix A: Subdivision and Site Construction Code
§ 151.01 SUBDIVISION AND SITE CONSTRUCTION CODE ADOPTED.
   The village adopts in full the Subdivision and Site Construction Code found
in Appendix A to this chapter, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
APPENDIX A: SUBDIVISION AND SITE CONSTRUCTION CODE
ARTICLE 151.10
GENERAL PROVISIONS
   
151.101   Title.
   
151.102   Authority And Purpose.
   
151.103   Jurisdiction.
   
151.104   Administration.
   
151.105   Interpretation, Conflict And Separability.
   
151.106   Conformity To Development Plans And Zoning.
   
151.107   Effective Date.
§ 151.101 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Subdivision and Site
Construction Code of Swanton, Ohio” and shall be hereinafter referred to as
“these regulations”.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.102 AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority granted to the
village by R.C. Chapter 711.
   (B)   The purpose of these regulations is to guide and regulate the
planning, subdividing, and development of land in order to promote and protect
the public health, safety and general welfare by establishing standards for
logical, sound and economical development and the construction of all public
improvements. It is intended that the provisions of these regulations shall be
applied to achieve the following objectives:
      (1)   Orderly development of land to obtain harmonious and stable
neighborhoods;
      (2)   Safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian circulation;
      (3)   Designs to allow ample public open spaces for schools, traffic,
utilities, access for firefighting equipment, adequate light and air,
recreational and other public purposes;
      (4)   Accurate surveying of land, and preparation and recording of plats;
      (5)   Ensure that lots are developed with adequate site improvements
including street surfacing, curbs and sidewalks;
      (6)   The assurance that subdivision improvements are properly installed
and completed, and private improvements are properly maintained in compliance
with the regulations herein;
      (7)   Ensure the adequate provision of water, drainage, sanitary sewer
facilities and other health requirements;
      (8)   Provide for necessary utility easements and the dedication of
public ownership and maintenance of the rights-of-way for transportation; and
      (9)   Orderly development of land in accordance with zoning and future
land use plans.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.103 JURISDICTION.
   These regulations shall be applicable to all subdivisions of land and
related land development hereinafter made within the corporate limits of the
village.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.104 ADMINISTRATION.
   These regulations shall be administered by the Village Planning Commission,
the Village Administrator, Zoning Administrator and/or his, her or its
representative(s) pursuant to the provisions hereof.
   (A)   Classification. Upon the submission of a proposed division of land
application, the application shall be classified by the Zoning Administrator as
a major subdivision, minor subdivision, lot line adjustment or lot
consolidation, after which, such application shall be reviewed in accordance
with these regulations and R.C. §§ 711.09 and 711.131.
   (B)   Administrative Act. Review of a subdivision, lot line adjustment or
lot consolidation by the Village is an administrative act.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.105 INTERPRETATION, CONFLICT AND SEPARABILITY.
   (A)   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of these
regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements. More stringent
provisions may be required if it is demonstrated that different standards are
necessary to promote the public health, safety and welfare.
   (B)   These regulations are not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul or in
any manner interfere with any existing laws, covenants or rules provided.
However, where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this chapter are
either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed
by any other provisions of this chapter or of any other applicable law,
ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations which
are more restrictive and impose higher standards or requirements shall govern.
   (C)   The provisions of this chapter are separable. If for any reason, any
section, sentence, clause, phrase or other part of this chapter is adjudged by
a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the decision shall not affect
the remaining portions of this chapter. The regulations in this chapter shall
not abate any legal action pending under prior subdivision regulations and
shall not interfere with other applicable laws and regulations or with deed
restrictions.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.106 CONFORMITY TO DEVELOPMENT PLANS AND ZONING.
   (A)   The arrangement, character, width and location of all arterial and
collector thoroughfares or extensions thereof shall conform with the
requirements of any adopted Major Thoroughfare Plan of the village.
Thoroughfares not contained in the aforementioned plan shall conform to the
recommendations of the Village Planning Commission based upon the design
standards set forth within these regulations and upon accepted engineering
standards.
   (B)   No person shall subdivide by deed, plat, plan, instrument of
conveyance or otherwise, any tract of land within the Village and no final plat
of land within the Village shall be approved except in conformity with the
provisions of this Subdivision and Site Construction Code and with the
provisions of the Zoning Code of the Village.
   (C)   No excavation of land or construction of any public or private
improvements shall take place or be commenced until the final plat is fully
accepted by the Village Council and it is in conformity with this Subdivision
and Site Construction Code and other applicable plans, specifications,
regulations and codes of the Village.
   (D)   No lot or land shall be sold from any plat until such plat has been
approved as herein required.
   (E)   The Planning Commission shall follow the land use recommendations of
the future land use plan of the village.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.107 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   These regulations shall be effective following adoption by the Village
Council and the Planning Commission and certification to the Recorders of
Fulton and Lucas Counties. Henceforth, any other regulations for the
subdivision and development of land previously adopted by the Village Council
and the Planning Commission shall be deemed to be repealed. These regulations
shall in no way affect any subdivisions having received preliminary approval by
the Planning Commission prior to the effective date; provided however, that no
changes to the preliminary plan as approved are introduced by the subdivider.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
ARTICLE 151.20
DEFINITIONS
   
151.201   Definitions and Rules of Interpretation.
   
151.202   Defined Words.
§ 151.201 DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   This
Article 151.20 includes definitions for words and phrases used in this
Subdivision and Site Construction Code, which are in addition to the
definitions and rules of interpretation set forth in
Chapter 150 Zoning Code, including §
150.114 Rules of Interpretation and
Article 150.90 Definitions. Any words or phrases used in
Chapter 151 that are not defined in
Article 150.90 or in §
152.202 below shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give these regulations the most reasonable application, as
determined by the Flood Plain Administrator.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.202 DEFINED WORDS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICANT. The owner(s) of land proposed to be subdivided, or his/her/their
representative who shall have express written authority to act on behalf of the
owner. Consent to subdivide or develop the land shall be required from the
legal owner of the premises.
   BIKEWAY. A pathway, usually separated from the roadway, designed
specifically to satisfy the physical requirements of bicycling.
   BLOCK. A piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways,
streets, streams, railroad rights-of-way or parks and the like, or a
combination thereof.
   COMMON AREA. Land in a subdivision or development area, with or without
structures, that is held in common ownership by the owners or occupants of the
dwellings or buildings in a subdivision or development area through a
homeowner’s association, community association, or other legal entity, or which
is owned by the individual members of a condominium association as tenants-in-
common. Also referred to as common land or common open space.
   CONCEPT PLAN. A preliminary presentation and documentation of a proposed
subdivision or site plan of sufficient accuracy to be used for the purpose of
discussion and comment by the Planning Commission.
   CONSTRUCTION PLANS. The maps, plans and drawings showing the specific
location and design of improvements to be installed in a proposed subdivision
in accordance with the requirements specified in these regulations.
   CURB. A vertical or sloping edge of a roadway.
   DEDICATION. The appropriation of land, or an easement therein, for the use
of the public and accepted for such use by or on behalf of the public.
   DRIVEWAY. A paved or unpaved area used for ingress or egress of vehicles,
allowing access from a street to a building, structure or other facility.
   EASEMENT. The right of a person to use common land or land owned by another
for a specific purpose, within which the owner of the property shall not erect
any permanent structures.
   FINAL PLAT. The final map, drawing or chart on which a developer’s plan of
the subdivision is presented to the Planning Commission for approval, and
which, if approved, will be submitted to the Recorder of Fulton or Lucas
County.
   FLOODPLAIN. The relatively flat area or low lands adjoining the channel of a
river, stream or watercourse, which has been or may be covered by flood waters,
more particularly that area designated by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency or other appropriate authority as a flood hazard area, as further
defined and regulated by
Chapter 152 Flood Damage Reduction Code.
   FUTURE LAND USE PLAN. A plan adopted by the Planning Commission which
indicates the general locations recommended for the various functional classes
of public works, places and structures and for the general physical development
of the village and includes any unit or part of such plan separately adopted
and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof.
   GROUND COVER. A planting of low-growing plants or sod that in time forms a
dense mat covering the area, preventing soil from being blown or washed away
and the growth of unwanted plants.
   GUTTER. A shallow channel usually set along a curb or the pavement edge of a
road for purposes of catching and carrying off runoff water.
   IMPROVEMENT. Any human-made, immovable item which becomes part of, placed
upon, or is affixed to, real estate, including but not limited to public and
private street pavement or resurfacing, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, walkways,
water lines, sewer lines, storm drains, street lights, street trees, flood
control and drainage facilities including storm water retention, detention and
water management controls, utility lines, landscaping and other related matters
normally associated with the development of raw land into building sites.
   ISLAND. In street design, a raised area, usually curbed, placed to guide
traffic and separate lanes, or used for landscaping, signing or lighting.
   LATERAL SEWERS. Pipes conducting sewage from individual buildings to larger
pipes called trunk or interceptor sewers that usually are located in street
rights-of-way.
   LOT. A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by plat,
subdivision or as otherwise permitted by law, to be used, developed or built
upon as a unit.
   LOT CONSOLIDATION. The consolidation of contiguous lots of record which are
under one ownership.
   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. A lot which fronts upon two parallel streets, or which
fronts upon two streets which do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot;
also referred to as a through-lot.
   LOT FRONTAGE. The length of the front lot line measured at the street right-
of-way line.
   LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT. The movement or relocation of one property line between
two or more existing adjacent parcels where the land taken from one parcel is
added to an adjacent parcel and where a greater or lesser number of parcels
than originally existed are not thereby created.
   MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE. Any security, such as a bond, check, or irrevocable
letter of credit, which may be required and accepted by a governmental agency
to ensure that necessary improvements will function as required for a specific
period of time.
   MAJOR SUBDIVISION. A subdivision of land, also known as a platted
subdivision, as defined in R.C. § 711.001(B).
   MINOR SUBDIVISION. A subdivision of land, also known as a lot split, as
defined in R.C. § 711.131, along an existing public street, not involving the
opening, widening or extension of any street or road, and involving no more
than five lots after the original tract has been completely subdivided.
   MONUMENT.
      (1)   TYPE A. A cylindrical concrete marker six inches in diameter and 30
inches in length with a one-quarter-inch iron rod cast at the central axis of
the cylinder. Such marker shall be placed in a vertical position with its top
being level with the surface of the surrounding ground.
      (2)   TYPE B. A cylindrical concrete marker as described under Type A
except that a machine type iron bolt (without nut) of one-inch diameter by 12
inches in length shall be placed in a vertical position with the head of the
bolt upward and level with the surface of the pavement. A point shall be marked
on the head of the bolt to indicate the exact point referred to on the final
plat.
   OFFICIAL MAP. The map established by the Planning Commission, such as a
Major Thoroughfare Plan showing the streets, highways and parks laid out,
adopted and established by law and any amendments, by the Planning Commission
or additions thereto resulting from the approval of subdivision plats by the
Planning Commission and the subsequent filing of such approved plats.
   OFFSITE. Located outside the lot lines of the lot in question but within the
property (of which the lot is a part) that is the subject of a development
application, or on a contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
   OWNER. Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, co-partnership,
corporation, trust or any other legal entity having sufficient proprietary
interest in the land sought to be subdivided and developed to commence and
maintain proceedings to subdivide and develop the same under this Subdivision
and Site Construction Code.
   PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE. Any security, such as a bond, check, or irrevocable
letter of credit, that may be accepted by a municipality as a guarantee that
the improvements required as a part of a development are satisfactorily
completed.
   PLAT. A map of a lot, parcel, subdivision or development area on which the
lines of each element are shown by accurate distances and bearings.
   PRELIMINARY PLAT. The preliminary map, drawing or chart indicating the
proposed layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the Planning Commission
for its consideration.
   PUBLIC OPEN SPACE. An open space area conveyed or otherwise dedicated to a
municipality, municipal agency, board of education, state or county agency, or
other public body for recreational or conservation proposes.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. All of the land included within an area which is dedicated,
reserved by deed or granted by easement for street purposes. Also, a strip of
land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk, railroad,
road, bikeway, electric transmission line, gas pipeline, water main, sanitary
or storm sewer main, shade trees or for another special use.
   SIDEWALK. A paved path provided for pedestrian use and usually located at
the side of a road within the right-of-way.
   STREET. Any vehicular way which:
      (1)   Is an existing state, county or municipal roadway;
      (2)   Is shown on a plat approved pursuant to law;
      (3)   Is approved by other official action; or
      (4)   Is shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the
County Recording Officer prior to the appointment of a Planning Board and the
grant to such Board of the power to review plats; and includes the land between
the street lines, whether improved or unimproved.
         (a)   ALLEY. A minor way which is used primarily for vehicular service
access to the back or the side of properties whose principal frontage is on
some other street.
         (b)   ARTERIAL STREET. A principal or heavy traffic street of
considerable continuity and used primarily as a traffic artery, also referred
to as a major street.
         (c)   COLLECTOR STREET. A street which carries traffic from minor
streets to arterial streets or major thoroughfares, including the principal
entrance streets of a residential development and principal streets for
circulation within such a development, also referred to as a secondary street.
         (d)   CUL-DE-SAC STREET. A street which connects with another street
at one end and dead end at the other end which allows space for the turning of
vehicles.
         (e)   HALF-STREET. A dedicated but unimproved street of half the
normal width, located on the perimeter of a parcel and intended for future
improvement.
         (f)   LOCAL STREET. A street primarily for access to abutting
residential properties and to serve local needs, also referred to as a minor
street.
         (g)   MARGINAL ACCESS STREET. A service street that runs parallel to a
higher order street which, for purposes of safety, provides access to abutting
properties and separation from through traffic. Street may be designed as a
residential access street or subcollector as anticipated daily traffic
dictates.
         (h)   STUB STREET. A portion of a street for which an extension has
been proposed and approved. Street may be permitted when development is phased
in over a period of time, but only if the street in its entirety has been
approved in the preliminary plan.
   STREET, PRIVATE. A local private way that provides vehicular access to more
than four residential structures, which is located in a recorded easement for
use by residents of the development in which the private way is located, which
shall be owned and maintained by an Association, management organization or
other private entity.
   STREET, PUBLIC. A public way that provides vehicular access to land, is
located in a right-of-way shown on the plat or other conveyance of dedication,
the dedication of which has been approved by the Swanton Village Council.
   SUBDIVIDER. Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, co-partnership,
corporation, trust or any other legal entity commencing proceedings under these
subdivision and site construction regulations to effect a subdivision of land
hereunder for himself, herself or for another.
   SUBDIVISION. The division of any parcel of land shown as a unit or as
contiguous units on the last preceding tax roll, into two or more parcels,
sites or lots, any one of which is less than five acres for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership, provided, however, that
the division or partition of land into parcels of more than five acres not
involving any new streets or easements of access, and the sale or exchange of
parcels between adjoining lot owners, where such sale or exchange of parcels
between adjoining lot owners, where such sale or exchange does not create
additional building sites, shall be exempted.
   VILLAGE ENGINEER. The engineer hired by the Village of Swanton.
   WYE. A Y-branch or Y-fitting. In a plumbing system, a branch in the shape of
the letter “Y”.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
ARTICLE 151.30
MAJOR SUBDIVISION PROCEDURES
   
151.301   Purpose.
   
151.302   Preapplication conference.
   
151.303   Concept plan.
   
151.304   Submission to State Highway Director.
   
151.305   Preliminary plat application filing.
   
151.306   Preliminary plat review and action.
   
151.307   Public hearing.
   
151.308   Technical design and construction plans.
   
151.309   Final plat application filing.
   
151.310   Final plat review and action.
   
151.311   Replats, subdivision vacations.
   
151.312   Specifications of documents to be submitted.
   
151.313   Preapplication conference documents.
   
151.314   Concept plan documents.
   
151.315   Preliminary plat application documents.
   
151.316   Technical design and construction plan documents.
   
151.317   Final plat documents.
   
151.318   Acceptance of streets.
   
151.319   Modifications approved by Planning Commission.
   
151.320   Revision of final plat after approval.
§ 151.301 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this article is to establish the procedures for Planning
Commission review and action on applications for major subdivisions as defined
by R.C. § 711.001 and elsewhere. The procedure is intended to provide orderly
and expeditious processing of such applications.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.302 PREAPPLICATION CONFERENCE.
   For the purpose of expediting applications and reducing subdivision and site
plan design and development costs, the subdivider is encouraged to meet with
the Village Zoning Administrator and Village Engineer prior to submitting a
preliminary plat. This pre-application conference is an opportunity for the
subdivider, Zoning Administrator, Village Engineer and other village officials
to informally discuss the purpose and effect of these regulations, the criteria
and standards contained herein; and to familiarize the developer with the
Village’s future land use plan, Zoning Code and Flood Damage Reduction Code,
and the drainage, sewerage and water systems for the village. It also provides
the Zoning Administrator and Village Engineer an opportunity to review the plan
and give recommendations to address some of the issues that otherwise would
become stipulations or comments in the preliminary plan stage.
   (A)   This step does not require a formal application, fee, or filing of the
plan.
   (B)   This step does not constitute formal acceptance of the subdivision
application. The official acceptance date of the subdivision application shall
be the date the Zoning Administrator accepts the preliminary plan of the
subdivision for consideration at a meeting.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.303 CONCEPT PLAN.
   (A)   In addition or as an alternative to the pre-application conference, at
the request of the applicant, the Planning Commission shall grant an informal
review of a concept plan for a development for which the applicant intends to
prepare and submit an application for development. The purpose of the concept
plan is for the Planning Commission to provide input in the formative stages of
subdivision and site plan design.
   (B)   Applicants seeking informal review of a concept plan shall submit a
sketch plan of the proposed subdivision containing the items specified in §
151.314.
   (C)   The applicant shall not be bound by any concept plan for which review
is requested, nor shall the Planning Commission be bound by any such review.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.304 SUBMISSION TO STATE HIGHWAY DIRECTOR.
   Before any plat is approved affecting any land within 300 feet of the
centerline of a proposed new highway or a highway for which changes are
proposed as described in the certification to local officials by the State
Highway Director of any land within a radius of 500 feet from the point of
intersection of said centerline with any public road or highway, the Commission
shall give notice, by registered or certified mail to the Highway Director. The
Commission shall not approve the plat for 120 days from the date the notice is
received by the Highway Director. If the Highway Director notifies the
Commission that he or she shall proceed to acquire the land needed, then the
Commission shall refuse to approve the plat. If the Highway Director notifies
the Commission that acquisition at this time is not in the public interest or
upon the expiration of the 120-day period or any extension thereof agreed upon
by the Highway Director and the property owner, the Commission shall, if the
plat is in conformance with all provisions of these regulations, approve the
plat.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.305 PRELIMINARY PLAT APPLICATION FILING.
   (A)   Application Filing Requirements. The subdivider shall apply in writing
on an application form for preliminary plat approval obtained from the Zoning
Administrator, and shall include the requisite number of plans, maps and other
required documentation. The application shall be prepared according to the
standards and the provisions of these regulations, including all documents
specified in §
151.315. The preliminary plat shall be considered officially filed on the date
that the completed application, together with all required copies and filing
fees, is received by the Zoning Administrator, and shall be so dated.
   (B)   Deposits and Fees. The subdivider shall be responsible for payment of
all deposits and fees at the time the application for a Preliminary Plat is
submitted. Failure to submit the required deposits, fees and payments with the
application shall be cause for the Zoning Administrator to stop further
progress of the review of the project. The application fee shall be in such
amount as determined by ordinance of Council. A schedule of filing fees shall
be posted in the Village Administrative Office. No application for preliminary
plat approval will be accepted without the total filing fee paid in full.
   (C)   Review by Zoning and Engineering. The Zoning Administrator and Village
Engineer shall review the submitted application to determine compliance with
all Village zoning, subdivision, land development and flood damage reduction
regulations. The Zoning Administrator and Village Engineer shall document their
approval or rejection and reasons for rejection of these documents. Required
documentation that is not properly submitted shall require the application
process time cycle to begin again.
   (D)   Application Filing Deadline. The applicant shall file an application
with the Zoning Administrator at least at least two weeks prior to the regular
Planning Commission meeting at which such application is to be considered.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.306 PRELIMINARY PLAT REVIEW AND ACTION.
   The Planning Commission shall review said application, which shall encompass
but not be limited to all plan design issues, recommendations, stipulations,
record requirements, agreements and covenants, surety and bond requirements and
other government agency approvals. The Planning Commission shall consider
options and may request further documentation and records as necessary.
   (A)   If the subdivision lot areas or uses do not conform with the existing
zoning classification, a petition to rezone must be submitted by the property
owner and acted upon by the Village Council prior to the consideration of a
preliminary plat.
   (B)   The Planning Commission shall approve or disapprove the preliminary
plat within 45 days after its submission to the Planning Commission.
   (C)   One print with the signature of the Chairperson of the Planning
Commission shall be returned to the applicant when the preliminary plat is
approved. Conditional approval, subject to changes marked on the print and/or
on any attachments thereto, may be granted by the Planning Commission.
   (D)   Approval of the preliminary plat by the Planning Commission shall
constitute authority for the subdivider to proceed with the preparation of the
technical design and construction plans and the final plat, and shall guarantee
that the terms under which the approval was granted will not be affected by
changes to these regulations.
   (E)   The approval of a preliminary plat shall be effective for a period of
12 months unless, upon application of the subdivider, the Planning Commission
grants an extension. Upon the grant of an extension or extensions, the
preliminary plat approval shall be valid for a maximum period of 36 months. If
a final plat has not been submitted within this time limit, the preliminary
plat must again be submitted to the Planning Commission for approval.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.307 PUBLIC HEARING.
   The Planning Commission may, on its own initiative or upon petition by a
citizen or neighboring property owner and prior to acting on a preliminary plat
of a subdivision, hold a public hearing thereon at such time and upon such
notice as the Commission may designate.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.308 TECHNICAL DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION PLANS.
   (A)   Prior to the filing of the final plat, the subdivider shall present to
the Village Zoning Administrator an application for technical design and
construction plan approval for all utilities and street improvements. All
documents required by §
151.316 must be submitted. The technical design and construction plans may be
submitted simultaneously with the preliminary plat or they may be submitted
subsequent to the approval of the preliminary plat.
   (B)   The Zoning Administrator shall forward copies of the technical design
and construction plans to such officials and agencies as may be necessary for
the purpose of study and recommendation. These shall include the Village
Engineer, the appropriate County Engineer or Sanitary Engineer or the
appropriate Board of Health.
   (C)   The technical design and construction plans shall be in conformance
with the previously approved preliminary plat and shall address all conditions
of preliminary plat approval.
   (D)   When a phasing plan has been approved as part of the preliminary plat,
technical design and construction plans for a subdivision may be submitted for
final plat approval in consecutive phases in accordance with the approved
phasing plan.
   (E)   Business and Industrial Requirements: The subdivider in a
nonresidential district shall present engineering drawings of structures,
improvements and detail the type of operation proposed on the premises. The
subdivider shall assure compliance with all business and industrial zoning
regulations. The subdivider shall indicate proposed service facilities,
retention systems, alleys and how screening, buffers and open space
requirements are used and positioned to assure harmonious conformance with
other neighboring development.
   (F)   After receipt of written reports from such officials and agencies, the
Commission shall determine whether the technical design and construction plans
shall be approved, approved with modification or disapproved. If disapproved,
the reasons for disapproval shall be stated in writing. The Commission shall
act on the technical design and construction plans within 45 days unless such
time is extended by agreement with the subdivider.
   (G)   No improvements or utilities shall be installed prior to approval of
the technical design and construction plans.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.309 FINAL PLAT APPLICATION FILING.
   (A)   An applicant requesting approval of a final plat shall submit to the
Zoning Administrator an application for final plat approval, accompanied by the
requisite number of copies of the final plat and other required documentation,
prepared in conformance with the requirements of §
151.317. The final plat shall have incorporated all changes or modifications to
the preliminary plat required by the Planning Commission, otherwise it shall
conform to the preliminary plat. The final plat may constitute only that
portion of the approved preliminary plat which the subdivider proposes to
record and develop at the time, provided that such portion conforms with all
requirements of these regulations.
   (B)   The final plat application shall be accompanied by a statement from
the Director of Public Works that the village is in receipt of as-built plans
showing all streets and utilities in exact location and elevation and
identifying those portions already installed and those to be installed. If a
performance guarantee is required by §
151.617, certification of compliance with those requirements shall also be
submitted.
   (C)   The final plat shall be considered officially filed on the date that
the completed application, together with all required copies and additional
information, is received by the Zoning Administrator, and shall be so dated.
   (D)   The final plat application shall be filed at least two weeks prior to
the regular Planning Commission meeting at which action is sought.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.310 FINAL PLAT REVIEW AND ACTION.
   (A)   The final plat and associated documentation shall be found to be in
conformance with the previously approved preliminary plat and construction
drawings.
   (B)   Association Agreements and Covenants. Prior to final plat approval,
the Planning Commission may require the subdivider to establish deed
restrictions, covenants and/or an association of property owners or homeowners
to ensure that capital improvements, conservation areas, buffers, common
ownership improvements and areas, easements, landscaping, public improvements,
public access area or way, public right-of-way, flood area, waterway,
parklands, natural features and reserve areas are maintained, protected, and
adequately funded at all times.
      (1)   The Village Solicitor shall review and approve such documents and
require the addition of provisions that are deemed necessary to protect the
Village and assure compliance.
      (2)   The Planning Commission shall audit and inspect these agreements,
easements, and covenants to ensure the agreements are maintained, conditions
sustained, and maintenance programs are funded properly.
   (C)   The Commission shall approve or disapprove the final plat within 45
days after it is filed. Failure of the Commission to act upon the final plat
within such time shall be deemed as approval of the plat. If the plat is
disapproved, the grounds for disapproval shall be stated in the records of the
Planning Commission, and a copy of said record shall be forwarded to the
subdivider. The Planning Commission shall not disapprove the final plat if the
developer has met all of the requirements of the Commission and has proceeded
in accordance with the conditions and standards specified in the preliminary
plat.
   (D)   The subdivider shall be notified of the final action of the Planning
Commission, and the subdivider shall record the final plat with the appropriate
County Recorder within 60 days after the date of approval; otherwise, the plan
shall be considered void.
   (E)   Two full size copies of the final plat as recorded shall be submitted
to the Village Zoning Administrator and Village Engineer within ten (10)
working days of such recording.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.311 REPLATS, SUBDIVISION VACATIONS.
   A subdivider proposing the (major) resubdivision of a plat previously
recorded in the office of the County Recorder shall follow the same procedure
as for a new plat, except that a preliminary map may not be necessary if
changes in street alignment or like changes are not included in the proposal.
Proposals for subdivision vacations/abandonments shall meet the requirements of
the Ohio Revised Code, including R.C. §§ 711.17 to 711.23, inclusive. Plats of
street openings, widenings and extensions; common area for common use by
owners, occupants or lease holders; and easements for the extension and
maintenance of public sewer, storm sewer drainage or other public utilities
shall have the same plat requirements as stated above.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.312 SPECIFICATIONS OF DOCUMENTS TO BE SUBMITTED.
   (A)   The documents to be submitted are intended to provide the Planning
Commission and other review authorities with sufficient information and data to
ensure compliance with all municipal codes and specifications and ensure that
the proposed development meets the design and improvement standards contained
in these regulations.
   (B)   In specific cases and for documented reasons, the Planning Commission
may waive the submission of a particular document. The reasons for the waiver
shall be indicated in the minutes of the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.313 PREAPPLICATION CONFERENCE DOCUMENTS.
   No specific documents are required for a preapplication conference, but
sufficient information to evaluate the development proposal should be provided.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.314 CONCEPT PLAN DOCUMENTS.
   An applicant seeking informal review of a concept plan shall submit a sketch
plan containing the following information:
   (A)   The name of the proposed subdivision, the scale of the sketch plan, a
north arrow and the date of the sketch;
   (B)   The names, addresses and phone numbers of each owner and developer
involved;
   (C)   The layout and acreage of streets, residential lots, common area and
any other nonresidential land uses within the subdivision;
   (D)   The location of all public utilities in the proposed subdivision, if
available, or the location of the nearest sources for water and public
facilities for the disposal of sewage and storm water;
   (E)   The proposed subdivision in relation to existing community facilities,
thoroughfares and other transportation modes, residential developments; and
   (F)   Existing natural and human-made features such as soil types, drainage,
vegetation, contours and utilities in the area.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.315 PRELIMINARY PLAT APPLICATION DOCUMENTS.
   An applicant seeking review of a preliminary plat shall submit the following
required documents:
   (A)   A completed preliminary plat application and preliminary plat
checklist, as provided by the Zoning Administrator, together with all
attachments required on the application;
   (B)   A preliminary plat prepared by a registered engineer or surveyor and
drawn at a scale not less than 100 feet to the inch on one or more sheets not
larger than 24 by 36 inches in size. The preliminary plat shall contain the
following information:
      (1)   Proposed name of the subdivision. The name shall not duplicate, be
the same in spelling, or alike in pronunciation with any other recorded
subdivision;
      (2)   Location by section, town, range, township, county and state;
      (3)   Names and addresses of the subdivider, owner and surveyor;
      (4)   Scale of the plan, north point and date;
      (5)   Boundaries of the subdivision indicated by a heavy line and the
approximate acreage;
      (6)   Location, widths and names of existing or platted streets, railroad
rights-of-way, easements, parks, permanent buildings, and section and
corporation lines within or adjacent to the tract;
      (7)   Existing sewers, water mains, culverts or other underground
facilities and open drainage ditches in and within close proximity to the
tract, indicating size, depth, flow and location;
      (8)   Names of adjacent subdivisions and owners of adjoining parcels of
nonsubdivided land;
      (9)   Zoning districts;
      (10)   Existing contours at two-foot intervals reference to sea level
datum;
      (11)   Wooded areas, power transmission poles and lines, and any other
significant items not otherwise listed here;
      (12)   Vicinity sketch;
      (13)   Layout of proposed streets, their proposed names and widths, and
the widths of proposed alleys, crosswalks and easements;
      (14)   Layout, numbers, dimensions and area of lots or parcels with
appropriate designations;
      (15)   Proposed building setback lines, showing dimensions;
      (16)   Location of sidewalks and ramps;
      (17)   Location and design of all street lights;
      (18)   Style of driveways in residential subdivisions;
      (19)   Diagram of the layout of the proposed sewer and water facilities,
if any;
      (20)   Diagram of proposed drainage development including streets and
lots with indication of their outlet into existing facilities;
      (21)   In critical areas, high water levels and areas subject to flooding
are to be indicated;
      (22)   All parcels of land intended to be dedicated or temporarily
reserved for public use, or to be reserved in the deeds for the common use of
property owners in the subdivision, with the purpose, condition or limitation
of such reservation indicated; and
      (23)   Screen planting plan, if any.
   (C)   A statement of the proposed use of lots, stating the type of
residential buildings and the number of proposed dwelling units, and/or the
type of business or industry proposed shall be submitted.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.316 TECHNICAL DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION PLAN DOCUMENTS.
   An applicant seeking review of technical design and construction plans shall
submit the following required documents, prepared by a professional engineer or
professional surveyor registered in the state of Ohio, and drawn at a scale not
less than 50 feet to the inch on one or more sheets not larger than 24 by 36
inches in size, in addition to the application for technical design and
construction plan review:
   (A)   Profiles showing existing and proposed elevations along centerlines of
all roads. Where a proposed road intersects an existing road or roads, the
elevation along the centerline of the existing road or roads within 100 feet of
the intersections shall be shown. Approximate radii of all curves, lengths of
tangents and central angles on all streets shall be shown;
   (B)   Plans and profiles, construction details and quantities, showing the
locations and typical cross-section of:
      (1)   Street pavements including curbs and gutters, sidewalks, drainage
easements, rights-of-way, manholes and catch basins;
      (2)   The location of street lighting standards, street signs and
subdivision identification signs;
      (3)   The location, size and invert elevations of existing and proposed
sanitary sewers, storm water drains, and fire hydrants, showing connection to
any existing or proposed utility systems; and
      (4)   The exact location of all water, gas or other underground utilities
or structures.
   (C)   Location, size, elevation and other appropriate description of any
existing facilities or utilities, including, but not limited to:
      (1)   Existing streets, sewers, drains, water mains, easements, water
bodies, streams, swamps, railroads, buildings and other pertinent features; and
      (2)   The water elevations of adjoining lakes or streams at the date of
the survey, and the approximate high water elevations, referred to the U.S.G.S.
datum. If the subdivision borders a stream or open ditch the distances and
bearings of a meander line established not less than 20 feet from the ordinary
high water mark of such waterway shall be shown.
   (D)   All specifications and references required by the village’s
construction standards and specifications, including a site grading plan for
the entire subdivision; and
   (E)   Additional plans, specifications, profiles or details necessary to
ensure compliance with the requirements of these regulations.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.317 FINAL PLAT DOCUMENTS.
   An applicant seeking review of a final plat shall submit the following
required documents:
   (A)   A completed final plat application and final plat checklist, as
provided in Appendix I of these regulations, together with all attachments
required on the application;
   (B)   A final plat prepared by a professional engineer or professional
surveyor registered in the state of Ohio and drawn at a scale not less than 100
feet to the inch (1"=100'). A final plat of a subdivision located in Fulton
County shall be submitted on one or more sheets 18 by 24 inches in size. A
final plat of a subdivision located in Lucas County shall be submitted on one
or more sheets 20 by 30 inches in size. The final plat shall be clearly and
legibly drawn in ink on mylar. The final plat shall contain the following
information:
      (1)   Name of the subdivision;
      (2)   Location by section, town, range, township, county, state;
      (3)   The scale, date and north point;
      (4)   All plat boundaries with length of courses in feet and hundredths
and bearings to half minutes. When required by the Village Engineer, all
calculations and filed notes shall be submitted;
      (5)   Bearings and distances to the nearest established street lines,
section corners or other recognized permanent monuments, which shall be
accurately described on the plat;
      (6)   Village, township, county or section lines accurately tied to the
subdivision by distances and bearings;
      (7)   Location, names and widths of streets within the plat;
      (8)   Length of all arcs, chord bearings, radii, internal angles, points
of curvature and tangent bearings;
      (9)   All easements for rights-of-way providing for public services or
utilities, and any limitations of such easements;
      (10)   All lot numbers and lines, with accurate dimensions in feet and
hundredths, and with bearings or angles to street and alley or crosswalk lines;
      (11)   Accurate location of all monuments;
      (12)   Accurate outlines of any areas to be dedicated or temporarily
reserved for public use with the purpose indicated thereon;
      (13)   Building setback lines, with dimension; and
      (14)   When lots are located on a curve or when side lot lines are at
angles other than 90 degrees, the width at the building line shall be shown.
   (C)   A notation of any deed restrictions or covenants shall be included on
the final plat.
   (D)   The required certifications, where appropriate, shall be affixed to
the final plat.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.318 ACCEPTANCE OF STREETS.
   (A)   As-Built-Documents. Upon completion of the subdivision, “as built
plans” based on field construction, observations and supported by Village
inspection records shall be submitted by the subdivider to the Village Engineer
for approval.
      (1)   Field construction materials are required to be properly compacted
and compaction tested by a certified testing entity.
      (2)   A report of the test results shall be submitted to the Village
Zoning Administrator.
   (B)   Ordinance Requirement. The Village Engineer shall not approve a plat
constituting an acceptance of a street for public use by the Village as
provided in R.C. § 711.091 until such time as the Village Council has enacted
an ordinance accepting such street or streets for public use by the Village or
other entity.
   (C)   Prior Resolution of Costs. All financial guarantees, costs, fees and
deposits owed to Swanton Village as required by this Subdivision and Site
Construction Code shall be paid in full before the Village Council may enact an
ordinance to accept any street.
   (D)   Application to Village Council. The subdivider shall apply to the
Village Council for final approval of the As-Built plat and Acceptance of
Streets. The subdivider shall submit to the Zoning Administrator twelve (12)
copies of the approved As-Built plat and other necessary documentation twenty
(20) days in advance of the meeting of the Village Council where it shall be
considered.
      (1)   The subdivider shall provide a certification by the Village
Engineer stating the subdivider has designed and installed all improvements in
accordance with the provisions of these subdivision rules and any conditions
set forth by the Planning Commission and the Village Council in their approval
of the subdivision plans.
      (2)   The subdivider shall provide a signed and notarized certification
stating all improvements have been designed and installed in accordance with
the provisions of these regulations, and any conditions set forth by the
Planning Commission and the Village Council in their prior approval of the
subdivision plans. The certification shall further state the offering of
dedication of streets, rights-of-way, conservation areas, and any sites for
public use or reserved by deed covenants for public or common use by property
owners.
      (3)   The subdivider shall provide documentation to the Village Council
which shall include a Title Commitment in a form and an amount that shall be to
the satisfaction of the Village Solicitor to insure deeds and titles to all
open land, dedicated lands, and rights-of-way are proper and shall be recorded.
The subdivider shall provide for the payment of fees, administrative costs,
certifications and insurances associated with all street acceptance activities.
      (4)   Subdivider shall provide certification by the Design Engineer of
record, stating that the on-site improvements have been built in accordance
with the original design specifications.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.319 MODIFICATIONS APPROVED BY PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   According to R.C. §§ 711.09(C) and 711.101, the Village Planning
Commission may modify the requirements of this Subdivision and Site
Construction Code in specific cases where unusual topographical or other
exceptional conditions, including but not limited to characteristics of
surrounding development, require such modifications, or in the case of
improvements, where unusual or exceptional factors or conditions require such
modifications.
      (1)   The Village Planning Commission may permit such modification when
it determines that such relief does not violate the intent of these
regulations, protects surrounding properties and will not be detrimental to the
public interest.
      (2)   Under no circumstances shall a modification be granted under this
section to any requirements of the zoning code.
      (3)   In granting a modification, the Village Planning Commission may
require such conditions as will, in its judgment, substantially secure the
objectives of the standards or requirements of these regulations.
      (4)   An application for any such modification shall be submitted in
writing by the subdivider for the consideration of the Village Planning
Commission. The application shall state fully the grounds for the modification
requested and all the facts relied upon by the applicant.
   (B)   Appeal of Planning Commission Waiver: The decision of the Planning
Commission may be appealed by petition of any Swanton Village resident or
property owner to the Village Council. Such petition may be filed at any time
prior to the endorsement of the Final Plat by the Village Council. A reversal
of a Planning Commission recommendation shall require a 3/4 vote of the Village
Council.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.320 REVISION OF FINAL PLAT AFTER APPROVAL.
   No changes, erasures, modifications or revisions shall be made to any final
plat of a subdivision after approval by Village Council and an endorsement is
made in writing on a final plat, unless that final plat is first resubmitted
and the changes approved by the Planning Commission and Village Council, except
that minor technical adjustments or corrections that do not significantly
change the plan as approved may be made with the written combined approval of
the Village Solicitor, Engineer and Mayor. Such approved changes shall be
distributed to the Planning Commission and the Village Council.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
ARTICLE 151.40
MINOR SUBDIVISION AND LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT PROCEDURES
   
151.401   Purpose.
   
151.402   Administrative waiver of plat.
   
151.403   Appeal by applicant.
   
151.404   Application.
   
151.405   Specifications of documents to be submitted.
   
151.406   Review criteria.
   
151.407   Lot line adjustment.
   
151.408   Lot consolidation.
§ 151.401 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this article is to establish the procedure for Planning
Commission review and action on applications for minor subdivisions as defined
by R.C. §§ 711.001 and 711.131 and §
151.202 of these regulations. The procedure is intended to avoid the necessity
of the platting procedures in certain situations.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.402 ADMINISTRATIVE WAIVER OF PLAT.
   (A)   Administrative waiver of a minor subdivision without the necessity of
the platting procedure may be granted by the Village Planning Commission or its
designated representative(s) if the proposed division of a parcel of land meets
all of the following conditions:
      (1)   The proposed subdivision is located along an existing public road
and involves no opening, widening or extension of any street or road, and in
the case of residential lots, does not involve an easement of access;
      (2)   No more than five lots are involved after the original parcel has
been completely subdivided;
      (3)   The proposed subdivision is not contrary to applicable subdivision
or zoning regulations; and
      (4)   The physical characteristics of the property are suitable for
building sites.
   (B)   The Planning Commission or its designee shall, within seven working
days after submission, notify the subdivider of the administrative waiver of
plat decision and of the next scheduled Planning Commission meeting, at which
time the application shall be reviewed by the Commission for compliance with
all applicable subdivision and zoning regulations.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.403 APPEAL BY APPLICANT.
   An applicant who has been denied administrative waiver of plat may, within
30 days of the denial, file an appeal with the Planning Commission. Within 30
days of the appeal filing, the Planning Commission shall review the action and
affirm or reverse the administrative action. Waiver of plat shall be given only
if all applicable subdivision, zoning, drainage and health requirements have
been met. Modification to any requirement of the zoning code shall be reviewed
as a variance in accordance with
Article 150.69.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.404 APPLICATION.
   (A)   An application for waiver of plat of the minor subdivision shall be
submitted on the form available from the Zoning Administrator. The completed
application must be submitted along with the minor subdivision plan and other
required supplementary information, as specified in §
151.405 of these regulations.
   (B)   The application for minor subdivision waiver of plat must be
accompanied by a filing fee, as established by the Village Council, and posted
in the Municipal Building. No application for minor subdivision waiver of plat
will be accepted without the total filing fee due.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.405 SPECIFICATIONS OF DOCUMENTS TO BE SUBMITTED.
   (A)   The subdivider shall submit a minor subdivision plan, prepared by a
registered professional surveyor, and containing the following information:
      (1)   Name of the subdivider; location by section, range and township, or
by parcel number; date; north arrow; scale; and acreage to the nearest
hundredths of an acre;
      (2)   Abutting streets; and
      (3)   The seal of the registered professional surveyor who prepared the
minor subdivision plan.
   (B)   In addition, any of the following information may be required by the
Planning Commission on the basis of the characteristics of the subject
property:
      (1)   If a sewage treatment system other than a connection to the public
sewer system is proposed, a statement from village authorities that such sewage
treatment system is permitted;
      (2)   Approval by the appropriate Health Department if on-site sewage
disposal systems are proposed;
      (3)   Lot grading and drainage plan, illustrating a plan for the handling
of surface and subsurface drainage, showing proposed finished grade elevations,
indicating the location of all proposed structures and driveways; the type,
size, location and outlet of all existing and proposed drainage systems;
swales; easements; and the proposed ground cover;
      (4)   Existing buildings, utilities and easements if applicable;
      (5)   Spot elevations;
      (6)   One-hundred-year floodplain elevations and delineations; and
      (7)   Other information as deemed necessary by the designated
representative of the Planning Commission in order to ensure the creation of
adequate building sites and to promote the public health, safety and welfare.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.406 REVIEW CRITERIA.
   The application for minor subdivision shall be approved if it complies with
the following.
   (A)   The proposed division of land must have frontage along an existing
improved public street and involve no opening, widening or extension of any
street or public utility. The right-of-way width at the end of a right-of-way
meant for future extension of the right-of- way does not constitute frontage
along an existing improved public street. If the installation of any of the
improvements described in this Subdivision and Site Construction Code are
needed for future construction on the lots, the proposed division shall be
reviewed as a major subdivision.
   (B)   The proposed division must be properly integrated with adjoining
developments or could be properly coordinated with the subdivision and
extension of streets to adjoining land.
   (C)   The proposed division complies with the planning principles and other
sections of this Subdivision and Site Construction Code, the Zoning Code and
other Codes and plans of the Village, or the owner has received the necessary
variances. Verification of said variance shall be provided to the Zoning
Administrator prior to approval.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.407 LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT.
   (A)   An application for a lot line adjustment as defined in this code and
not otherwise classified as a subdivision shall include a metes and bounds
legal description and a survey drawing and be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator for administrative review and approval.
   (B)   The proposed lot line adjustment shall result in parcels that comply
with all applicable zoning, subdivision and building requirements determined by
the Zoning Administrator and Village Engineer.
   (C)   Within seven (7) working days after submission, the Zoning
Administrator shall make a determination.
      (1)   If the application conforms to §
151.407(B), then the Zoning Administrator shall approve and stamp the deed(s)
for the lot line adjustment with an approved stamp.
      (2)   If the application does not conform to §
151.407(B), then the Zoning Administrator shall not approve the application and
shall state the conditions that must be complied with before it will be
approved.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.408 LOT CONSOLIDATION.
   The purpose of the lot consolidation shall be for planning and building
purposes. The lot consolidation shall comply with all applicable zoning,
subdivision, and other land use controls as deemed necessary by the Zoning
Administrator.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
ARTICLE 151.50
SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS
   
151.501   Purpose.
   
151.502   Site design standards.
   
151.503   Planned unit developments encouraged.
   
151.504   Blocks.
   
151.505   Residential development lot design.
   
151.506   Commercial and industrial development lot design.
   
151.507   Public open space and recreation.
   
151.508   Landscaping.
   
151.509   Street names.
   
151.510   Circulation system design.
   
151.511   Commercial street design.
   
151.512   Industrial street design.
   
151.513   Utility and drainage easements.
§ 151.501 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this article is to establish standards for subdivision layout
and improvements design that will create functional and attractive
developments, minimize adverse impacts and ensure that proposed subdivisions
will be an asset to the village. To promote this purpose, the subdivision shall
conform to the following standards, which are designed to result in a well
planned community without adding unnecessarily to development costs.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.502 SITE DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   Design of the development shall take into consideration all existing
local and regional plans for the municipality and the surrounding community.
   (B)   To the maximum extent practicable, development shall be located to
preserve the natural features of the site, to avoid areas of environmental
sensitivity, to minimize negative impacts and alteration of natural features
and to preserve historically significant structures and sites.
   (C)   Development shall be designed to avoid construction on steep slopes in
excess of 20% as measured over a ten-foot interval unless appropriate
engineering measures concerning slope stability, erosion and resident safety
are taken into consideration.
   (D)   The development shall be laid out to avoid adversely affecting ground
water and aquifer recharge; to reduce cut and fill; to avoid unnecessary
impervious cover; to prevent flooding; to provide adequate access to lots and
sites; and to mitigate adverse effects for shadow, noise, odor, traffic,
drainage and utilities on neighboring properties.
   (E)   Variations, exceptions and/or modifications of these regulations may
be made by the Planning Commission in specific cases where it is deemed that
unusual topographical or other exceptional conditions require such modification
or adjustment of these regulations, or for special developments of rental units
or new concepts of solar orientation or other methods of platting, provided
that such plats are self-contained and do not encroach unfavorably on or
interfere with the normal development of abutting properties.
   (F)   If the Planning Commission finds that land proposed to be subdivided
is unsuitable for development due to flooding, inadequate drainage, topography,
inadequate water supply, inadequate sanitary sewage disposal, schools,
transportation facilities or other such conditions which may endanger health,
life or property; and if from investigations conducted by various public
agencies concerned, it is determined that in the best interest of the public,
the land should not be developed for the purpose proposed, the Planning
Commission shall not approve the land for subdivision.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.503 PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS ENCOURAGED.
   The planned residential development (PRD) approach to development is
encouraged by the Planning Commission through use of the Planned Residential
Development (PRD) Overlay set forth in
Article 150.23 of the Zoning Code. These subdivision and site construction
regulations may be modified by the degree necessary to accomplish the
objectives and standards required by the planned development of a PRD
residential subdivision, in accordance with the provisions of the Zoning Code.
Nothing within this section, however, shall exempt the developer from the
requirements of subdivision plat approval as specified in
Article 151.30 Major Subdivision Procedures of these regulations. All planned
residential developments are subject to approval by the Planning Commission and
Village Council.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.504 BLOCKS.
   (A)   Blocks shall be designed to accommodate lots of a size and character
required for the zoning district in which the development is located and to
provide convenient circulation, service and safety on boundary streets. The
blocks shall be designed so that the rear lot lines shall coincide with
drainage courses, railroads and divisions in land uses.
   (B)   The maximum length of blocks shall be 1,320 feet. The Planning
Commission may require a crosswalk at approximately the center of the block in
blocks that exceed 900 feet in length.
   (C)   The width of blocks shall be sufficient to provide for an ultimate
development of two tiers of lots between streets and eliminate double frontage
lots. A single tier of lots, having a greater depth than the required minimum,
may be required to separate residential development from major or arterial
streets, adjoining nonresidential land uses, or unusual topographic or natural
features. An easement of at least ten feet in width for screening, which shall
not be traversed by vehicles, may be required along the lots abutting such a
major or arterial street or nonresidential land use.
   (D)   Where all or part of a subdivision is adjacent to or in the vicinity
of a primary or secondary street, the greater dimension of blocks shall
generally parallel the primary or secondary streets to avoid unnecessary
ingress and egress.
   (E)   Blocks for multi-family residential, commercial or industrial uses
shall be adequate to accommodate the building sites and provide the yards,
service drives, off-street parking and other required facilities.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.505 RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT LOT DESIGN.
   (A)   The lot arrangement and design shall be such that all lots provide
satisfactory and desirable building sites, properly related to topography and
the character of the surrounding development.
   (B)   Each lot shall conform to or exceed the requirements of these
regulations and the zoning requirements for the district in which it is located
and the use for which it is intended.
   (C)   All side lines of lots shall be at right angles to straight street
lines and radial to curved street lines, except where the Planning Commission
determines that a variation to this rule provides a better street and lot
layout.
   (D)   Lots with double frontage shall be avoided except where the Planning
Commission determines that double frontage lots are essential to provide
separation of residential development from arterial streets or nonresidential
land uses, as provided in §
151.504(C) of these regulations.
   (E)   Corner residential lots shall have extra width sufficient to maintain
building lines on both streets, as required by the Zoning Code.
   (F)   All lots shall abut on a dedicated street.
   (G)   Utility easements should generally follow rear lot lines, where it is
not practicable to install utilities within the road right-of-way, and provide
continuous easement to public ways.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.506 COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT LOT DESIGN.
   (A)   A commercial subdivision may show lots which need not conform to any
minimum width or area, except those required in the zoning ordinance, but such
subdivisions shall show the location within which buildings may be erected and
the area that is to be reserved for off-street parking and service areas.
   (B)   The location for vehicular movements between the subdivision and
adjacent streets shall be indicated, and restrictions shall be recorded upon
the plat which will restrict such vehicular movement to the location shown on
the plat.
   (C)   Easements may be required providing for vehicular movements through
parking areas and to and from service areas, as well as easements which can be
improved as buffer areas wherever the area adjoins property zoned for
residential use. The installation of plantings, walls, fences or other
improvements that will assure a satisfactory buffer or protective screen within
such easement may be required.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.507 PUBLIC OPEN SPACE AND RECREATION.
   (A)   Where the subdivision contains a street, park, school or other public
area which is shown upon the future land use plan as intended for public
ownership, all or part of such area shall either be dedicated to the proper
public agency or it shall be reserved for acquisition, within a specified
period by purchase or other means and an agreement shall be entered into
between the subdivider and the proper public agency regarding the time and
method of acquisition and the cost thereof, or an agreement shall be made by
the appropriate public agency upon an alternate location that is satisfactory
to the Planning Commission.
   (B)   Due regard shall be shown for the preservation of outstanding natural
and cultural features such as scenic spots, watercourses, historic sites and
substantial stands of trees.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.508 LANDSCAPING.
   (A)   Reasonable landscaping should be provided at site entrances, in public
areas and adjacent to buildings and in compliance with the requirements of the
zoning code for the type of development. The type and amount of landscaping
required shall be allowed to vary with the type of development.
   (B)   The plant or other landscaping material that best serves the intended
function shall be selected. Landscaping materials shall be appropriate for the
local environment, soil conditions and availability of water. The impact of the
proposed landscaping plan at various time intervals shall also be considered.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.509 STREET NAMES.
   Names of new streets shall not duplicate or nearly duplicate those of
existing or platted streets, irrespective of the use of the suffix “street”,
“avenue”, “circle”, “boulevard”, “drive”, etc. When a new street is a direct
extension of an existing street, the name should remain the same. Street names
shall be subject to the approval of the Village Planning Commission or Village
Administrator with review and recommendations from other governmental agencies
such as law enforcement and emergency response departments.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.510 CIRCULATION SYSTEM DESIGN.
   (A)   The road system shall be designed to permit the safe, efficient and
orderly movement of traffic to meet, but not exceed, the needs of the present
or future population to be served; to have a simple and logical pattern; to
respect natural features and topography; and to present an attractive
streetscape.
   (B)   In residential subdivisions, the road system shall be designed to
serve the needs of the neighborhood and to discourage use by through traffic.
      (1)   Public Streets. Publicly dedicated streets shall be required for
the following:
         (a)   For access to all sublots within the residential subdivision
that are designed as a part of a standard detached single-family subdivision.
         (b)   For major through streets in any residential subdivision that
connect two existing public streets, or that are intended to provide a future
continuing street system beyond the project boundaries, and which are expected
to accommodate pass-through traffic going to and from adjacent areas.
      (2)   Private Streets. Streets that are not otherwise required to be
public streets pursuant to Division (B)(1) above may be permitted to be private
streets in compliance with the following regulations:
         (a)   A private street shall not be planned or expected to be extended
to serve property outside the subdivision.
         (b)   The applicant shall demonstrate to the reasonable satisfaction
of the Planning Commission that the private streets will be properly controlled
and maintained in perpetuity by a Homeowners Association or other means
acceptable to the Planning Commission.
         (c)   All elements of a private street shall be constructed in
accordance with the construction standards/street section requirements set
forth for public streets in the Subdivision Improvement Requirements.
   (C)   The pedestrian system shall be located as required for safety and
shall meet all applicable village ordinances. In conventional developments,
walks shall be placed parallel to and along both sides of all streets, with
exceptions permitted to preserve natural features or to provide visual
interest. In planned unit developments, walks may be placed away from the road
system, but they may also be required parallel to the street for safety
reasons.
   (D)   Bikeways, greenways, hiking trails or other alternative pedestrian
linkages should be provided where a connection to an existing system is readily
available.
   (E)   New streets shall be a continuation of existing streets or provide a
minimum jog of 120 feet from the existing street alignment.
   (F)   Permanent dead-end streets shall not be permitted. Temporary dead-end
streets, or stub streets, shall be permitted only as part of a continuing
street plan, and only if a temporary turnaround satisfactory to the Planning
Commission in design is provided and provisions for maintenance, removal and
ultimate extension are advanced. Temporary dead-end streets longer than 200
feet shall not be permitted. Where temporary dead-end streets are permitted,
all requirements of §
151.605 shall be satisfied.
   (G)   Cul-de-sac streets shall be not be over 600 feet in length and the
terminal shall be circular in area, with no center island, with a minimum
diameter of 100 feet, provided, however, that in exceptional circumstances the
Planning Commission may approve different arrangements.
   (H)   The street and alley arrangement shall be such as not to cause a
hardship to owners of adjoining property when they plat their own land and seek
to provide convenient access to it, and shall further the development of a
coherent neighborhood street pattern in the vicinity of the subdivision.
Subdividers are encouraged to leave open space in such areas as may provide
future street rights-of-way for new or extended streets on to adjoining
properties.
   (I)   Dedication of half-streets shall not be accepted unless exceptional
circumstances are found by the Planning Commission to justify the same. Where
there exists a dedicated or platted half-street or alley adjacent to the tract
being subdivided, the other half shall be platted if deemed necessary by the
Planning Commission.
   (J)   Alleys shall not be used in residential subdivisions except when
deemed necessary by the Planning Commission to meet unusual conditions.
   (K)   Frontage on high volume traffic ways shall be provided with parallel
service streets, or buffering as provided in §
151.504 of these regulations, or such other means of minimizing access as may
be appropriate to the conditions.
   (L)   The angle of intersection between minor streets and major streets
should not vary by more than ten degrees from a right angle. All other streets
should intersect each other as near to a right angle as possible and no
intersection of streets at angles of less than 60 degrees shall be permitted.
   (M)   Access restriction controlling ingress and egress to streets may be
required by the Planning Commission to minimize points of intersection and to
relieve congestion at intersections. Direct access to streets within 600 feet
of a major intersection shall not be provided except where it is the only
access to property and in such cases should be avoided whenever possible and in
all cases will be limited in number.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.511 COMMERCIAL STREET DESIGN.
   (A)   Streets serving business developments and accessory parking areas
shall be planned to connect with arterial streets so as not to generate traffic
on local streets. The intersections of driveways from parking areas with
arterial or collector streets shall be located so as to cause the least
possible interference with traffic movement on the streets, and shall be
located not less than 100 feet from the intersection of an arterial or
collector street with any other street, and shall be spaced not less than 200
feet from each other. The Commission may require marginal access streets to
provide maximum safety and convenience.
   (B)   Alleys are required in the rear of all commercial lots if no other
provisions are made for adequate service access or for parking. The rights-of-
way for such alleys shall be not less than 20 feet and dead-end alleys shall
not be permitted.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.512 STREET DESIGN.
   (A)   Collector streets for industrial subdivisions shall be planned to
serve industrial areas exclusively and shall connect with arterial streets so
that no industrial traffic will be directed into any residential streets. The
intersections of service streets from parking areas with arterial or collector
streets shall be not less than 100 feet from the intersection of the arterial
or collector street with any other street. Streets shall be planned to extend
to the boundaries of any adjoining land planned for industry, except in the
case of severe physical conditions or where the Planning Commission finds such
extension is not in accord with the approved future land use plan of the area.
   (B)   Alleys are required in the rear of all industrial lots if no other
provisions are made for adequate service access or for parking. The rights-of-
way for such alleys shall be not less than 20 feet and dead-end alleys shall
not be permitted.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.513 UTILITY AND DRAINAGE EASEMENTS.
   (A)   Easements of at least 15 feet in width centered along rear and/or side
lot lines shall be provided for sanitary sewers, gas mains, waterlines and
electric lines or other utilities where it is not practicable to locate said
utilities within the road right-of-way. Easements of greater width may be
required along or across lots where necessary for the extension of main sewers
or other utilities, where both water and sewer lines are located in the same
easement, or where the Planning Commission feels that such widths are necessary
to provide adequate access.
   (B)   Whenever any stream or important surface drainage course is located in
the area being subdivided, the subdivider shall provide an adequate easement
along each side of the stream for the purpose of widening, deepening,
relocating, improving or protecting the stream for drainage or recreational
use.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
ARTICLE 151.60
IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
   
151.601   Purpose.
   
151.602   Minimum Improvements.
   
151.603   Grading.
   
151.604   Erosion Control.
   
151.605   Streets.
   
151.606   Street Lighting.
   
151.607   Sidewalks.
   
151.608   Residential Parking.
   
151.609   Water Supply.
   
151.610   Fire Protection.
   
151.611   Sanitary Sewers.
   
151.612   Storm Water Management.
   
151.613   Monuments.
   
151.614   Telephone, Electric and Other Utilities.
   
151.615   Oversize and Offsite Improvements.
   
151.616   Utility Line Extensions.
   
151.617   Improvement Guarantees.
§ 151.601 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this article is to establish standards for required
improvements design and installation that will create functional and attractive
developments, minimize adverse impacts and ensure that proposed subdivisions
will be an asset to the village. To promote this purpose, all subdivision
improvements shall conform to the following standards which are designed to
result in a well planned community without adding unnecessarily to development
costs.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.602 MINIMUM IMPROVEMENTS.
   All plats and subdivisions of land located within the corporate limits of
the village shall conform to the rules and regulations contained herein as
adopted by the Village Council and/or the Planning Commission, and the
subdivider shall provide, construct, install and pay for the minimum
improvements required by the village and specified herein.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.603 GRADING.
   Prior to the granting of final plat approval, the subdivider shall have
installed or shall have furnished an adequate performance guarantee, as
provided in §
151.617 hereof, for the ultimate installation of the following.
   (A)   All lots shall be graded so that all storm water will drain therefrom.
Such grading shall not cause ponding on properties adjacent to the plat, add
areas of storm water runoff nor provide points of extreme concentration on them
not existing prior to the proposed development.
   (B)   The basement or other lowest floor elevation shall be at a minimum
elevation of one foot above the estimated high water level of any area affected
or likely to be affected by the flooding of public watercourses. Such
elevations shall be a matter of public record and recited on the final plat.
Compliance with this section shall be a condition of obtaining zoning or
building permits.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.604 EROSION CONTROL.
   Prior to the granting of final plat approval, the subdivider shall have
installed or shall have furnished adequate guarantee, as provided in §
151.617 hereof, for the ultimate installation of the following. All soil
surface areas within the street rights-of-way shall be seeded to grass with a
mixture of seed to be specified by the village. All disturbed soil areas
outside the street rights-of-way shall be seeded or planted to a quick growing
ground cover of grass, shrubs or other vegetation to prevent erosion of the
soil.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.605 STREETS.
   Prior to the granting of final plat approval, the subdivider shall have
installed or shall have furnished adequate guarantee, as provided in §
151.617 hereof, for the ultimate installation of the following.
   (A)   The minimum right-of-way width for all public streets shall be 60
feet, except that where there are unusual topographical or other physical
conditions, the Planning Commission may require a greater or lesser width.
   (B)   All streets, including private streets shall be constructed in
conformance with the current Location and Design Manual and Construction and
Material Specifications of the Ohio Department of Transportation (ODOT). All
streets and thoroughfares shall be graded to their full right-of-way width
including side slopes, and shall be extended to the farthest line of each lot
in the subdivision.
   (C)   Public streets shall have a minimum pavement width of 28 feet,
measured face-to-face of curbs.
   (D)   Additional pavement lanes and/or traffic signalization may be required
for commercial or other special developments to provide acceleration,
deceleration or left turn lanes, or handle or control excessive traffic that
may be generated by such developments. Complete data with respect to character
and volume of expected traffic generated by the development may be required.
   (E)   Concrete curbs and gutters are required on all streets, per ODOT
Construction and Material Specifications Item 609. The minimum pavement gutter
elevations shall be at or above hydraulic grade line for a ten-year frequency
storm.
   (F)   The subgrade shall be free of sod, vegetative or organic matter, soft
clay and other objectionable materials for a depth of at least two feet below
finished grade. The subgrade shall be properly rolled, shaped and compacted,
and shall be subject to the approval of the Village Engineer.
   (G)   The developer has the option of using any of the following base
courses, based upon findings of the design engineer as to soil and traffic
conditions: aggregate, bituminous aggregate, asphaltic concrete, water-bound
macadam, portland cement concrete or equally suitable base course. Materials
and thickness shall be determined by the design engineer, subject to approval
by the Village Engineer, as set forth by ODOT Construction and Material
Specifications.
   (H)   Upon expiration of the established maintenance period for the base
course, the surface course shall be constructed using either asphaltic
concrete, bituminous mix or portland cement concrete. Specific materials and
thickness shall be determined by the design engineer, subject to approval by
the Village Engineer, as set forth by ODOT Construction and Material
Specifications.
   (I)   Intersections shall have a minimum 25 feet radius, measured to the
back of the curb.
   (J)   All street construction shall be inspected by the Village Engineer. It
shall be the responsibility of the owner to notify and obtain village approval
before placing the base course and also before placing the surface courses.
Final acceptance of the street will not be made without these approvals. The
developer shall provide certification that the construction meets all
appropriate village and ODOT standards, including ODOT Construction and
Material Specifications, Item 400 (Flexible Pavement) or Item 450 (Rigid
Pavement), whichever is appropriate.
   (K)   The transition curb connecting a street to the circular terminus of a
cul-de-sac shall have a radius of not less than 100 feet.
   (L)   Streets abutting the subdivision that are not presently paved or
curbed nor have a design grade on them will normally not be required to be
paved at the time the subdivisions are to be constructed. However, all lots in
the plat abutting such streets shall have included in their deeds, or portions
thereof, a waiver of objection for the assessment for paving, curbing and
draining. This waiver of objection is to be recited on the plat, and is to be
an instrument of record affecting future title of properties.
   (M)   Street name signs, traffic-control signs and sign posts of a type in
use throughout the village, shall be erected by the developer at all
intersections and other points in the subdivision as directed by the village.
To avoid duplication and confusion, the proposed names of all streets shall be
approved by the village prior to the names being assigned or used.
   (N)   The recorded plat of any subdivision that includes a private street
shall clearly state that such street(s) is a private street. Further, the
initial purchaser of a newly created lot served by a private street shall be
furnished by the seller with a disclosure statement outlining the maintenance
responsibilities for the private street(s).
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.606 STREET LIGHTING.
   Prior to the granting of final plat approval, the subdivider shall have
installed or shall have furnished adequate guarantee, as provided in §
151.617 hereof, for the ultimate installation of the following.
   (A)   The subdivider, shall install street lights in accordance with the
village construction standards in each residential subdivision which contains a
majority of lots with an individual lot width of 100 feet or less at the front
property line. Such lights shall be located at each street entrance to the
subdivision and in each street intersection within the subdivision. In
addition, whenever the distance between two adjacent street lights would exceed
300 feet, then additional street lights shall be installed in such a manner
that proper light intensity shall be provided and maintained.
   (B)   New subdivision street lighting shall be installed with all associated
wiring underground.
   (C)   The design of all street light posts and lamp heads must be approved
by the village prior to installation.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.607 SIDEWALKS.
   Prior to the granting of final plat approval, the subdivider shall have
installed or shall have furnished adequate guarantee, as provided in §
151.617 hereof, for the ultimate installation of the following.
   (A)   Concrete sidewalks not less than five feet in width and having a
minimum thickness of four inches shall be provided on both sides of the new
streets within any residential subdivision, on the abutting side of any
existing street contiguous to the subdivision, and as part of the development
of a vacant residential or nonresidential lot. Where such new sidewalk meets an
existing sidewalk that is less than five feet in width, the new sidewalk may be
narrowed sufficiently to meet the existing sidewalk evenly. Handicapped
accessible sidewalk ramps shall be required at intersecting street rights of
way in accordance with ADA standards.
   (B)   A utility strip a minimum of two feet in width shall be maintained
between the inside edge of the sidewalk and the outside edge of the curb. This
utility strip is to be seeded with grass or other suitable ground cover and
shall not be used as a shade or street tree planting area.
   (C)   The subgrade shall be free of sod, vegetative or organic matter, soft
clay and other objectionable materials for a depth of at least one foot below
finished grade. The subgrade shall be properly shaped and compacted.
   (D)   Installation may be deferred for a period of three years by posting a
financial guarantee, as provided in §
151.617 hereof, to permit the building of dwellings prior to the installation
of sidewalks provided that no such deferment shall be continued in effect or
granted as to a particular block in a subdivision after 70% or more of the lots
in such blocks have dwellings constructed thereon. In the event sidewalks are
installed prior to the construction of dwellings, the minimum thickness for the
sidewalk at the driveway shall be six inches.
   (E)   In commercial and industrial subdivisions, sidewalks are required by
the Planning Commission, and shall be installed along each lot line that abuts
a public or private street.
   (F)   All sidewalks shall be installed in conformance with the ODOT Location
and Design Manual and shall conform to ODOT Construction and Material
Specifications Item 608.
   (G)   The location of sidewalks and ramps will be presented to the Planning
Commission at the time of preliminary plat approval.
   (H)   The design and location of street lights shall be approved by the
Planning Commission at the time of preliminary plat approval.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.608 RESIDENTIAL PARKING.
   (A)   The location of residential driveways shall comply with §
150.218 of the Zoning Code, and each driveway shall be wholly on the
residential lot to which it is accessory. Driveways shall be prohibited from
encroaching on an adjoining property.
   (B)   The style of residential driveways shall be determined at the time of
preliminary plat approval. Selected driveway designs shall be consistent
throughout the subdivision unless the Planning Commission grants approval for a
combination of driveways.
      (1)   The following types of driveways may be considered:
         (a)   Concrete;
         (b)   Asphalt; and
         (c)   Brick or pavers.
      (2)   Dirt or stone driveways are not allowed.
   (C)   Driveways shall be graded and constructed with adequate drainage so as
dispose of all surface water and drainage on site. Surface water and drainage
shall not be allowed to flow onto adjacent properties nor shall water be
permitted to drain onto or over public rights-of-way and sidewalks or remain
standing in driveways.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.609 WATER SUPPLY.
   Prior to the granting of final plat approval, the subdivider shall have
installed or shall have furnished adequate guarantee, as provided in §
151.617 hereof, for the ultimate installation of the following.
   (A)   The subdivider shall provide a complete water distribution system,
including a connection for each lot and appropriately spaced fire hydrants.
Such water system shall conform to all applicable requirements of the village.
   (B)   Each lot must be served by individual water line connections, except
in the case of duplexes, which may be served with an approved wye tap, provided
that each unit has an individual shutoff valve. Each dwelling unit, whether
single-family or multi-family, must have an individual meter easily accessible.
   (C)   All water line connections (tap-ins) will be made by the village. The
subdivider will provide all excavation, backfill and compaction; and all
excavations shall be safe to enter as determined by village employees. Backfill
material in roadways, driveways and sidewalks shall meet appropriate ODOT
specifications. The Village Street Department must be notified two business
days in advance of the work to be performed.
   (D)   All water service connections shall be of copper pipe, sufficiently
sized to provide adequate water service.
   (E)   Where a public water supply is used, water supply lines shall be
installed within the public road right-of-way, unless exceptional circumstances
warrant their location elsewhere. Regardless of the location of the water
supply lines, fire hydrants must be located within the road right-of-way.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.610 FIRE PROTECTION.
   Prior to the granting of final plat approval, the subdivider shall have
installed or shall have furnished adequate guarantee, as provided in §
151.617 hereof, for the ultimate installation of the following.
   (A)   Fire hydrants shall be provided by the subdivider in all subdivisions
with public water supplies. Such hydrants shall be spaced to provide necessary
fire flow. Hydrants shall be spaced no farther than 500 feet apart. Hydrants
shall also be required at the entrance and end of all cul-de-sacs exceeding 400
feet in length. In commercial and industrial subdivisions, the minimum spacing
between hydrants shall be 300 feet.
   (B)   A hydrant shall be located at all low points and at all high points
with adequate means of drainage provided.
   (C)   Hydrants shall be located at the ends of lines, and valves of full
line size shall be provided after hydrant tees at the ends of dead lines that
may be extended.
   (D)   The minimum size of a water line serving any hydrant shall be not less
than six inches in diameter and should be a circulating water line.
   (E)   Size, type and installation of hydrants shall conform to the current
village construction standards and be approved by the Fire Chief or his or her
designee and Village Engineer or his or her designee. The hydrants should be
located between property lines and curbs, within the road right-of-way, with
all outlets facing or parallel to the street.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.611 SANITARY SEWERS.
   Prior to the granting of final plat approval, the subdivider shall have
installed or shall have furnished adequate guarantee, as provided in §
151.617 hereof, for the ultimate installation of the following:
   (A)   Public sanitary sewers shall be installed to adequately serve all
lots, including lateral connections. Public sewer system extensions shall meet
the requirements of the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and all
village standards. Combinations of sanitary sewers and storm sewers shall be
prohibited. The Village Engineer will review all sanitary sewer proposals.
   (B)   Where exceptional circumstances warrant, as determined by the Planning
Commission, the subdivider may provide a private sewer extension to serve the
property being platted. Any private sewer line extensions must meet all village
and Ohio EPA standards as well as those of the appropriate Board of Health and
be approved by the Village Engineer. The subdivider, his, her or its heirs,
successors and assigns shall be responsible for the maintenance of the private
line. Under no circumstances will the village assume ownership or maintenance
responsibilities for private lines so installed. The subdivider must agree to
tap into the public sewer system should public sewers be extended to the
property.
   (C)   Where exceptional circumstances warrant, as determined by the Planning
Commission, the subdivider may provide an adequate private sanitary treatment
plant, or package plant, and the necessary sanitary sewer lines accessible to
each lot. The system, where practicable, is to be designed so it can be
integrated into the master plan of sanitary sewers when the public sewers are
installed.
   (D)   Where exceptional circumstances warrant, as determined by the Planning
Commission, the subdivider may provide private on-site sewage disposal systems,
typically a septic tank and leach field system, for lots of one acre or more in
area if soil percolation tests, as prescribed by the appropriate Board of
Health, have indicated a reasonably useful life for such disposal methods and
all other relevant requirements of the appropriate Board of Health have been
met. Other private on-site disposal methods may be approved by the appropriate
Board of Health.
   (E)   Where a public sanitary sewer extension is provided by the developer,
such sanitary sewer lines shall be installed within the public road right-of-
way, unless exceptional circumstances warrant their location elsewhere.
   (F)   All lateral connections shall be a minimum of six inches in diameter.
   (G)   The minimum elevation at the top of any sanitary manhole casting shall
be not less than one foot higher than the estimated 25-year high water level.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.612 STORM WATER MANAGEMENT.
   An adequate storm drainage system shall be provided for each subdivision and
site construction project documented in the Stormwater Management Plan. The
design of said system shall be based on a minimum fifty-year frequency.
   (A)   Prior to the granting of final plat approval, the subdivider shall
have installed or shall have furnished adequate guarantee, as provided in §
151.617 hereof, for the ultimate installation of the improvements included in
the subdivision’s or development’s Stormwater Management Plan.
   (B)   All necessary facilities, including underground pipe, inlets, catch
basins, open drainage ditches and detention ponds, shall be installed to
provide for the adequate disposal of surface water and to maintain any natural
drainage course.
   (C)   Rainfall intensity, runoff coefficients and concentration times used
in computing flows and structure sizes shall be in accordance with the tables,
charts and the data established in the Stormwater Management Plan for such
calculations. All areas which contribute storm water to the proposed storm
drainage system must be considered on the determination of the sizes of pipes,
structures and channels.
   (D)   Drainage plans shall be accompanied by two (2) copies of the design
computations and a topographic map showing existing and proposed contours and
indicating design increments. Hydraulic gradient checks for less frequent
storms may also be required by the Village Engineer where deemed appropriate.
   (E)   Culvert sizes shall be determined by using the Rational Method and
shall be based on a minimum ten-year frequency rainfall, or other more
stringent methodology as required by the Village Engineer and the Stormwater
Management Plan.
   (F)   Detention ponds (preferably underground detention) or basins shall be
provided where necessary to control the volume and velocity of storm water
leaving the site. Detention ponds and basins shall be designed to meet and
exceed the Stormwater Management Plan. Such facilities shall be approved by the
Village Engineer and the appropriate County Soil and Water Conservation
District.
   (G)   Storm sewer and drainage system connections shall be provided to every
lot at least to the building setback line, and easements shall be provided by
the subdivider for maintenance. The subdivider shall provide for the continued
maintenance or for a property owner association or for an agreement for such
continued maintenance that meets the approval of the Village Solicitor and the
Planning Commission. All downspouts shall be connected. Such connections shall
be to underground piping. No above ground drainage pipe shall be permitted.
   (H)   Footer drains shall be connected to storm sewers or drainage system as
required by the Wood County Building Department standards. The building
contractor or excavator shall test and determine the water level at the
excavation site and notify the Village Engineer of this level before the
foundation is placed.
   (I)   Storm sewers shall be constructed of materials approved for use by the
Village Engineer based on performance standards as established by the Ohio
Department of Transportation (ODOT).
   (J)   Storm drainage, including drain tile around basements, shall not be
permitted to discharge into any sanitary sewer facility, but shall connect to
an adequate drainage outlet. Detention or retention basins required for the
proper management of storm water in a platted subdivision with a permanent to
semi-permanent water depth greater than two feet and side slopes steeper than
four horizontal to one vertical may be required to be fenced by the Village
Planning Commission. Such fencing if required, such be a minimum of four feet
in height. Chain link fences are prohibited in residential and commercial
subdivisions.
   (K)   Catch basins shall be installed in street gutters and located so that
not more than 400 feet of gutter is drained into any basin. The catch basins
shall conform to ODOT Construction and Material Specifications Item 604. Storm
inlet or catch basin grates shall be of a type design to permit safe crossing
by bicycles and other pedestrian traffic as approved by the Ohio Department of
Transportation (ODOT).
   (L)   Manholes shall be provided at all changes in alignment, end points,
and grade changes of storm sewers and at such other locations as necessary to
provide sufficient maintenance access and maintain a maximum interval between
manholes on storm sewers of three hundred-fifty feet (350) for pipes sizes
twelve (12) inches to twenty-four (24) inches and five hundred (500) feet for
pipe sizes greater than twenty-four (24) inches or shorter distance intervals
as required by the Village Engineer.
   (M)   Storm sewers shall be installed to outlet the street catch basins and
to provide storm drainage for the lots. Storm sewers shall extend to the
farthest lot line and terminate in a manhole that conforms to ODOT Construction
and Material Specifications Item 604. These sewers shall be a minimum of 12
inches in diameter and consist of tongue and groove, sealed joint, rigid pipe
or an approved equal. All storm sewers under the pavement and curbs shall be of
reinforced or extra strength pipe and shall be backfilled with granular
material in concurrence with ODOT Construction and Material Specifications Item
603 Type B conduit specifications. All sewers shall be laid with a gradient
that will provide a minimum full flow velocity of two feet per second.
   (N)   All storm sewers must be inspected by a representative of the village
and thereby obtain approval from the village before backfilling. Final
acceptance of the storm sewer system will not be made without this approval.
   (O)   In order to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the
people, the Planning Commission may reject any proposed subdivision located in
an area subject to periodic flooding, and shall reject any proposed subdivision
located in a 100-year floodplain, as identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency or other appropriate authority. If the subdivision is located
in an area having poor drainage or other adverse physical characteristics, the
Commission may approve the subdivision provided the subdivider agrees to
perform such improvements as will render the area safe for the intended use. In
lieu of improvements, the subdivider shall furnish adequate guarantee, as
provided in §
151.617 hereof, covering the cost of the required improvements.
   (P)   Where natural drainage channels intersect the street right-of-way, it
shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to have satisfactory bridges and/
or culverts constructed.
   (Q)   Rear yard drainage shall be provided in all residential subdivisions.
Rear yard catch basin shall be placed so that no more than three lots in one
direction or 350 feet of lot frontage, whichever is less, is directed to one
basin. A minimum grade of 0.5% shall be maintained for rear yard swales.
   (R)   Applicants are encouraged to implement low-impact development (LID)
best practices to integrate hydrologically functional design with pollution
prevention measures to compensate for land development impacts on hydrology and
water quality. LID’s goal is to mimic natural hydrology and processes by using
small-scale, decentralized practices that infiltrate, evaporate, detain, and
transpire stormwater. LID stormwater control measures (SCMs) should be
uniformly and strategically located throughout the site, and should be designed
in conjunction with green infrastructure opportunities for accessory parking
areas.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.613 MONUMENTS.
   Prior to the granting of final plat approval, the subdivider shall have
installed the following.
   (A)   A permanent concrete monument, as defined in §
151.202 of these regulations, shall be placed at each change in direction on
the boundary of the plat, and one such monument shall be placed on the
centerline of the right-of-way of each street intersection, at the beginning
and end of all street curves, and at such other points as are necessary to
establish definitely all lines of the plat.
   (B)   Iron pipe or pins shall be placed at the corners of all lots and at
other points as are required by the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.614 TELEPHONE, ELECTRIC AND OTHER UTILITIES.
   (A)   All distribution wires and cables including electrical distribution
and telephone and cablevision wires and cables, and those wires and cables used
for street lighting, shall be installed underground in accordance with
standards and regulations promulgated by the Public Utilities Commission of
Ohio and by the public utility supplying such service. The Planning Commission
may waive in whole or part the above requirements where a strict application
thereof would result in excessive removal of trees or for other aesthetic
reasons.
   (B)   Where practicable, utilities such as electrical distribution and
telephone and cablevision wires and cables shall be placed within the public
road right-of-way or within designated utility easements centered along rear
and/or side lot lines.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.615 OVERSIZE AND OFFSITE IMPROVEMENTS.
   The Village Council, with a recommendation provided by the Planning
Commission and consulting engineer, to ensure the orderly development of
adjacent properties may require utilities, pavements and other land
improvements for a proposed subdivision be designed oversized and/or with
extensions provided to the boundary of the proposed subdivision prior to the
approval of the final plat to serve nearby land which is an integral part of
the community service or drainage area. The developer shall be required to pay
for all of the construction costs for the streets, utilities and other required
improvements for the proposed subdivision as determined by the Village Planning
Commission and consulting engineer. The village may pay the difference between
the cost of required improvements for the proposed subdivision and improvements
required to service the surrounding areas. Each case requiring village
participation shall be approved by the Village Council.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.616 UTILITY LINE EXTENSIONS TO BOUNDARIES.
   Utilities or required subdivision improvements shall be extended to the
boundary of the proposed subdivision to serve adjoining unsubdivided land on
adjacent properties as required by the Village Council, with a recommendation
provided by the Planning Commission and consulting engineer.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.617 IMPROVEMENT GUARANTEES.
   (A)   Improvement guarantees shall be provided to ensure the proper
installation and maintenance of required street, utility and other improvements
as specified in this article. The nature and duration of the guarantee shall be
structured to achieve this goal without adding unnecessary costs to the
developer.
   (B)   No final plat of any subdivision shall be approved until:
      (1)   The improvements listed in this article, inclusive, hereof have
been completed; or
      (2)   The subdivider has filed with the Village Administrator a
performance guarantee in the form of a bond, certified check or irrevocable
letter of credit equal to estimated cost of construction of the improvements,
as determined by a professional engineer licensed in the state, plus 10% of the
required improvements; guaranteeing to the village the completion of such
improvements in a satisfactory manner within such time, not to exceed two
years, as may be fixed by the Planning Commission. The form of bond, check or
letter of credit shall be approved by the Village Solicitor or other authorized
legal representative, and shall be made payable to and enforceable by the
village.
   (C)   Upon application of the subdivider, the Planning Commission may waive
compliance with division (B) above upon the following conditions:
      (1)   After the preliminary plat drawing of the proposed subdivision has
been approved by the Village Planning Commission, the subdivider may improve a
portion of the proposed subdivision and submit a final plat for that improved
portion to the Village Planning Commission for approval. If the Planning
Commission deems it necessary to defer the construction of any required
improvement, the subdivider shall pay his or her share of the costs of the
deferred future improvements, as determined by the village, to the village
prior to the approval of the final plat by the village. The subdivider shall
provide a surety bond, certified check or irrevocable letter of credit equal to
the estimated cost of the construction of the improvements as determined by a
professional engineer licensed in the state plus 10% of the remaining required
improvements, guaranteeing to the village the completion of such improvements
in a satisfactory manner within such time, not to exceed two years, as may be
fixed by the Planning Commission. The form of bond, check or letter of credit
shall be approved by the Village Solicitor or other authorized legal
representative, and shall be made payable to and enforceable by the village;
      (2)   No lot or land abutting the unopened and unimproved street shall be
sold and/or conveyed until said lot or land are in conformity with divisions
(B)(1) or (B)(2) above. However, with the consent of the Planning Commission,
all of such abutting lots or land may be sold and/or conveyed as one unit; and
      (3)   No building or zoning permit shall be issued or buildings
constructed on lots or land abutting an unopened and unimproved street until
the conditions set forth in divisions (B)(1) or (B)(2) above have been complied
with.
   (D)   In the event the developer fails to complete the installation of all
improvements according to the terms and conditions of divisions (B)(2) and (C)
(1) above, the village, upon proceed to have such work completed and
appropriate such portion of bond, certified check or irrevocable letter of
credit posted for the faithful performance of said work.
   (E)   Inspections during installation of improvements shall be made by the
village to ensure conformity with the approved technical design and
construction plans and other specifications. The subdivider shall be liable for
costs incurred for necessary inspections during construction. An amount
covering the estimated costs of such inspections shall be deposited with the
Village Administrator prior to commencing the work. The subdivider shall notify
the proper administrative officials 24 hours prior to commencing work.
   (F)   Upon completion of all required improvements, the developer shall
notify the Village Administrator, in writing, of the completion of improvements
and request a final inspection. The village, its consulting engineer or other
authorized representatives shall inspect all improvements of which such notice
has been given and shall file a detailed report, in writing, with the Village
Administrator listing items of work necessary to accomplish satisfactory
completion of the improvements; and/or recommending acceptance of the
improvements. The Village Administrator shall notify the developer in writing,
by certified mail, of the contents of the inspection report no later than 45
days after receipt of the notice of completion from the developer.
   (G)   The Village Council shall either approve or reject the improvements
based on the contents of the inspection report and the recommendation of the
Village Administrator; and shall notify the developer in writing, by certified
mail, of the decision of the Village Council with a statement for the reason of
any rejection. No improvements shall be approved by the Village Council until a
maintenance guarantee in the form of a bond, certified check or irrevocable
letter of credit is filed with the village in an amount equal to 25% of the
total cost of the improvements in the subdivision guaranteeing the workmanship
and materials for a period of two years after acceptance of the improvements by
village. All streets, sewers, waterlines or other improvements dedicated for
public use shall be accepted by the village for public use and maintenance only
upon passage of an ordinance authorized for such purpose.
   (H)   At the end of the two-year maintenance period, the village, along with
its consulting engineer, or other authorized representatives shall inspect all
improvements to ensure such improvements remain in an acceptable condition.
After the inspection, the village either:
      (1)   Issue a letter to the developer, the developer’s bank or surety,
and/or the developer’s contractor releasing the maintenance guarantee; or
      (2)   Issue a letter to the developer and/or the developer’s contractor
listing items of work necessary to be completed or corrected before the release
of the maintenance guarantee will be made.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
ARTICLE 151.70
ENFORCEMENT, PENALTIES AND AMENDMENTS
   
151.701   Enforcement.
   
151.702   Recording Of Plat.
   
151.703   Revision Of Plat After Approval.
   
151.704   Sale Of Land Within Subdivisions.
   
151.705   Public Improvements.
   
151.706   Schedule Of Fees, Charges And Expenses.
   
151.707   Penalties Imposed By The Ohio Revised Code.
   
151.708   Amendments.
§ 151.701 ENFORCEMENT.
   It shall be the duty of the Village Administrator, or other designee, to
enforce the provisions of the subdivision and site construction regulations of
the village and to bring to the attention of the Village Council and Planning
Commission any violations or lack of compliance. Zoning permits for lots within
any subdivision may be withheld for failing to comply with the Village of
Swanton Subdivision and Site Construction Code or Zoning Code.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.702 RECORDING OF PLAT.
   No plat of any subdivision shall be recorded by the County Recorder of
Fulton or Lucas County or have any validity until said plat has received final
approval in the manner prescribed in these regulations.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.703 REVISION OF PLAT AFTER APPROVAL.
   No changes, erasures, modifications or revisions shall be made in any plat
of a subdivision after approval has been given by the Village Planning
Commission, and endorsed in writing on the plat, unless said plat is first
resubmitted to the Commission for review and approval of any proposed changes,
erasures, modifications or revisions.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.704 SALE OF LAND WITHIN SUBDIVISIONS.
   No owner or agent of the owner of any land located within a subdivision
shall transfer or sell any land by reference to, exhibition of, or by the use
of a plat of the subdivision before such plat has been approved and recorded in
the manner prescribed in these regulations. The description of such lot or
parcel by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other documents
used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the transaction
from the provisions of these regulations.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.705 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.
   The village will withhold all public improvements of whatsoever nature,
including the maintenance of streets and the furnishing of sewage facilities
and water service from all subdivisions which have not been approved, and from
all areas dedicated to the public which have not been accepted by the Village
Council in the manner prescribed herein.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.706 SCHEDULE OF FEES, CHARGES AND EXPENSES.
   (A)   The Village Council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges and
expenses, and a collection procedure for the same, and other matters pertaining
to these regulations. The schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the
Fiscal Officer, and may be altered, or amended only by the Village Council.
   (B)   No application will be accepted and no action shall be taken on any
application or appeal until all applicable fees, charges and expenses have been
paid in full.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.707 IMPOSED BY THE OHIO REVISED CODE.
   (A)   Violations of rules and regulations (R.C. § 711.102).
      (1)   Whoever willfully violates any rule or regulation adopted by the
legislative authority of a municipal corporation or a board of county
commissioners pursuant to R.C. § 711.101 or fails to comply with an order
issued pursuant thereto, shall forfeit and pay not less than $10 nor more than
$1,000.
      (2)   Such sum may be recovered with costs in a civil action brought in
the Court of Common Pleas of the county in which the land lies relative to
which such violation occurred, by the legal representative of the village, city
or county, in the name of such village, city or county and for the use thereof.
   (B)   Forfeiture for wrongfully recording plats (R.C. § 711.15). A County
Recorder who records a plat contrary to R.C. §§ 711.01 to 711.38, inclusive,
shall forfeit and pay not less than $100 nor more than $500 to be recovered
with costs in a civil action by the prosecuting attorney in the name of and for
the use of the county.
   (C)   Transfer of land before recording; forfeiture (R.C. § 711.13).
      (1)   Whoever, being the owner or agent of the owner of any land within
or without a municipal corporation, willfully transfers any lot, parcel or
tract of such land from or in accordance with a plat of a subdivision as
specifically defined in this chapter, before the plat has been recorded in the
office of the County Recorder, shall forfeit and pay the sum of not less than
$10 nor more than $500 for each lot, parcel or tract of land so sold. The
description of the lot, parcel or tract by metes and bounds in the deed or
transfer shall not serve to exempt the seller from the forfeiture provided in
this section.
      (2)   If the land is within a municipal corporation, the sum may be
recovered in a civil action, brought in any court of competent jurisdiction by
the city director of law or other corresponding official of the municipal
corporation in the name of the municipal corporation and for the use of the
street repair fund thereof.
      (3)   The sale of lots, parcels or tracts from a plat of a subdivision on
which any and all areas indicated as streets or open grounds are expressly
indicated as for the exclusive use of the abutting or other owners in the
subdivision and not as public streets, ways or grounds shall not serve to
exempt the seller from the requirements of this chapter or from the forfeiture
provided in this section.
   (D)   Disposal of lots; forfeiture (R.C. § 711.15). Any person who disposes
of, offers for sale or leases for a time exceeding five years, any lot or part
of a lot, in a subdivision with intent to violate R.C. §§ 711.001 to 711.14,
inclusive, shall forfeit and pay the sum of not less than $10 nor more than
$500 for each lot or part of a lot so sold, offered for sale or leased, to be
recovered, with costs, in a civil action, in the name of the County Treasurer
for the use of the county.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 151.708 AMENDMENTS.
   When necessary to further the purpose of this chapter, the Village Council
may, after a public hearing, amend, supplement or change these regulations upon
the recommendation of the Planning Commission. Notice shall be given on the
time and place of such public hearing by publication in at least one newspaper
of general circulation published in the local area, 30 days prior to the date
of such hearing. The amendment or amendments shall be available in the office
of the Fiscal Officer for public examination during said 30 days.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
CHAPTER 152: FLOOD DAMAGE REDUCTION CODE
Section
   
152.01   Flood Damage Reduction Code adopted
   
Appendix A: Flood Damage Reduction Code
§ 152.01 FLOOD DAMAGE REDUCTION CODE ADOPTED.
   The village adopts in full the Flood Damage Reduction Code found in
Appendix A  to this chapter, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
APPENDIX A: FLOOD DAMAGE REDUCTION CODE
ARTICLE 152.10
GENERAL PROVISIONS
   
152.101   Statutory authorization.
   
152.102   Findings of fact.
   
152.103   Statement of purpose.
   
152.104   Methods of reducing flood losses.
   
152.105   Lands to which these regulations apply.
   
152.106   Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.
   
152.107   Abrogation and greater restrictions.
   
152.108   Interpretation.
   
152.109   Warning and disclaimer of liability.
   
152.110   Severability.
§ 152.101 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   Article XVIII, Section 3 of the Ohio Constitution grants municipalities the
legal authority to adopt land use and control measures for promoting the
health, safety and general welfare of its citizens. This chapter adopts
regulations for areas of special flood hazard that are necessary for
participation in the National Flood Insurance Program. Therefore, the Council
of the Village of Swanton does ordain as follows.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 152.102 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   The village has special flood hazard areas that are subject to periodic
inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base.
Additionally, structures that are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or
otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss. In
order to minimize the threat of such damages and to achieve the purposes
hereinafter set forth, this chapter is adopted.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 152.103 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare, and to:
   (A)   Protect human life and health;
   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (D)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in
areas of special flood hazard;
   (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the proper use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to protect property and
minimize future flood blight areas;
   (G)   Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions;
   (H)   Minimize the impact of development on adjacent properties within and
near flood prone areas;
   (I)   Ensure that the flood storage and conveyance functions of the
floodplain are maintained;
   (J)   Minimize the impact of development on the natural, beneficial values
of the floodplain;
   (K)   Prevent floodplain uses that are either hazardous or environmentally
incompatible; and
   (L)   Meet community participation requirements of the National Flood
Insurance Program.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 152.104 METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES.
   In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
   (A)   Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety
and property due to water hazards, or which result in damaging increases in
flood heights or velocities;
   (B)   Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods including facilities, which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (C)   Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters;
   (D)   Controlling filling, grading, dredging, excavating and other
development which may increase flood damage; and
   (E)   Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in other
areas.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 152.105 LANDS TO WHICH THESE REGULATIONS APPLY.
   This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the village as identified in §
152.106, including any additional areas of special flood hazard annexed by the
village.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 152.106 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
   (A)   For the purposes of this chapter, the following studies and/or maps
are adopted:
      (1)   The areas of special flood hazard have been identified by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency in scientific and engineering reports
entitled “Flood Insurance Study, Lucas County, Ohio, Volumes 1-4; including the
Village of Swanton”; August 16, 2011; and
      (2)   These studies, with Flood Insurance Rate Maps Panel 185, Map Number
39095C0185E and Panel 205, Map Number 39095C0205E, and any revisions to the
aforementioned maps and/or studies are hereby adopted by reference and declared
to be a part of this chapter.
   (B)   Such maps and/or studies are on file in the office of the Village
Administrator, Swanton, Ohio.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 152.107 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   This chapter is not intended to repeal any existing ordinances
including subdivision regulations, zoning or building codes.
   (B)   In the event of a conflict between this chapter and any other
ordinance, the more restrictive shall be followed.
   (C)   This chapter shall not impair any deed restriction covenant or
easement but the land subject to such interests shall also be governed by this
chapter.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 152.108 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes. Where a provision of this chapter may be in conflict with a
state or federal law, such state or federal law shall take precedence over this
chapter.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 152.109 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   (A)   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations.
   (B)   Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may
be increased by human- made or natural causes.
   (C)   This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special
flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damage. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the
village, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Emergency Management
Agency, for any flood damage that results from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 152.110 SEVERABILITY.
   Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared by the courts to
be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of
the chapter as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part so declared to
be unconstitutional or invalid.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
ARTICLE 152.20
DEFINITIONS
   
152.201   Definitions and Rules of Interpretation.
   
152.202   Defined Words.
§ 152.201 DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   This
Article 152.20 includes definitions for words and phrases used in this Flood
Damage Reduction Code, which are in addition to the definitions and rules of
interpretation set forth in
Chapter 150 Zoning Code, including §
150.114 Rules of Interpretation and
Article 150.90 Definitions. Any words or phrases used in
Chapter 152 that are not defined in
Article 150.90 or in §
152.202 below shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give these regulations the most reasonable application, as
determined by the Flood Plain Administrator.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 152.202 DEFINED WORDS.
   Words and terms with specific defined meanings are set forth below.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. As defined in the Village Zoning Code.
   APPEAL. A request for review of the Floodplain Administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year. The BASE FLOOD may also be referred to as the 1% chance annual
flood or 100-year flood.
   BASE (100-YEAR) FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The water surface elevation of the
base flood in relation to a specified datum, usually the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum of 1929 or the North American Vertical Datum of 1988, and
usually expressed in feet mean sea level (MSL). In Zone AO areas, the BASE
FLOOD ELEVATION is the natural grade elevation plus the depth number from one
to three feet.
   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
   ENCLOSURE BELOW THE LOWEST FLOOR. See LOWEST FLOOR.
   EXECUTIVE ORDER 11988 (FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT). Issued by President Carter in
1977, this order requires that no federally assisted activities be conducted in
or have the potential to affect identified special flood hazard areas, unless
there is no practicable alternative.
   FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA). The agency with the overall
responsibility for administering the National Flood Insurance Program.
   FILL. A deposit of earth material placed by artificial means.
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM). Usually the initial map, produced by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency, or United States Department of Housing and
Urban Development, for a community depicting approximate special flood hazard
areas.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency or the United States Department of Housing and
Urban Development has delineated the areas of special flood hazard.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RISK ZONES. Zone designations on FHBMs and FIRMs that
indicate the magnitude of the flood hazard in specific areas of a community.
Following are the zone definitions.
      (1)   ZONE A. Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year flood;
base flood elevations are not determined.
      (2)   ZONES A1-30 AND ZONE AE. Special flood hazard areas inundated by
the 100-year flood; base flood elevations are determined.
      (3)   ZONE AO. Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year
flood; with flood depths of one to three feet (usually sheet flow on sloping
terrain); average depths are determined.
      (4)   ZONE AH. Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year
flood; flood depths of one to three feet (usually areas of ponding); base flood
elevations are determined.
      (5)   ZONE A99. Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year
flood to be protected from the 100-year flood by a federal flood protection
system under construction; no base flood elevations are determined.
      (6)   ZONE B AND ZONE X (SHADED). Areas of 500-year flood; areas subject
to the 100-year flood with average depths of less than one foot or with
contributing drainage area less than one square mile; and areas protected by
levees from the base flood.
      (7)   ZONE C AND ZONE X (UNSHADED). Areas determined to be outside the
500-year floodplain.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). The official report in which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency or the United States Department of Housing and
Urban Development has provided flood profiles, floodway boundaries (sometimes
shown on flood boundary and floodway maps), and the water surface elevations of
the base flood.
   FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE). The base flood elevation plus one foot of
freeboard. In areas where no base flood elevations exist from any authoritative
source, the FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION can be historical flood elevations, or
base flood elevations determined and/or approved by the Floodplain
Administrator.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that have been reserved in order to pass the base flood discharge. A
FLOODWAY is typically determined through a hydraulic and hydrologic engineering
analysis such that the cumulative increase in the water surface elevation of
the base flood discharge is no more than a designated height. In no case shall
the designated height be more than one foot at any point within the community.
The FLOODWAY is an extremely hazardous area, and is usually characterized by
any of the following: moderate to high velocity flood waters; high potential
for debris and projectile impacts and moderate to high erosion forces.
   FREEBOARD. A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level
for the purposes of floodplain management. FREEBOARD tends to compensate for
the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than
the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such
as wave action, obstructed bridge openings, debris and ice jams, and the
hydrologic effect of urbanization in a watershed.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the United States Department of Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listings on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on the state’s inventory of historic places
maintained by the Ohio Historic Preservation Office; or
      (4)   Individually listed on the inventory of historic places maintained
by the village’s historic preservation program, which program is certified by
the Ohio Historic Preservation Office.
   HYDROLOGIC AND HYDRAULIC ENGINEERING ANALYSIS. An analysis performed by a
professional engineer, registered in the state, in accordance with standard
engineering practices as accepted by FEMA, used to determine flood elevations
and/or floodway boundaries.
   LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC). An official FEMA determination, by letter, to
amend or revise effective flood insurance rate maps, flood boundary and
floodway maps, and flood insurance studies. LOMCs are broken down into the
following categories.
      (1)   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). A revision based on technical data
showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood
hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective flood insurance rate map and
establishes that a specific property is not located in a special flood hazard
area.
      (2)   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR). A revision based on technical data
that, usually due to human-made changes, shows changes to flood zones, flood
elevations, floodplain and floodway delineations, and planimetric features. One
common type of LOMR, a LOMR-F, is a determination concerning whether a
structure or parcel has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation
and is, therefore, excluded from the special flood hazard area.
      (3)   CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR). A formal review and
comment by FEMA as to whether a proposed project complies with the minimum
National Flood Insurance Program floodplain management criteria. A CLOMR does
not amend or revise effective flood insurance rate maps, flood boundary and
floodway maps, or flood insurance studies.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement) of a structure. This definition excludes an “enclosure below the
lowest floor” which is an unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure usable solely
for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a
basement area, provided that such enclosure is built in accordance with the
applicable design requirements specified in these regulations for enclosures
below the lowest floor.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. As defined in the Village Zoning Code.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. As defined in the Village Zoning Code.
   NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP). A federal program enabling property
owners in participating communities to purchase insurance protection against
losses from flooding. This insurance is designed to provide an insurance
alternative to disaster assistance to meet the escalating costs of repairing
damage to buildings and their contents caused by floods. Participation in the
NFIP is based on an agreement between local communities and the federal
government that states if a community will adopt and enforce floodplain
management regulations to reduce future flood risks to all development in
special flood hazard areas, the federal government will make flood insurance
available within the community as a financial protection against flood loss.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction commenced
on or after the initial effective date of the Village of Swanton Flood
Insurance Rate Map, February 15, 1984, and includes any subsequent improvements
to such structures.
   PERSON. As defined in the Village Zoning Code.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. As defined in the Village Zoning Code.
   REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ARCHITECT. A person registered to engage in the
practice of architecture under the provisions of R.C. §§ 4703.01 to 4703.19.
   REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER. A person registered as a professional
engineer under R.C. Chapter 4733.
   REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL SURVEYOR. A person registered as a professional
surveyor under R.C. Chapter 4733.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. Also known as AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD, it
is the land in the floodplain subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in
any given year. SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS are designated by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency on flood insurance rate maps, flood insurance
studies, flood boundary and floodway maps and flood hazard boundary maps as
Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-30, and A99. SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS may also refer
to areas that are flood prone and designated from other federal state or local
sources of data including but not limited to historical flood information
reflecting high water marks, previous flood inundation areas, and flood prone
soils associated with a watercourse.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. The date the building permit was issued, provided the
actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The
ACTUAL START means either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation
of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of
excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and
filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor
does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or
the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the ACTUAL START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of a building.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building, manufactured home, or gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the
improvement. This term includes structures, which have incurred “substantial
damage”, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include:
      (1)   Any improvement to a structure that is considered “new
construction”;
      (2)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications
which have been identified prior to the application for a development permit by
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
      (3)   Any alteration of a “historic structure” provided that the
alteration would not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
“historic structure”.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the standards of this chapter consistent
with the variance conditions herein.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
ARTICLE 152.30
ADMINISTRATION
   
152.301   Designation of the Floodplain Administrator.
   
152.302   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator.
   
152.303   Floodplain development permits.
   
152.304   Application required.
   
152.305   Review and approval of a floodplain development permit application.
   
152.306   Inspections.
   
152.307   Post-construction certifications required.
   
152.308   Revoking a floodplain development permit.
   
152.309   Exemption from filing a development permit.
   
152.310   Map maintenance activities.
   
152.311   Data use and flood map interpretation.
   
152.312   Substantial damage determination.
§ 152.301 DESIGNATION OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Village Administrator is hereby appointed to administer and implement
these regulations and is referred to herein as the Floodplain Administrator.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 152.302 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall
include, but are not limited to:
   (A)   Evaluate applications for permits to develop in special flood hazard
areas;
   (B)   Interpret floodplain boundaries and provide flood hazard and flood
protection elevation information;
   (C)   Issue permits to develop in special flood hazard areas when the
provisions of this chapter have been met, or refuse to issue the same in the
event of noncompliance;
   (D)   Inspect buildings and lands to determine whether any violations of
this chapter have been committed;
   (E)   Make and permanently keep all records for public inspection necessary
for the administration of this chapter including flood insurance rate maps,
letters of map amendment and revision, records of issuance and denial of
permits to develop in special flood hazard areas, determinations of whether
development is in or out of special flood hazard areas for the purpose of
issuing floodplain development permits, elevation certificates, variances and
records of enforcement actions taken for violations of this
chapter;
   (F)   Enforce the provisions of this chapter;
   (G)   Provide information, testimony or other evidence as needed during
variance hearings;
   (H)   Coordinate map maintenance activities and FEMA follow-up; and
   (I)   Conduct substantial damage determinations to determine whether
existing structures, damaged from any source and in special flood hazard areas
identified by FEMA, must meet the development standards of this chapter.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 152.303 FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMITS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to begin construction or other
development activity including, but not limited to, filling; grading;
construction; alteration, remodeling or expanding any structure; or alteration
of any watercourse wholly within, partially within or in contact with any
identified special flood hazard area, as established in §
152.106, until a floodplain development permit is obtained from the Floodplain
Administrator. Such floodplain development permit shall show that the proposed
development activity is in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. No
such permit shall be issued by the Floodplain Administrator until the
requirements of this chapter have been met.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 152.304 APPLICATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   An application for a floodplain development permit shall be required
for all development activities located wholly within, partially within, or in
contact with an identified special flood hazard area. Such application shall be
made by the owner of the property or his or her authorized agent, herein
referred to as the applicant, prior to the actual commencement of such
construction on a form furnished for that purpose. Where it is unclear whether
a development site is in a special flood hazard area, the Floodplain
Administrator may require an application for a floodplain development permit to
determine the development’s location.
   (B)   Such applications shall include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   Site plans drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions
and topography of the area in question; the location of existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location
of the foregoing;
      (2)   Elevation of the existing, natural ground where structures are
proposed;
      (3)   Elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed
structures;
      (4)   Such other material and information as may be requested by the
Floodplain Administrator to determine conformance with, and provide enforcement
of these regulations;
      (5)   Technical analyses conducted by the appropriate design professional
registered in the state and submitted with an application for a floodplain
development permit which will include:
         (a)   Floodproofing certification for nonresidential floodproofed
structures as required in §
152.505;
         (b)   Certification that fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor
of a structure not meeting the design requirements of §
152.504(E) are designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces;
         (c)   Description of any watercourse alteration or relocation that the
flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse will not be diminished, and
maintenance assurances as required in §
152.509(C);
         (d)   A hydrologic and hydraulic analysis demonstrating that the
cumulative effect of proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood by more than one foot in special flood hazard areas
where the Federal Emergency Management Agency has provided base flood
elevations but no floodway as required by §
152.509(B);
         (e)   A hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis showing impact
of any development on flood heights in an identified floodway as required by §
152.509(A); and
         (f)   Generation of base flood elevation(s) for subdivision and large-
scale developments as required by §
152.503(A).
   (C)   The applicant shall be responsible for payment of the floodplain
development permit application fee in such an amount as shall be determined by
ordinance of Council.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 152.305 REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF A FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   Review.
      (1)   After receipt of a complete application, the Floodplain
Administrator shall review the application to ensure that the standards of this
chapter have been met. No floodplain development permit application shall be
reviewed until all information required in §
152.304 has been received by the Floodplain Administrator.
      (2)   The Floodplain Administrator shall review all floodplain
development permit applications to assure that all necessary permits have been
received from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from which
prior approval is required. The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining
such permits as required including permits issued by the United States Army
Corps of Engineers under Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act, being 33
U.S.C. Section 403 and 404 of the Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. Section 1344
and the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency under Section 401 of the Clean
Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. Section 1341.
   (B)   Approval. Within 30 days after the receipt of a complete application,
the Floodplain Administrator shall either approve or disapprove the
application. If an application is approved, a floodplain development permit
shall be issued. All floodplain development permits shall be conditional upon
the commencement of work within one year. A floodplain development permit shall
expire one year after issuance unless the permitted activity has been
substantially begun and is thereafter pursued to completion.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 152.306 INSPECTIONS.
   The Floodplain Administrator shall make periodic inspections at appropriate
times throughout the period of construction in order to monitor compliance with
permit conditions.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 152.307 POST-CONSTRUCTION CERTIFICATIONS REQUIRED.
   The following as-built certifications are required after a floodplain
development permit has been issued:
   (A)   For new or substantially improved residential structures, or
nonresidential structures that have been elevated, the applicant shall have a
Federal Emergency Management Agency elevation certificate completed by a
registered surveyor to record as-built elevation data. For elevated structures
in Zone A and Zone AO areas without a base flood elevation, the elevation
certificate may be completed by the property owner or owner’s representative;
and
   (B)   For all development activities subject to the standards of §
152.310(A), a letter of map revision.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 152.308 REVOKING A FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   A floodplain development permit shall be revocable, if among other things,
the actual development activity does not conform to the terms of the
application and permit granted thereon. In the event of the revocation of a
permit, an appeal may be taken to the Village Planning Commission in accordance
with §§
152.701 through
152.706, Appeals and Variances.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 152.309 EXEMPTION FROM FILING A DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   (A)   An application for a floodplain development permit shall not be
required for:
      (1)   Maintenance work such as roofing, painting and basement sealing, or
for small nonstructural development activities (except for filling and grading)
valued at less than $5,000;
      (2)   Development activities in an existing or proposed manufactured home
park that are under the authority of the Ohio Department of Health and subject
to the flood damage reduction provisions of the O.A.C. Chapter 3701;
      (3)   Major utility facilities permitted by the Ohio Power Siting
Planning Commission under R.C. Chapter 4906;
      (4)   Hazardous waste disposal facilities permitted by the Hazardous
Waste Siting Planning Commission under R.C. Chapter 3734; and
      (5)   Development activities undertaken by a federal agency and which are
subject to Federal Executive Order 11988 - Floodplain Management.
   (B)   Any proposed action exempt from filing for a floodplain development
permit is also exempt from the standards of this chapter.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 152.310 MAP MAINTENANCE ACTIVITIES.
   To meet National Flood Insurance Program minimum requirements to have flood
data reviewed and approved by FEMA, and to ensure that the village’s flood
maps, studies and other data identified in §
152.106 accurately represent flooding conditions so appropriate floodplain
management criteria are based on current data, the following map maintenance
activities are identified.
   (A)   Requirement to submit new technical data.
      (1)   For all development proposals that impact floodway delineations or
base flood elevations, the community shall ensure that technical data
reflecting such changes be submitted to FEMA within six months of the date such
information becomes available. These development proposals include:
         (a)   Floodway encroachments that increase or decrease base flood
elevations or alter floodway boundaries;
         (b)   Fill sites to be used for the placement of proposed structures
where the applicant desires to remove the site from the special flood hazard
area;
         (c)   Alteration of watercourses that result in a relocation or
elimination of the special flood hazard area, including the placement of
culverts; and
         (d)   Subdivision or large scale development proposals requiring the
establishment of base flood elevations in accordance with §
152.503(A).
      (2)   It is the responsibility of the applicant to have technical data,
required in accordance with this section prepared in a format required for a
conditional letter of map revision or letter of map revision, and submitted to
FEMA. Submittal and processing fees for these map revisions shall be the
responsibility of the applicant.
      (3)   The Floodplain Administrator shall require a conditional letter of
map revision prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit for:
         (a)   Proposed floodway encroachments that increase the base flood
elevation; and
         (b)   Proposed development which increases the base flood elevation by
more than one foot in areas where FEMA has provided base flood elevations but
no floodway.
      (4)   Floodplain development permits issued by the Floodplain
Administrator shall be conditioned upon the applicant obtaining a letter of map
revision from FEMA for any development proposal subject to division (A)(1)
above.
   (B)   Right to submit new technical data. The Floodplain Administrator may
request changes to any of the information shown on an effective map that does
not impact floodplain or floodway delineations or base flood elevations, such
as labeling or planimetric details. Such a submission shall include appropriate
supporting documentation made in writing by the Council of the village or its
designee, and may be submitted at any time.
   (C)   Annexation/detachment. Upon the occurrence of annexation or
detachment, the Floodplain Administrator shall notify FEMA in writing whenever
the boundaries of the village have been modified by annexation or the community
has assumed authority over an area, or no longer has authority to adopt and
enforce floodplain management regulations for a particular area. In order that
the village’s flood insurance rate map to accurately represent the its
boundaries, notification shall include a copy of the map of the village
suitable for reproduction, clearly showing the new corporate limits or the new
area for which the village has assumed or relinquished floodplain management
regulatory authority.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 152.311 DATA USE AND FLOOD MAP INTERPRETATION.
   The following guidelines shall apply to the use and interpretation of maps
and other data showing areas of special flood hazard.
   (A)   In areas where FEMA has not identified special flood hazard areas, or
in FEMA identified special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation and
floodway data have not been identified, the Floodplain Administrator shall
review and reasonably utilize any other flood hazard data available from a
federal, state or other source.
   (B)   Base flood elevations and floodway boundaries produced on FEMA flood
maps and studies shall take precedence over base flood elevations and floodway
boundaries by any other source that reflect a reduced floodway width and/or
lower base flood elevations. Other sources of data, showing increased base
flood elevations and/or larger floodway areas than are shown on FEMA flood maps
and studies, shall be reasonably used by the Floodplain Administrator.
   (C)   When preliminary flood insurance rate maps and/or flood insurance
study have been provided by FEMA:
      (1)   Upon the issuance of a letter of final determination by the FEMA,
the preliminary flood hazard data shall be used and replace all previously
existing flood hazard data provided from FEMA for the purposes of administering
this chapter; and
      (2)   Prior to the issuance of a letter of final determination by FEMA,
the use of preliminary flood hazard data shall only be required where no base
flood elevations and/or floodway areas exist or where the preliminary base
flood elevations or floodway area exceed the base flood elevations and/or
floodway widths in existing flood hazard data provided from FEMA. Such
preliminary data may be subject to change and/or appeal to FEMA.
   (D)   The Floodplain Administrator shall make interpretations, where needed,
as to the exact location of the flood boundaries and areas of special flood
hazard. A person contesting the determination of the location of the boundary
shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as
provided in Sections
152.701 through
152.706, Appeals and Variances.
   (E)   Where a map boundary showing an area of special flood hazard and field
elevations disagree, the base flood elevations or flood protection elevations
(as found on an elevation profile, floodway data table, established high water
marks and the like) shall prevail.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 152.312 SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE DETERMINATION.
   (A)   Damages to structures may result from a variety of causes including
flood, tornado, wind, heavy snow, fire and the like. After such a damage event,
the Floodplain Administrator shall:
      (1)   Determine whether damaged structures are located in special flood
hazard areas;
      (2)   Conduct substantial damage determinations for damaged structures
located in special flood hazard areas; and
      (3)   Make reasonable attempt to notify owners of substantially damaged
structures of the need to obtain a floodplain development permit prior to
repair, rehabilitation or reconstruction.
   (B)   Additionally, the Floodplain Administrator may implement other
measures to assist with the substantial damage determination and subsequent
repair process. These measures include issuing press releases, public service
announcements and other public information materials related to the floodplain
development permits and repair of damaged structures; coordinating with other
federal, state and local agencies to assist with substantial damage
determinations; providing owners of damaged structures with materials and other
information related to the proper repair of damaged structures in special flood
hazard areas; and assist owners of substantially damaged structures with
increased cost of compliance insurance claims.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
ARTICLE 152.50
USE AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
   
152.501   Use Regulations.
   
152.502   Water And Wastewater Systems.
   
152.503   Subdivisions And Large Developments.
   
152.504   Residential Structures.
   
152.505   Nonresidential Structures.
   
152.506   Accessory Structures.
   
152.507   Recreational Vehicles.
   
152.508   Above Ground Gas Or Liquid Storage Tanks.
   
152.509   Assurance Of Flood-Carrying Capacity.
§ 152.501 USE REGULATIONS.
   The following use and development standards apply to development wholly
within, partially within, or in contact with any special flood hazard area as
established in §
152.106 or §
152.311(A):
   (A)   Permitted uses. All uses not otherwise prohibited in this section or
any other applicable land use regulation adopted by the village are allowed
provided they meet the provisions of this chapter; and
   (B)   Prohibited uses.
      (1)   Private water supply systems in all special flood hazard areas
identified by FEMA, permitted under R.C. Chapter 3701; and
      (2)   Infectious waste treatment facilities in all special flood hazard
areas, permitted under R.C. Chapter 3734.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 152.502 WATER AND WASTEWATER SYSTEMS.
   The following standards apply to all water supply, sanitary sewerage and
waste disposal systems not otherwise regulated by the Ohio Revised Code:
   (A)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems;
   (B)   New and replacement sanitary sewerage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and
discharge from the systems into flood waters; and
   (C)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
or contamination from them during flooding.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 152.503 SUBDIVISIONS AND LARGE DEVELOPMENTS.
   (A)   Requirements:
      (1)   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage and are subject to all applicable standards in this
chapter;
      (2)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;
      (3)   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage; and
      (4)   In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation
data are not available, the applicant shall provide a hydrologic and hydraulic
engineering analysis that generates base flood elevations for all subdivision
proposals and other proposed developments containing at least 50 lots or five
acres, whichever is less.
   (B)   The applicant shall meet the requirement to submit technical data to
FEMA in §
152.310(A)(1)(d) when a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis is completed that
generates base flood elevations as required by division (A)(4) above.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 152.504 RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES.
   (A)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. Where a
structure, including its foundation members, is elevated on fill to or above
the base flood elevation, the requirements for anchoring (this division (A))
and construction materials resistant to flood damage (division (B) below) are
satisfied.
   (B)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with methods and materials resistant to flood damage.
   (C)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment
and other service facilities that are designed and/or elevated so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding.
   (D)   New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure, including manufactured homes, shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated to or above the flood protection elevation. In Zone AO areas
with no elevations specified, the structure shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent
natural grade.
   (E)   New construction and substantial improvements, including manufactured
homes, that do not have basements and that are elevated to the flood protection
elevation using pilings, columns, posts or solid foundation perimeter walls
with openings sufficient to allow unimpeded movement of flood waters may have
an enclosure below the lowest floor provided the enclosure meets the following
standards:
      (1)   Be used only for the parking of vehicles, building access or
storage; and
      (2)   Be designed and certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls
by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters; or
      (3)   Have a minimum of two openings on different walls having a total
net area not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area,
and the bottom of all such openings being no higher than one foot above grade.
The openings may be equipped with screens, louvers or other coverings or
devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
   (F)   Manufactured homes shall be affixed to a permanent foundation and
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of
over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.
   (G)   Repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination
that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s
continued designation as a historic structure and is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure, shall be exempt
from the development standards of this section.
   (H)   In AO Zones, new construction and substantial improvement shall have
adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around
and away from the structure.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 152.505 NONRESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES.
   (A)   New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall meet the requirements of §
152.505.
   (B)   New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated to or above the level of the flood
protection elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, shall meet all of the following standards:
      (1)   Be dry floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water to the level of the flood
protection elevation;
      (2)   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
      (3)   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect,
through the use of a Federal Emergency Management Agency floodproofing
certificate, that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2) above.
   (C)   In Zone AO areas with no elevations specified, the structure shall
have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at least two feet above the
highest adjacent natural grade.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 152.506 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.
   Relief to the elevation or dry floodproofing standards may be granted for
accessory structures containing no more than 600 square feet. Such structures
must meet the following standards:
   (A)   They shall not be used for human habitation;
   (B)   They shall be constructed of flood-resistant materials;
   (C)   They shall be constructed and placed on the lot to offer the minimum
resistance to the flow of floodwaters;
   (D)   They shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation;
   (E)   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be
elevated or floodproofed to or above the level of the flood protection
elevation; and
   (F)   They shall meet the opening requirements of §
152.504(E)(3).
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 152.507 RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.
   Recreational vehicles must meet at least one of the following standards:
   (A)   They shall not be located on sites in special flood hazard areas for
more than 180 days;
   (B)   They must be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
   (C)   They must meet all standards of §
152.504.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 152.508 ABOVE GROUND GAS OR LIQUID STORAGE TANKS.
   All above-ground gas or liquid storage tanks shall be anchored to prevent
flotation or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic
loads.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 152.509 ASSURANCE OF FLOOD-CARRYING CAPACITY.
   Pursuant to the purpose and methods of reducing flood damage stated in this
chapter, the following additional standards are adopted to assure that the
reduction of the flood-carrying capacity of watercourses is minimized.
   (A)   Development in floodways.
      (1)   In floodway areas, development shall cause no increase in flood
levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. Prior to issuance of
a floodplain development permit, the applicant must submit a hydrologic and
hydraulic analysis, conducted by a registered professional engineer,
demonstrating that the proposed development would not result in any increase in
the base flood elevation; or
      (2)   Development in floodway areas causing increases in the base flood
elevation may be permitted provided all of the following are completed by the
applicant:
         (a)   Meet the requirements to submit technical data in §
152.310(A);
         (b)   An evaluation of alternatives, which would not result in
increased base flood elevations and an explanation why these alternatives are
not feasible;
         (c)   Certification that no structures are located in areas that would
be impacted by the increased base flood elevation;
         (d)   Documentation of individual legal notices to all impacted
property owners within and outside the community, explaining the impact of the
proposed action on their property; and
         (e)   Concurrence of the Council of the village or designee and the
legislative authority or designee of any other communities impacted by the
proposed actions.
   (B)   Development in riverine areas with base flood elevations but no
floodways.
      (1)   In riverine special flood hazard areas identified by FEMA where
base flood elevation data are provided but no floodways have been designated,
the cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the base flood
elevation more than one foot at any point. Prior to issuance of a floodplain
development permit, the applicant must submit a hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis, conducted by a registered professional engineer, demonstrating that
this standard has been met; or
      (2)   Development in riverine special flood hazard areas identified by
FEMA where base flood elevation data are provided but no floodways have been
designated causing more than one foot increase in the base flood elevation may
be permitted provided all of the following are completed by the applicant:
         (a)   An evaluation of alternatives which would result in an increase
of one foot or less of the base flood elevation and an explanation why these
alternatives are not feasible; and
         (b)   Divisions (A)(2), (A)(2)(a), (A)(2)(c), (A)(2)(d) and (A)(2)(e)
above.
   (C)   Alterations of a watercourse. For the purpose of this chapter, a
watercourse is altered when any change occurs within its banks. The extent of
the banks shall be established by a field determination of the “bankfull
stage”. The field determination of “bankfull stage” shall be based on methods
presented in Chapter 7 of the USDA Forest Service General Technical Report RM-
245, Stream Channel Reference Sites: An Illustrated Guide to Field Technique or
other applicable publication available from a federal, state or other
authoritative source. For all proposed developments that alter a watercourse,
the following standards apply.
      (1)   The bankfull flood-carrying capacity of the altered or relocated
portion of the watercourse shall not be diminished. Prior to the issuance of a
floodplain development permit, the applicant must submit a description of the
extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the
proposed development, and certification by a registered professional engineer
that the bankfull flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse will not be
diminished.
      (2)   Adjacent communities, the United States Army Corps of Engineers and
the Ohio Department of Natural Resources, Division of Water, must be notified
prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse. Evidence of such
notification must be submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
      (3)   The applicant shall be responsible for providing the necessary
maintenance for the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that
the flood-carrying capacity will not be diminished. The Floodplain
Administrator may require the permit holder to enter into an agreement with the
village specifying the maintenance responsibilities. If an agreement is
required, it shall be made a condition of the floodplain development permit.
      (4)   The applicant shall meet the requirements to submit technical data
in §
152.310(A)(1)(c) when an alteration of a watercourse results in the relocation
or elimination of the special flood hazard area, including the placement of
culverts.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
ARTICLE 152.70
APPEALS AND VARIANCES
   
152.701   Appeals Board established.
   
152.702   Powers and duties.
   
152.703   Appeals.
   
152.704   Variances.
   
152.705   Procedure at hearings.
   
152.706   Appeal to the court.
§ 152.701 APPEALS BOARD ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   As established by the village, the Planning Commission shall hear and
decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this
chapter.
   (B)   The Planning Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing
the vote of each member upon each question and shall keep records of all
official actions. Records of the Planning Commission shall be kept and filed at
the Swanton Municipal Office, Swanton, Ohio.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 152.702 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Planning Commission shall hear and decide appeals where it is
alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination
made by the Floodplain Administrator in the administration or enforcement of
this chapter.
   (B)   Authorize variances in accordance with §
152.704 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 152.703 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any person affected by any notice and order, or other official action
of the Floodplain Administrator may request and shall be granted a hearing on
the matter before the Planning Commission provided that such person shall file,
within 14 days of the date of such notice and order, or other official action,
a brief statement of the grounds for such hearing or for the mitigation of any
item appearing on any order of the Floodplain Administrator’s decision. Such
appeal shall be in writing, signed by the applicant, and be filed with the
Floodplain Administrator. Upon receipt of the appeal, the Floodplain
Administrator shall transmit said notice and all pertinent information on which
the Floodplain Administrator’s decision was made to the Planning Commission.
   (B)   Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, the Planning Commission shall
fix a reasonable time for the appeal, give notice in writing to parties in
interest, and decide the appeal within 45 days after the date of receiving said
appeal.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 152.704 VARIANCES.
   Any person believing that the use and development standards of these
regulations would result in unnecessary hardship may file an application for a
variance. The Planning Commission shall have the power to authorize, in
specific cases, such variances from the standards of these regulations, not
inconsistent with federal regulations, as will not be contrary to the public
interest where, owning to special conditions of the lot or parcel, a literal
enforcement of the provisions of these regulations would result in unnecessary
hardship.
   (A)   Application for a variance.
      (1)   Any owner or agent thereof, of property for which a variance is
sought shall make an application for a variance by filing it with the
Floodplain Administrator, who upon receipt of the variance shall transmit it to
the Planning Commission.
      (2)   Such application at a minimum shall contain the following
information: name, address and telephone number of the applicant; legal
description of the property; parcel map; description of the existing use;
description of the proposed use; location of the floodplain; description of the
variance sought; and reason for the variance request.
      (3)   All applications for a variance shall be accompanied by a variance
application fee as set forth in the schedule of fees adopted by the Village of
Swanton.
   (B)   Notice for public hearing. The Planning Commission shall schedule and
hold a public hearing within 30 days after the receipt of an application for a
variance from the Floodplain Administrator. Prior to the hearing, a notice of
such hearing shall be given in a newspaper of general circulation, or mailed to
the owners of property contiguous to and across the street from the parcel of
which a variance is requested at least 20 days before the date of the hearing.
   (C)   Public hearing.
      (1)   At such hearing the applicant shall present such statements and
evidence as the Planning Commission requires. In considering such variance
applications, the Planning Commission shall consider and make findings of fact
on all evaluations, relevant factors and standards specified in other sections
of this chapter as well as the following factors:
         (a)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
         (b)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
         (c)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
         (d)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility
to the community;
         (e)   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
         (f)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
         (g)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
         (h)   The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan
and floodplain management program for that area;
         (i)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
         (j)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
         (k)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
      (2)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship due to the physical characteristics of the property. In
increased cost or inconvenience of meeting the requirements of these
regulations does not constitute an exceptional hardship to the applicant;
         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights beyond that which is allowed in these regulations;
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, nuisances,
fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws;
         (d)   A determination that the structure or other development is
protected by methods to minimize flood damages; and
         (e)   A determination that the variance is the minimum necessary,
considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
      (3)   Upon consideration of the above factors and the purposes of this
chapter, the Planning Commission may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances, as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.
   (D)   Other conditions for variances.
      (1)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
      (2)   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (0.5) acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, providing items in division (C)(1)(a)
through (C)(1)(k) above have been fully considered. As the lot size increases
beyond one-half (0.5) acre, the technical justification required for issuing
the variance increases.
      (3)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor
elevation below the base flood elevation and the cost of flood insurance will
be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor
elevation.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 152.705 PROCEDURE AT HEARINGS.
   (A)   All testimony shall be given under oath.
   (B)   A complete record of the proceedings shall be kept, except
confidential deliberations of the Planning Commission, including all documents
presented and a record of the testimony of all witnesses.
   (C)   The applicant or counsel shall proceed first to present evidence and
testimony in support of the appeal or variance.
   (D)   The Flood Administrator or counsel may present evidence or testimony
in opposition to the appeal or variance.
   (E)   All witnesses shall be subject to cross-examination by the adverse
party or their counsel.
   (F)   The Planning Commission shall issue subpoenas upon written request for
the attendance of witnesses. A reasonable deposit to cover the cost of issuance
and service shall be collected in advance.
   (G)   Planning Commission Decision.
      (1)   The Planning Commission shall prepare conclusions of fact
supporting its decision.
      (2)   The decision may be announced at the conclusion of the hearing and
thereafter issued in writing or the decision shall be issued in writing within
45 days after the hearing.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 152.706 APPEAL TO THE COURT.
   Those aggrieved by the decision of the Planning Commission may appeal such
decision to the Fulton or Lucas County Court of Common Pleas, as provided in
R.C. Chapter 2506.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
ARTICLE 152.80
ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY
   
152.801   Compliance Required.
   
152.802   Notice Of Violation.
 
   
152.990   Penalty.
§ 152.801 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, erected, constructed,
reconstructed, repaired, extended, converted, enlarged or altered without full
compliance with the terms of this chapter and all other applicable regulations
which apply to uses within the village, unless specifically exempted from
filing for a development permit as stated in §
152.309.
   (B)   Failure to obtain a floodplain development permit shall be a violation
of this chapter and shall be punishable in accordance with §
152.990.
   (C)   Floodplain development permits issued on the basis of plans and
applications approved by the Floodplain Administrator authorize only the use
and arrangement set forth in such approved plans and applications or amendments
thereto. Use, arrangement or construction contrary to that authorized shall be
deemed a violation of this chapter and punishable in accordance with §
152.990.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 152.802 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   (A)   Whenever the Floodplain Administrator determines that there has been a
violation of any provision of this chapter, he or she shall give notice of such
violation to the person responsible therefor and order compliance with this
chapter as hereinafter provided.
   (B)   Such notice and order shall:
      (1)   Be put in writing on an appropriate form;
      (2)   Include a list of violations, referring to the section or sections
of this chapter that have been violated, and order remedial action, which, if
taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter;
      (3)   Specify a reasonable time for performance;
      (4)   Advise the owner, operator or occupant of the right to appeal; and
      (5)   Be served on the owner, occupant or agent in person. However, this
notice and order shall be deemed to be properly served upon the owner, occupant
or agent if a copy thereof is sent by registered or certified mail to the
person’s last known mailing address, residence or place of business, and/or a
copy is posted in a conspicuous place in or on the dwelling affected.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 152.990 PENALTY.
   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of
its requirements shall constitute a minor misdemeanor and upon conviction
thereof shall be fined not more than $100 together with the costs of
prosecution. Each day during which such violation continues shall be deemed as
a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the village from
taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation. The village shall prosecute any violation of these regulations in
accordance with the penalties stated herein.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-27-2023)
CHAPTER 153: BUILDINGS
Section
   
153.01   Ohio Building Codes adopted
   
153.02   Village Building Department established
   
153.03   Enforcement authority
§ 153.01 OHIO BUILDING CODES ADOPTED.
   The Ohio Building Code of Ohio, O.A.C. § 4101:1, as promulgated by the Ohio
Board of Building Standards, is hereby adopted as the building code of the
village for all construction within the jurisdiction of such code.
(Ord. 2014-20, passed 7-21-2014)
§ 153.02 VILLAGE BUILDING DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   The Village Building Department is hereby established.
   (B)   Said Department shall have full authority to enforce all laws,
statutes and regulations as provided and authorized in the Ohio Revised Code
and the Ohio Administrative Code pursuant to the certification approved by and
certification rule adopted by the Ohio Board of Building Standards.
(Ord. 2014-20, passed 7-21-2014)
§ 153.03 ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.
   (A)   O.A.C. § 4101:1 (the Building Code); § 4101:2 (the Mechanical Code);
and § 4101:3 (the Plumbing Code), as promulgated by the Ohio Board of Building
Standards, shall apply and be enforced within the said village.
   (B)   This section shall be in full force and effect from and after the
earliest date permitted by law following promulgation of the Ohio Building Code
and Ohio Mechanical Code, by the Board of Building Standards through the
certification process, adoption and effective date of certification issued by
the Ohio Board of Building Standards.
   (C)   The Mayor of the village is hereby authorized and directed to enter
into an agreement with the Wood County Building Inspection Department for the
enforcement of the Ohio Building Codes within the limits of said village,
whereby the Wood County Building Inspection Department will exercise all
authority and accept plans and specifications and make inspections necessary
within said village in accordance with the provisions of the Ohio Building
Codes.
   (D)   The terms of the said agreement shall grant to the Wood County
Building Inspection Department full authority to do all things necessary to
administer and enforce the Ohio Building Codes within the limits of the
village, and in consideration therefore to allow the Wood County Building
Inspection Department to retain all permit and inspection fees authorized by
the state for such purposes.
   (E)   The legislature authority of the village further agrees to hold the
Wood County Building Inspection Department harmless for all claims or causes of
action of every kind and nature arising from the acts of the county, its
departments, agents, employees and representatives in the administration and
enforcement of said codes.
(Ord. 2014-21, passed 7-21-2014)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   AGREEMENTS
      
II.   ANNEXATIONS AND DETACHMENTS
      
III.   DEDICATIONS AND PLAT APPROVALS
      
IV.   EASEMENTS
      
V.   FRANCHISES
      
VI.   REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS
      
VII.   STREET GRADE LEVELS AND STREET NAME CHANGES
      
VIII.   VACATIONS
      
IX.   ZONING MAP CHANGES
TABLE I: AGREEMENTS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord.  Date   Description
No.   Passed
74-10 6-10-  Authorizing the Mayor and the Clerk- Treasurer to enter into agreements with
      1974   other political subdivisions for mutual police aid.
      2-27-  Authorizing the Mayor, the Village Administrator and the Clerk-Treasurer to
78-5  1978   enter into agreements with other political subdivisions for mutual police
             aid.
80-7  2-25-  Authorizing the Mayor and the Clerk- Treasurer to enter into agreements with
      1980   the Village of Wauseon for mutual fire aid.
82-5  3-22-  Authorizing the Mayor and the Administrator to enter into a mutual police
      1982   aid agreement with other municipalities in the county.
83-4  2-14-  Authorizing the Mayor and the Clerk- Treasurer to enter into agreements with
      1983   the City of Wauseon for mutual fire aid.
83-5  2-14-  Authorizing the Mayor and Administrator to enter into a contract for mutual
      1983   police aid with other municipalities in the county.
             Authorizing the village to enter into a cooperative purchasing agreement
86-15 5-12-  with the State Department of Administrative Services, Office of State
      1986   Purchasing for the purchase of supplies, services, equipment and certain
             materials, through an authorized agent.
      3-28-  Authorizing the Mayor, Village Administrator and Clerk to execute a mutual
88-17 1988   police aid agreement with the Villages of Archbold, Delta, Metamora, Fayette
             and the City of Wauseon.
      7-30-  Authorizing a cooperative agreement for construction, maintenance and
90-20 1990   operation of a state water project between the village and the Ohio Water
             Development Authority.
90-36 12-17- Authorizing a community assistance program agreement with the Toledo Edison
      1990   Company.
91-5  2-25-  Authorizing a reciprocal fire protection agreement with the Village of
      1991   Whitehouse.
      5-26-  Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into a fire protection and
92-12 1992   rescue service agreement with Swanton Township and Toledo-Lucas County Port
             Authority.
93-8  8-23-  Establishing a rural enterprise zone and providing tax exemption therein.
      1993
      1-8-   Authorizing Mayor and Clerk to enter into an Ohio Enterprise Zone Agreement
96-2  1996   among the Village of Swanton, Fulton County Commissioners and Pilliod
             Furniture, Inc.
96-23 7-15-  Authorizing the Village Administrator and Fire Chief to enter into a mutual
      1996   aid agreement with Monclova Township for fire and rescue services.
96-30 11-25- Authorizing rates, charges and other service terms and conditions for
      1996   service provided by Ohio Gas Company in the village.
2009- 12-14- Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement for
36    2009   prosecutorial services for the village.
             Authorizing all actions necessary to effect a governmental electricity
2010- 1-25-  aggregation program with opt-out provisions pursuant to R.C. § 4928.20,
3     2010   directing the Fulton County Board of Elections to submit a ballot question
             to the electors.
2010- 6-14-  Amending Ord. 2009-14 authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into a
15    2010   contract with the Toledo-Lucas County Port Authority and Bax Global Inc.
2010- 8-9-   Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement for
17    2010   engineering services with Jones and Henry Engineers for Fulton Street sewer
             separation improvements.
2010- 8-9-   Amending Ord. 2009-21, authorizing the extension of general engineering
24    2010   services agreement with Jones and Henry Engineers.
27-   9-13-  Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement with Leon
2010  2010   Smith for sewer plant consulting services.
2010- 10-25- Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement for
29    2010   engineering services with Poggemeyer Design Group for Birch, Maple and
             Hickory Street improvements.
2010- 11-8-  Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into a contract with Harding
30    2010   Township for 2011 fire protection and rescue services.
2010- 12-13- Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement for
32    2010   prosecutorial services for the village.
             Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into a contract with the
2010- 12-13- Board of Fulton County Commissioners, to serve as bail bondsmen for Fulton
33    2010   County Court, Eastern Division, for a period of one year, ending December
             31, 2011.
2011- 5-9-   Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement with Gerken
10    2011   Paving Inc. for paving improvements to Birch, Maple, Hickory and Oak
             Streets.
2011- 12-12- Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement for
27    2011   prosecutorial services for the village.
             Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into a contract with the
2011- 12-12- Board of Fulton County Commissioners, to serve as bail bondsmen for Fulton
28    2011   County Court, Eastern Division, for a period of one year, ending December
             31, 2012.
2011- 12-12- Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement with Fulton
30    2011   County Commissioners to provide for indigent legal services in Fulton County
             Eastern District Court.
2011- 12-12- Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into contracts with Fulton,
31    2011   Swancreek, Harding, and Swanton Townships for fire protection and rescue
             services.
2011- 12-12- Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement for
32    2011   emergency medical and ambulance services with the Fulton County
             Commissioners.
2012- 3-12-  Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement with
6     2012   Richard Schantz for water plant consulting services.
2012- 3-26-  Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement for
3     2012   engineering services with Poggemeyer Design Group for Elm and West St. Clair
             Street paving improvements.
2012- 4-9-   Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement for
7     2012   engineering services with Jones and Henry Engineers for Fulton Street sewer
             separation improvements Phase 2.
2012- 5-14-  Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement for
9     2012   engineering services with Stantec Consulting Services for the Munson Road
             emergency water line.
2012- 8-13-  Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement with Henry
15    2012   Bergman and Sons for Elm and West St. Clair Street paving improvements.
2012- 8-13-  Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement for the
16    2012   Fulton Street water and sewer improvement project Phase 2.
18-   9-10-  Amending Ord. 2010-24, authorizing the extension of general engineering
2012  2012   services agreement with Jones and Henry Engineers.
2012- 11-12- Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement for
24    2012   engineering services with Poggemeyer Design Group for water plant
             improvements.
2012- 11-26- Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement for
29    2012   prosecutorial services for the village.
             Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into a contract with the
2012- 11-26- Board of Fulton County Commissioners, to serve as bail bondsmen for Fulton
30    2012   County Court, Eastern Division, for a period of one year, ending December
             31, 2013.
2012- 11-26- Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement with Fulton
31    2012   County Commissioners to provide for indigent legal services in Fulton County
             Eastern District Court.
2012- 12-17- Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement with
32    2012   Anderzack-Pitzen Construction Inc. for the Munson Road emergency waterline
             improvement project.
2012- 12-17- Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into contracts with Harding
33    2012   and Swanton Townships for fire protection and rescue services.
2013- 2-25-  Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement with
4     2013   Richard Schantz for water plant consulting services.
2013- 3-25-  Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement with Leon
5     2013   Smith for wastewater treatment plant consulting services.
2013- 4-22-  Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into a connection agreement
8     2013   with Swancreek Water District and the Fulton County Board of Commissioners
             for the Munson Road emergency waterline.
2013- 5-28-  Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into a reimbursement
10    2013   agreement with Fulton County Commissioners for use of basic life support
             equipment in Lucas County.
2013- 9-23-  Amending Ord. 2012-18, authorizing the extension of general engineering
21    2013   services agreement with Jones and Henry Engineers.
2013- 10-28- Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement for
26    2013   engineering services with Poggemeyer Design Group for granular activated
             carbon water plant improvements.
             Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into a contract with the
2013- 11-11- Board of Fulton County Commissioners, to serve as bail bondsmen for Fulton
24    2013   County Court, Eastern Division, for a period of one year, ending December
             31, 2014.
2013- 11-11- Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement with Fulton
25    2013   County Commissioners to provide for indigent legal services in Fulton County
             Eastern District Court.
2013- 11-11- Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into contracts with Fulton
27    2013   Township and Toledo Lucas County Port Authority for fire protection and
             rescue services.
2013- 11-25- Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into contracts with Swanton
30    2013   and Harding Townships for fire protection and rescue services.
2013- 12-9-  Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement for the
32    2013   granular activated carbon (GAC) water improvement project.
2013- 12-9-  Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into a contract with
33    2013   Swancreek Township for fire protection and rescue services.
2014- 3-10-  Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement with
4     2014   Richard Schantz for water plant consulting services.
2014- 3-10-  Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement with Leon
5     2014   Smith for wastewater treatment plant consulting services.
2014- 3-24-  Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement with the
3     2014   Ohio Department of Transportation for bridge inspection services.
2014- 5-27-  Authorizing a mutual aid agreement for emergency police services with
11    2014   surrounding municipal corporations in Fulton County.
2014- 5-27-  Authorizing a demolition contract with Paxton Demolition for the property
16    2014   located at 113-115 North Main Street.
2014- 7-21-  Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement for the
22    2014   Holiday Lane sanitary sewer improvement project.
2014- 8-11-  Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement for the
25    2014   wastewater treatment plant phosphorus removal improvement project.
2014- 10-13- Amending Ord. 2013-21, authorizing the extension of general engineering
26    2014   services agreement with Jones and Henry Engineers.
2014- 11-24- Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement with Fulton
30    2014   County Commissioners to provide for indigent legal services in Fulton County
             Eastern District Court.
             Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into a contract with the
2014- 12-8-  Board of Fulton County Commissioners, to serve as bail bondsmen for Fulton
32    2014   County Court, Eastern Division, for a period of one year, ending December
             31, 2015.
2014- 12-8-  Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement for
34    2014   prosecutorial services for the village.
2014- 12-8-  Authorizing a contract with the Board of Fulton County Commissioners for
35    2014   emergency medical services for a period of two years, ending December 31,
             2016.
2014- 12-29- Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement for
36    2014   engineering services with Jones and Henry Engineers for the Clark Street
             sewer separation project.
2014- 12-29- Repealing Ord. 2014-16 authorizing a demolition contract with Paxton
39    2014   Demolition for the property located at 113-115 North Main Street.
2014- 1-12-  Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into a contract with
37    2015   Swancreek Township for fire protection and rescue services.
2015- 3-9-   Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement with
4     2015   Richard Schantz for water plant consulting services.
2015- 3-9-   Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement with Leon
5     2015   Smith for wastewater treatment plant consulting services.
2015- 3-23-  Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement with
12    2015   Proudfoot and Associates for traffic engineering services.
2015- 4-13-  Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement to provide
8     2015   agricultural services for property owned by the village.
2015- 7-20-  Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement with VWC
23    2015   Investments LLC for the annexation of land into the village.
2015- 8-10-  Authorizing an agreement with Jean Kelly for consulting services.
26    2015
             Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into a contract with the
2015- 11-9-  Board of Fulton County Commissioners, to serve as bail bondsmen for Fulton
32    2015   County Court, Eastern Division, for a period of one year, ending December
             31, 2016.
2015- 11-9-  Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement with Fulton
33    2015   County Commissioners to provide for indigent legal services in Fulton County
             Eastern District Court.
2015- 11-9-  Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement with
34    2015   Smartbill LTD, for printing and mailing services of utility bills.
2015- 11-23- Amending Ord. 2013-21, authorizing the extension of general engineering
38    2015   services agreement with Jones and Henry Engineers.
2015- 12-14- Authorizing the Village Administrator or Mayor to enter into an agreement
39    2015   for emergency medical services with the Fulton County Commissioners.
2015- 12-14- Authorizing an agreement with the Ohio Department of Transportation for the
40    2015   resurfacing of US-20A from Turtle Creek to SR 295.
2015- 12-14- Authorizing an agreement with the Ohio, Department of Transportation for the
41    2015   resurfacing of US-20A SR-64 between Main Street and 945 feet east of Hallett
             Street.
2016- - -    Authorizing the Village Administrator to renew agreement for a countywide
01    2016   emergency management agency.
2016- - -    Authorizing agreement with Andrew Ranou Farm for agricultural services.
05    2016
2016- 5-9-   Authorizing agreement with Hank’s Plumbing & Heating Co. of Toledo, OH for
13    2016   the Clark Street sewer separation project.
2016- 5-23-  Authorizing agreement with DGL Consulting Engineers, LLC for engineering and
15    2016   survey services related to the Garfield Avenue bridge replacement project.
2017- 1-9-   Authorizing the Village Administrator to renew the agreement for a
01    2017   countywide emergency management agency.
2017- 3-13-  Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement with
06    2017   Poggemeyer Design Group for engineering services.
2017- 4-10-  Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into a contract with
10    2017   Swancreek Township for fire protection and rescue services.
2017- 4-10-  Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into a contract with Fulton
11    2017   Township for fire protection and rescue services.
2017- 6-26-  Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement for
16    2017   engineering services with Jones and Henry Engineers for the Project 7 sewer
             separation project.
2017- 8-28-  Amending Ordinance 2016-46, authorizing the extension of general engineering
25    2017   services agreement with Jones and Henry Engineers for a period commencing on
             September 26, 2017 to and ending on September 25, 2018.
2017- 9-11-  Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement for the
26    2017   airport highway storm sewer project.
2017- 9-25-  Authorizing and directing the Mayor and/or Village Administrator to enter
29    2017   into an agreement with the Ohio Department of Transportation related to the
             Garfield Bridge.
2017- 11-13- Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement with Yvonne
32    2017   Trevino for prosecutorial services.
             Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into a contract with the
2017- 11-13- Board of Fulton County Commissioners, to serve as bail bondsmen for the
34    2017   county court, from January 1, 2018 until formally terminated by either
             party.
2017- 11-13- Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into a contract with the
35    2017   Fulton County Commissioners, to provide for indigent legal services.
2017- 12-11- Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into a contract with Fulton
40    2017   Township for fire protection and rescue services.
2017- 12-11- Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into a contract with
41    2017   Swancreek Township for fire protection and rescue services.
2018- 1-8-   Authorizing the Village Administrator to renew the agreement for a
01    2018   countywide emergency management agency.
2018- 1-8-   Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement for
03    2018   construction engineering services with Jones and Henry Engineers for the
             project 7 sewer separation project.
             Authorizing and directing the Mayor and/or Village Administrator to enter
2018- 2-12-  into an agreement with Poggemeyer Design Group for construction,
04    2018   administration, and observation services on the Garfield Avenue Bridge
             replacement project.
2018- 4-23-  Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement for the
12    2018   Church Street reconstruction Phase 1 project.
2018- 6-11-  Authorizing the Village Administrator and Mayor to file a loan application
17    2018   and enter into a loan agreement with the Ohio Water Development Authority
             for the Project 7 Sewer Separation.
2018- 8-27-  Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement for
25    2018   engineering services with Jones and Henry Engineers for the Project 10 -
             Brookside, Woodside, Parkside Combined Sewer Separation.
2018- 6-11-  Authorizing the Village Administrator and Mayor to file a loan application
17    2018   and enter into a loan agreement with the Ohio Water Development Authority
             for the Project 7 Sewer Separation.
2018- 8-27-  Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement for
25    2018   engineering services with Jones and Henry Engineers for the Project 10 -
             Brookside, Woodside, Parkside Combined Sewer Separation.
2018- 10-9-  Authorizing the Mayor and/or Village Administrator to enter into an
28    2018   agreement with the Ohio Department of Natural Resources related to Memorial
             Park Pavilion Project.
2018- 10-9-  Authorizing the Mayor and/or Village Administrator to enter into an
29    2018   agreement with the Ohio Department of Transportation for safe routes to
             school non-infrastructure funds.
2018- 10-22- Amending Ordinance 2018-12 authorizing Village Administrator to enter into
31    2018   an agreement for the Church Street reconstruction project.
2018- 11-12- Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into contract with Swancreek
33    2018   Township for fire protection and rescue services.
2018- 11-12- Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into contract with Fulton
34    2018   Township for fire protection and rescue services.
2018- 11-26- Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement with Fulton
37    2018   County Commissioners to provide for indigent legal services in Fulton County
             Eastern District Court.
2019- 1-14-  Authorizing the Village Administrator to renew the agreement for a
01    2019   countywide Emergency Management Agency.
2019- 1-14-  Accepting the terms of the NatureWorks Local Grant Program Project
02    2019   Agreement.
2019- 1-14-  Authorizing and directing the Mayor and/or Village Administrator to enter
04    2019   into an agreement with Poggemeyer Design Group for engineering services for
             the Safe Routes to School design and bid.
2019- 1-14-  Authorizing and directing the Mayor and/or Village Administrator to enter
05    2019   into an agreement with Poggemeyer Design Group for engineering services for
             the Memorial Park Pavilion remodel project.
2019- 2-11-  Authorizing the Village Administrator and Mayor to enter into a WPCLF
07    2019   agreement on behalf of the village for planning, design, and/or construction
             of Project 10 - Brookside, Woodside and Parkside Combined Sewer Separation.
2019- 2-25-  Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement to provide
08    2019   agricultural services for property owned by the village.
2019- 5-13-  Authorizing and directing the Mayor and/or Village Administrator to enter
18    2019   into an agreement with Poggemeyer Design Group for engineering services for
             the West Pointe Resurfacing Project.
2019- 5-28-  Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement with The
21    2019   Dotson Company of Whitehouse, Ohio for the Memorial Park Pavilion renovation
             project.
2019- 5-28-  Authorizing and directing the Village Administrator to enter into an
24    2019   agreement with Republic Services for refuse and recycling services.
2019- 8-26-  Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement for the
30    2019   West Pointe Estates Resurfacing Project.
2019- 10-15- Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement for the
34    2019   Project 10 Sewer Separation.
2019- 10-28- Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement with Rotary
36    2019   Club of Swanton for improvements to Pilliod Park.
2019- 11-11- Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into contract with Swancreek
38    2019   Township for fire protection and rescue services.
2019- 11-11- Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into contract with Fulton
39    2019   Township for fire protection and rescue services.
2019- 11-25- Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement with Fulton
41    2019   County Commissioners to provide for indigent legal services in Fulton County
             Eastern District Court.
2019- 11-25- Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement for
43    2019   prosecutorial services for the village.
2019- 11-25- Authorizing the Village Administrator to renew the agreement for a
44    2019   countywide emergency management agency.
2020- 4-13-  Authorizing the Mayor and/or Village Administrator to enter into an
08    2020   agreement with Jones & Henry Engineers for engineering services for Project
             8 & 9 Sewer Separation.
2020- 10-26- Authorizing and directing the Mayor and/or Village Administrator to enter
23    2020   into an agreement with Shoaf Consulting for engineering services for water
             treatment plant - membrane softening improvements.
2020- 10-26- Authorizing and directing the Mayor and/or Village Administrator to enter
24    2020   into an agreement with the Ohio Department of Transportation for safe routes
             to school infrastructure funds.
2020- 12-14- Authorizing the Village Administrator to renew the agreement for a
27    2020   countywide emergency management agency.
2020- 12-14- Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement with Fulton
28    2020   County Commissioners to provide for indigent legal services in Fulton County
             Eastern District Court.
2021- 1-25-  Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement for the
01    2021   Beard Pavilion replacement project.
2021- 4-5-   Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement for the
07    2021   2021 Safe Routes to School project.
2021- 4-26-  Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement for
08    2021   construction engineering services with Jones and Henry Engineers for the
             Project 8 & 9 Combined Sewer Separation Project.
2021- 4-26-  Authorizing the Village Administrator and Mayor to apply for, accept, and
09    2021   enter into a water pollution control loan fund agreement (WPCLF) on behalf
             of the village.
2021- 5-24-  Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement with
12    2021   Underground Utilities, Inc. of Monroeville, OH for the Project 8 & 9 sewer
             separation.
2021- 6-28-  Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement for the
13    2021   Woodside resurfacing project.
2021- 9-27-  Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement for
19    2021   emergency medical services with the Fulton County Commissioners.
2021- 10-25- Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into a fisheries agreement
23    2021   with the Ohio Department of Natural Resources.
2021- 10-25- Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into a contract with Fulton
25    2021   Township for fire protection and rescue services.
2021- 10-25- Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into a contract with
26    2021   Swancreek Township for fire protection and rescue services.
2021- 11-8-  Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement for
30    2021   prosecutorial services for the village.
2021- 12-13- Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement with Fulton
34    2021   County Commissioners to provide for indigent legal services in Fulton County
             Eastern District Court.
2021- 12-13- Authorizing an directing the Mayor and/or Village Administrator to enter
36    2021   into an agreement with Fishbeck for engineering services for headworks
             improvements.
2022- 1-10-  Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement for
01    2022   membrane improvement project.
2022- 1-24-  Authorizing the Mayor and/or Village Administrator to enter into an
03    2022   agreement with Jones & Henry Engineers for engineering services for Project
             3&11 Sewer Separation.
2022- 1-24-  Authorizing the Fire Chief and/or Village Administrator to enter into an
04    2022   agreement with the Secretary of the Air Force for fire protection services.
2022- 1-24-  Authorizing the Village Administrator to renew the agreement for a
05    2022   countywide emergency management agency.
2022- 2-28-  Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement to retain
07    2022   Kent Murphree as the Village Solicitor.
2022- 6-13-  Amending Ordinance 2022-03 and authorizing the Mayor and/or Village
16    2022   Administrator to enter into an updated agreement with Jones & Henry
             Engineers for Project 3, 11 & 12 Sewer Separation.
2022- 6-27-  Authorizing the Mayor and/or Village Administrator to enter into an
18    2022   agreement with Poggemeyer Design Group for engineering services for Hallett
             Avenue Phase A Project.
2022- 10-24- Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement with Fulton
23    2022   County Commissioners to provide for indigent legal services in Fulton County
             Eastern District Court.
2022- 10-24- Consenting to the Director of Ohio Department of Transportation (ODOT) to
24    2022   move forward with Bridge Inspection Program Services.
Res.  11-15- Authorizing the Safety/Service Director to enter into a contract with Choice
22-   2022   One Engineering for the rendering of professional services related to the
128          Water Transmission Main Replacement.
2022- 12-14- Authorizing the Village Administrator to renew the agreement for a
28    2022   countywide emergency management agency.
2023- 2-13-  Authorizing the Village Administrator and Mayor to apply for, accept, and
04    2023   enter into a water pollution control loan fund agreement (WPCLF) on behalf
             of the village.
2023- 6-12-  Authorizing and directing the Village Administrator to enter into an
10    2023   agreement with Republic Services for refuse and recycling services.
2023- 9-25-  Authorizing and directing the Fire Chief and/or Village Administrator to
15    2023   enter into an agreement with the Secretary of the Air Force for fire
             protection services.
2023- 9-25-  Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement with Fulton
16    2023   County Commissioners to provide for indigent legal services in Fulton County
             Eastern District court.
2023- 11-27- Authorizing the Village Administrator to renew the agreement for a
20    2023   countywide emergency management agency for 2024.
2023- 12-11- Authorizing the Village Administrator and Mayor to enter into a water
22    2023   pollution control loan fund agreement for the screen/headworks improvement
             project.
2023- 12-11- Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement for the
24    2023   WRRF screen/headworks project.
2024- 6-10-  Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement with the
07    2024   Ohio Department of Transportation (ODOT) to rehabilitate bridges, resurface
             pavement and perform related work on State Route 64.
2024- 8-12-  Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement for the
10    2024   FUL-CR1-5.12 Hallett Avenue Improvements Phase A Project.
2024- 8-26-  Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement for the
11    2024   FUL-CR1-5.12 Hallett Avenue Improvements Phase A Project.
2024- 9-23-  Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement with DGL
12    2024   Consulting Engineers for the FUL-CR1-5.12 Hallett Avenue Improvements Phase
             A Project.
2024- 10-15- Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement with
13    2024   Kleinfelder for engineering services for Crestwood Drive reconstruction.
2024- 10-15- Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement with Fulton
14    2024   County Commissioners to provide for indigent legal services in Fulton County
             Eastern District Court.
2025- 4-14-  Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement with
09    2025   Salenbien Trucking & Excavating, Inc. for the Munson Road Improvements
             Project.
2025- 6-9-   Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement with Klumm
13    2025   Bros for conducting emergency sewer repair work on North Main Street.
            
 
TABLE II: ANNEXATIONS AND DETACHMENTS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./ Date
Res.  Passed Description
No.
80-9  - -    Ransom.
82-65 - -    Cooper and Haines.
335   12-13- Authorizes annexation of land near SE corner of corporation line.
      1926
347   11-14- Accepting order of County Commissioners modifying annexation petition of land
      1927   described in Ord. 335.
493   1-9-   Accepting annexation application of Ollie W. Albright et al. for 12.26 acres.
      1956
501   1-14-  Accepting annexation application of Elmer Chortie et al.
      1957
502   1-14-  Accepting annexation application of Donald J. McQuade et al.
      1957
536   9-14-  Authorizes annexation of parcel bounded by the Ohio Turnpike, Fulton-Lucas
      1959   County line and centerline of State Highway 64.
537   10-12- Authorizes annexation of parcel bounded by village corporate limits, Fulton-
      1959   Lucas County Line Road and Toledo-Wauseo n (Chicago Pike) Road.
543   7-11-  Authorizes annexation of 6.55 acres being a parcel in NW Quarter of Section
      1960   12.
Res.  2-27-  Establishes eastern boundary of village on Section Line 12.
458   1961
      4-27-  Authorizes annexation of 0.753 acres in part of the west 45.11 acres of SW
570   1964   Quarter of Section 7, Town 7N, Range 9E, lying south of the Toledo-Wauseo n
             Road.
76-16 10-25- Cannaley.
      1976
77-12 8-8-   Accepting annexation application of Richard D. Wells, west of State Route 64,
      1977   south of Ohio Turnpike, 1.463 acres of land.
81-1  1-12-  Accepting annexation of Gerald Hines and various, east of Hallett, south of
      1981   Airport Highway, 69 acres.
81-14 9-14-  Accepting annexation of Eleanor Sulewski. southwest corner of Dodge and
      1981   Munson Roads, 0.5860 acres.
82-16 6-14-  Accepting annexation from the village, south of West Pointe Estates, 0.919
      1982   acres.
83-2  1-24-  Accepting annexation of Jim Cannaley, Swanton Trailer Court, Hallett Avenue,
      1983   12.28 acres.
83-33 9-26-  Accepting annexation of Clarence and Barbara Wilhelm, Honey Bear on Airport
      1983   Highway, 0.722 acres.
84-1  1-9-   Accepting annexation of Loren and Hazel Glaser, south of West Pointe Estates,
      1984   0.912 acres.
84-15 7-2-   Accepting annexation of Leo and Rita Hall, Harding Drive and Browning Road,
      1984   1.00 acre.
88-40 10-10- Accepting annexation of James Wolfe, Something Special Day Care, Airport
      1988   Highway and Munson.
89-2  1-9-   Accepting annexation application of Swanton Local School District.
      1989
89-20 6-26-  Accepting annexation application of Leon R. Mann et al., 0.737 acres.
      1989
89-21 6-26-  Accepting annexation application of Cannaley Management Group, Inc.,
      1989   Centerville Road, 116.611 acres.
89-24 8-14-  Miller, State Route 64, next to Reservoir.
      1989
90-15 6-25-  Accepting annexation application of Dielman, Inc., Airport Highway.
      1990
90-38 12-17- Accepting annexation application of Cannaley Management Group, Inc.,
      1990   Centerville Road, 78.207 acres.
90-39 12-17- Accepting annexation application of Cannaley Management Group, Inc., South 64
      1990   and Airport Highway, west side, 56.338 acres.
93-19 12-14- Annexation R & D Properties, west side of Munson Road, north of RR tracks,
      1993   8.318 acres.
96-5  2-12-  Annexation of Perkins Subdivision, 7.69 acres on Hallett Avenue.
      1996
96-20 8-26-  Annexation of OCCA, 95.35 acres of land to the village.
      1996
97-37 1-12-  Annexation of Wells Subdivision, 4.810 acres of land to the village.
      1997
98-3  2-9-   Annexation of Sandair, 47.68 acres of land to the village.
      1998
98-12 3-23-  Memorial Park, Playtek.
      1998
98-30 8-10-  New high school property, North Main.
      1998
99-12 6-14-  Annexation of Panning property, County Road 2, south of Airport Highway.
      1999
99-29 11-8-  Annexation of Richard C. Anderson property, 53 acre parcel, Swanton Township,
      1999   Lucas County, Airport Highway and State Route 64.
2000- 12-11- Annexation of Kathleen Noble property, 79.451 acre parcel, Fulton Township,
39    2000   Munson and Dodge.
2002- 4-22-  Annexation of 0.78 acre parcel from Leona F. Sloan.
13    2002
2002- 4-22-  Annexation of 3.295 acre parcel from Bendix Roschmann, Mary Jane Roschmann,
14    2002   Francis Gelske and Kelly Gelske.
2003- 4-14-  McNeill annexation of 8.71 acres of land, 220 West Airport Highway.
16    2003
2003- 5-27-  Annexation of 55.337 acres, Reservoir property.
25    2003
2003- 9-22-  Annexation of 147.653 acres, adjacent to reservoir property, west and north
44    2003   to existing corporation line.
2003- 9-22-  Annexation of 5.434 acres of property owned by James Cannaley, north side of
45    2003   Airport Highway, just west of State Route 64, Lucas County.
2003- 9-22-  Annexation of 21.022 acres of property, Louisville Title Agency for Northwest
46    2003   Ohio, Centerville Road.
2003- 10-13- Annexation of 1.828 acres of property, owned by Shirley Hall.
49    2003
2004- 2-23-  Annexation of approximately 10.699 acres of land: Holiday Lane along with
5     2004   parcels: 26-050012-00.0 0, 26-050032-00.0 0, 26-050036-00.0 0, 26-050048-00.0
             0 and 26-050332-00.0 0.
2004- 4-12-  Annexation of 1 acre owned by Robert and Heather Herr, 7290 County Road 2.
11    2004
2004- 10-28- Annexation of property owned by Rollan and Shirley Griffin, 7234 County Road
29    2004   1-3, changed to 111 Browning Road.
2004- 1-24-  Annexation of 59.91 acres of land, application by James Cannaley (Najarian
48    2005   property along East Airport Highway and north to Brindley Road).
2010- 6-14-  Annexation of approximately 1.128 acres of land to the village, being part of
13    2010   the Southwest Quarter of Section 6, Township 7 North, Range 9 East, in
             Swanton Township, County of Lucas.
             Indicating what services will be provided to the area proposed to be annexed
2011- 4-11-  to the village by petitions for annexation filed with the Board of Lucas
6     2011   County Commissioners by James L. Jefferds and Gloria A. Jefferds (1.520
             acres); Mary L. Krause (1.010 acres); and Robert J. Wertz and Jeanette A.
             Vance (1.700 acres).
             Indicating what services will be provided to the area proposed to be annexed
             to the village by petitions for annexation filed with the Board of Fulton
2011- 4-11-  County Commissioners by Jack L. Meller and Pamela A. Meller (1.0 acres);
7     2011   Roseann C. Meiring (0.7067 acres); John A. Bahus and Frances Caroline Bahus
             (1.0 acres); Sheldon C. Meister and Joan B. Meister (1.61 acres); and Janice
             A. Biehl (5.0 acres).
             Indicating what services will be provided to the area proposed to be annexed
2011- 4-25-  to the village by petitions for annexation filed with the Board of Fulton
7     2011   County Commissioners by James L. Jefferds and Gloria A. Jefferds (1.520
             acres); Mary L. Krause (1.010 acres); and Robert J. Wertz and Jeanette A.
             Vance (1.700 acres).
             Indicating what services will be provided to the area proposed to be annexed
2011- 8-22-  to the village by petitions for annexation filed with the Board of Lucas
19    2011   County Commissioners by John and Elaine Purdy (3.5 acres); and Lynette and
             Jerami Nation (4 acres).
             Indicating what services will be provided to the area proposed to be annexed
2011- 8-22-  to the village by petitions for annexation filed with the Board of Fulton
20    2011   County Commissioners by David and Sharon Marvin (0.534 acres); Peter Kelly
             (5.26 acres); and Andrew Pilliod (5.25 acres).
2011- 11-14- Indicating what services will be provided to the area proposed to be annexed
22    2011   to the village by petitions for annexation filed with the Board of Lucas
             County Commissioners by Richard T. Betz (2.02 acres).
             Indicating what services will be provided to the area proposed to be annexed
2011- 11-14- to the village by petitions for annexation filed with the Board of Fulton
23    2011   County Commissioners by Donald L. and Evelyn J. Kerr (3.02 acres); and Diana
             Kwiatkowski (0.370 acres).
2011- 11-14- Indicating what services will be provided to the area proposed to be annexed
24    2011   to the village by petitions for annexation filed with the Board of Fulton
             County Commissioners.
             Indicating what services will be provided to the area proposed to be annexed
2012- 11-12- to the village by petitions for annexation filed with the Board of Lucas
25    2012   County Commissioners by Mapleview Farms (39.05 acres); and Mapleview Farms
             (37.250 acres).
             Indicating what services will be provided to the area proposed to be annexed
2012- 11-26- to the village by petitions for annexation filed with the Board of Lucas
27    2012   County Commissioners by Mapleview Farms (Taxing Parcel Number 72-22821);
             Mapleview Farms (Taxing Parcel Number 72-22783); and Mapleview Farms Taxing
             Parcel Numbers 72-22687, 72-22714, 72-22714, 72-22747).
             Indicating what services will be provided to the area proposed to be annexed
             to the village by petitions for annexation filed with the Board of Lucas
2013- 1-22-  County Commissioners by Mapleview Farms (Taxing Parcel Numbers 72-22824);
2     2013   Schmidt Family L.L.C., (Taxing Parcel Number 72-22821); Mary A. Smith,
             Trustee (Taxing Parcel Number 72-22844); Mapleview Farms (Taxing Parcel
             Number 72-22783); and Mapleview Farms (Taxing Parcel Numbers 72-22687, 72-
             22714, 72-22714, 72-22747).
             Annexation of approximately 107.98 acres of land to the village, being
2013- 6-24-  Mapleview Farms (Taxing Parcel Numbers 72-22824, 72-22714, 72-22687, 12-22141
11    2013   and 72-22783: 77.49 acres); Mary Smith (Taxing Parcel Number 72-22844; 8.940
             acres); and Schmidt Family L.L.C. (Taxing Parcel Number 72-22821: 21.550
             acres).
2013- 8-26-  Indicating what services will be provided to the area proposed to be annexed
16    2013   to the village by petitions for annexation filed with the Board of Lucas
             County Commissioners by Eric Bergman (Taxing Parcel Number 72-07117).
             Indicating what services will be provided to the area proposed to be annexed
2015- 2-9-   to the village by petitions for annexation filed with the Board of Fulton
6     2015   County Commissioners by Eric M. Honeywell (Taxing Parcel Number 26-050176-
             00.0 00).
             Indicating what services will be provided to the area proposed to be annexed
             to the village by petitions for annexation filed with the Board of Lucas
2015- 5-26-  County Commissioners by V.W.C. Investments, L.L.C. (Taxing Parcel Numbers 72-
15    2015   06194 and 72-06261); Neil and Mary Toeppe (Taxing Parcel Numbers 72-06782,
             72-06787 and 72-06777); A.M.A. Management Co., Ltd. (Taxing Parcel Number 72-
             06611); William B. Rowland, Trustee, et al. (Taxing Parcel Number 72-06774);
             and Ohio Gas Company (Taxing Parcel Numbers 72-06254 and 72-06247).
2015- 6-22-  Annexation of approximately 0.88 acres of land to the village, being an area
16    2015   of land in Swancreek Township, County of Fulton.
2018- 12-10- Annexation of .75 acres of land, more or less, in Swancreek Township to the
38    2018   village, on petition by James and Mary Broyles.
2018- 1-28-  Annexation of 5.13 ± acres of land, more or less, in Swanton Township to the
40    2019   village, on petition by John Pryzbylek.
2019- 4-22-  Annexation of 2.00 acres of land, more or less, in Swanton Township, on
16    2019   petition by Elizabeth J. Lambert.
2019- 5-28-  Annexation agreement for property located at 300 N. Hallett Avene.
22    2019
2019- 9-9-   Annexation of 5.78 acres of land, more or less, in Swancreek Township.
31    2019
2019- 9-23-  Annexation and boundary agreement with Swanton Township.
33    2019
2020- 2-10-  Annexation of 1 acre of land, more or less, in Swancreek Township.
03    2020
2021- 11-8-  Assenting to the detachment of property containing approximately 1.61 acres
27    2021   (Parcel Number 28-055372-01.000).
2023- 4-24-  Approving the pending annexation filed by Steven L. and Dawn M. McCaw.
07    2023
2023- 6-26-  Accepting annexation of 3.23 acres of land, more or less, in Swancreek
11    2023   Township to the village, on petition by Steven L. McCaw and Dawn McCaw.
2025- 1-27-  Accepting annexation of 168.51 acres of land, more or less, in Swanton
03    2025   Township to the village, on petition by Murbach, Inc.; JBM Farms, LLC; and
             AGS, LLC.
            
 
TABLE III: DEDICATIONS AND PLAT APPROVALS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Res. 126      5-20-1895   Plat of Sylvia L. Sanderson’s Fourth Addition.
207           7-14-1902   Plat of Hallett’s Addition.
218           6-13-1904   Plat of Sylvia L. Sanderson’s Fifth Addition.
221           8-22-1904   Plat of Louis A. Sanderson’s First Addition.
222           10-3-1904   Plat of George H. Hayne’s Second Addition.
243           11-5-1906   Plat of Zeller’s First Addition.
244           11-5-1906   Plat of Eva and Iva Sanderson’s First Addition.
258           4-26-1907   Plat of Sylvia L. Sanderson’s Sixth Addition.
286           7-28-1913   Acceptance of an alley dedicated by Chancy Berkibile.
Res. 310      1-15-1923   Plat of Zellar, Nester, Busack and Beil First
                          Addition.
328           4-27-1925   Extending Church Street in northwest direction to
                          Miller Avenue.
454           12-21-1950  Plat of L.F. Keopfer’s First Addition.
2000-31       9-11-2000   Accepting dedication of Parkview Drive as Village
                          Street.
2017-18       6-26-2017   Approving, confirming and accepting the dedication of
                          additional right-of-way on Garfield Avenue.
2021-29       11-8-2021   Dedicating the unimproved portion of Hickory Street
                          in Albrights Addition, Lot 109.
                         
 
TABLE IV: EASEMENTS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res.   Date   Description
No.         Passed
153         8-24-  To Price and Huyck to place telephone poles along Chestnut
            1896   Street.
Res. 197    8-11-  Toledo and Indiana R.R. Co., relocation of tracks on Main and
            1902   Broadway Streets.
Brockhoff   5-20-  “Alley” but never acknowledged by village, shared driveway.
            1905
Foodtown    6-3-   113 East Airport Highway water line and storm sewer.
            1905
252         3-22-  Toledo and Indiana R.R. Co., relocation of tracks in Broadway
            1909   and Dodge Streets.
265         10-4-  Village to lay water pipes across Lake Shore and Michigan
            1909   Southern Ry. Co. right-of-way.
333         11-1-  Ohio Gas Light and Coke Co., to construct, operate and
            1926   maintain gas pipes and appliances.
334         9-7-   Toledo and Indiana R.R. Co., to construct and maintain a spur
            1926   or side track on Broadway Street.
365         8-27-  Swanton Milling and Elevator Co., to construct an unloading
            1928   pit under a side track on Woodlawn Avenue.
Wiles       3-10-  Hollis S. Bassett’s Second Addition, Garfield area sanitary
            1957   sewer.
Chamberlin  3-13-  Old Plank Road (Airport Highway) sanitary sewer.
            1957
Ruggles     4-10-  Main Street and South Street sanitary sewer.
            1957
Haynes      4-11-  Garfield sanitary sewer.
            1957
Rehring     4-24-  Railroad area sanitary sewer.
            1957
Busach      5-17-  Railroad area sanitary sewer.
            1957
Faber       5-17-  Railroad area sanitary sewer.
            1957
Rowley      8-19-  Sanitary sewer.
            1957
Hallett     8-28-  Chicago Pike Road (Airport Highway) sanitary sewer.
            1957
Kern        8-30-  Lot 11 in Pleasant Home Addition sanitary sewer.
            1957
Beech       9-3-   Curtis sanitary sewer.
            1957
Weir        9-6-   Main Street area sanitary sewer.
            1957
Tuggle      9-7-   Sylvia L. Sanderson’s Addition sanitary sewer.
            1957
Hollis      9-10-  Curtis sanitary sewer.
            1957
Judson      9-11-  S. L. Sanderson’s Addition sanitary sewer.
            1957
Noe         9-11-  Main Street, Sylvia L. Sanderson’s Addition sanitary sewer.
            1957
Norwine     9-11-  Joseph P. Miller’s Addition sanitary sewer.
            1957
Wise        9-11-  Joseph P. Miller’s Addition sanitary sewer.
            1957
Robasser    9-12-  Joseph P. Miller’s Addition sanitary sewer.
            1957
Haynes      9-13-  Sylvia L. Sanderson’s Addition sanitary sewer.
            1957
Tolford     9-13-  J.P. Miller’s Addition sanitary sewer.
            1957
Brockhoff   9-14-  J.P. Miller’s Addition sanitary sewer.
            1957
Latimer     9-14-  Joseph P. Miller’s Addition sanitary sewer.
            1957
           6-29-  Garfield, water line Murbach-Seifert Post Memorial Home.
            1964
583         8-9-   Pilliod Cabinet Co. to install a railroad spur across
            1965   Broadway Street and an alley west of Woodlawn Avenue.
585         9-27-  W.R. Grace and Co., Marco Chemical Division to install a
            1965   railroad spur across Broadway Street.
Miller      10-17- State Route 64, north of water plant water line.
            1977
Suess       7-26-  104 Brookside Drive, temp.
            1982
MLR         8-20-  14160 East Airport Highway sanitary sewer.
(Wendy’s) 1985
MLR         8-20-  14180 East Airport Highway sanitary sewer.
(Wendy’s) 1985
Albright    7-29-  395 West Airport Highway sanitary sewer.
            1988
Harborside  7-29-  401 West Airport Highway sanitary sewer.
            1988
Nazarene    7-29-  315 West Airport Highway sanitary sewer.
            1988
Pilliod     7-29-  301 West Airport Highway sanitary sewer.
            1988
Hallett     8-12-  421 West Airport Highway sanitary sewer.
            1988
Tavtigian   8-12-  333 West Airport Highway sanitary sewer.
            1988
Ritenour    8-29-  425 West Airport Highway sanitary sewer.
            1988
Miller      8-14-  State Route 64, north of water plant water line.
            1989
Seventh-Day 7-30-  209 West Airport Highway water line.
            1990
90-37       12-17- Board of Trustees of Swanton Public School District Library
            1990   driveway and parking lot access.
Reese       11-1-  201 Walnut Street driveway.
            1992
Bowles      10-22- 2093 US 20A water main and sewer facilities.
            1996
Wolf        10-22- 2041 US 20A water main and sewer facilities.
            1996
Crow        2-7-   2149 US 20A water main and sewer facilities.
            1997
Res. 98-4   5-4-   134 East Airport Highway sanitary sewer.
Patterson   1998
Res. 98-4   5-4-   14255 East Airport Highway sanitary sewer.
Fessenden   1998
98-40       9-14-
Louisville  1998   Turtle Creek sanitary sewer.
Title
2003-10     2-24-
Lutheran    2003   200 Dodge Street storm sewer.
Church
Swanton     12-14- Willow Run storm sewer.
Properties  2004
Rittenour   3-28-  South Munson Road widening.
            2005
            8-10-  Permitting the encroachment of an existing parking area
2015-24     2015   located at 14230 Airport Highway into the road right-of-way
                   of Airport Highway.
            9-11-  Authorizing and directing the Mayor and/or Village
2017-27     2017   Administrator to enter into an easement agreement with Ohio
                   Gas of Ohio, Inc. relating to the Garfield Bridge project.
2023-06     5-8-   Abandoning easement on real property located at 3810
            2023   Waterville Swanton Road.
                  
 
TABLE V: FRANCHISES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
177      9-16-1896   Northwestern Toll Line Co. to erect and operate a
                     telephone system.
189      4-10-1899   Central Union Telephone Co. to erect and maintain a
                     telephone system.
191      1-29-1900   Northwestern Ohio Telephone Co. to erect and operate a
                     telephone system.
192      2-25-1901   Joseph Yost and Frederick Collins to lay and operate an
                     electric railroad in Garfield Ave.
197      7-1-1901    Detwiler, Donnelly, Brown, Files and Griffin to construct
                     a railroad along certain streets.
253      12-31-1906  W.R. Balderson to erect and maintain a system for
                     furnishing electricity.
250      12-14-1908  J.H. Lochbihler to construct and operate a railroad.
280      5-20-1912   The Gordon Lumber, Basket and Mfg. Co. to construct,
                     operate and maintain a steam railroad.
288      9-29-1913   Abner D. Baker to erect apparatus for conducting
                     electricity.
305      2-22-1915   Amends Ord. 288 re: Baker electricity franchise.
303      3-15-1915   Amends Ord. 197 re: Toledo and Indiana R.R. Co. right to
                     lay and maintain a railroad.
337      7-19-1920   Swanton Home Telephone Co. to construct, operate and
                     maintain a telephone exchange with appurtenances.
376      5-16-1929   Toledo and Indiana R.R. Co. to construct and maintain a
                     track siding for 25 years.
396      4-27-1931   Ohio Fuel Gas Co. to lay and maintain pipe for conveying
                     gas for 25 years; fixes rates for 5 years.
409      6-26-1935   Toledo Edison Co. regulates domestic electricity rates for
                     5 years.
411      9-13-1937   Toledo Edison Co. regulates street lighting rates for 6
                     years.
417      9-26-1938   Toledo Edison Co. regulates electrical rates used for
                     water supply for 5 years.
427      10-26-1942  Toledo Edison Co. regulates street lighting rates for 5
                     years.
                     Toledo Edison Co. to erect, maintain and operate
436      7-9-1945    appurtenances for conducting electricity, telephone and
                     telegraph for 25 years.
440      10-14-1946  Toledo Edison Co. regulates electrical rates used for
                     water supply for 5 years.
447      10-13-1947  Toledo Edison Co. regulates street lighting rates for 5
                     years.
448      1-28-1948   Toledo Edison Co. regulates street lighting rates for
                     parts of Main, Broadway and Dodge Street for 10 years.
492      12-13-1955  Ohio Gas Co. to lay, maintain and operate pipes for supply
                     of gas for 25 years.
497      9-10-1956   Toledo Edison Co. regulates electrical rates used for
                     water supply for 5 years.
511      5-13-1957   Toledo Edison Co. regulates electrical rates to operate
                     sewage disposal plant for 10 years.
513      9-23-1957   Toledo Edison Co. regulates street lighting rates for 10
                     years.
514      11-11-1957  Ohio Gas Co. regulates rates for supply of natural gas.
519      11-25-1957  Amends Ord. 492 re: Ohio Gas Co. franchise.
                     Toledo Edison Co. regulates prices for overhead white way
523      7-14-1958   lighting for parts of Main, Broadway and Dodge Streets for
                     10 years.
551      8-14-1961   Toledo Edison Co. regulates electricity prices for 10
                     years.
                     Toledo Edison Co. provides rates for mercury vapor
569      4-27-1964   lighting of streets and other public places to November 1,
                     1967.
73-14    8-13-1973   Tiffin Valley Cable, Inc. to operate and maintain a
                     community television antenna system.
79-10    6-29-1979   Amends Ord. 73-14 re: Tiffin Valley Cable, Inc. franchise.
83-26    7-26-1983   Amends Ord. 73-14 re: Tiffin Valley Cable, Inc. franchise.
85-19    3-11-1985   Triax Associates I transfer of cable TV franchise from
                     Community Cable TV.
86-25    7-21-1986   Triax Associates I, L.P. transfer of assets form Triax
                     Associates I.
88-41    9-26-1988   A.X.S. Services, Inc. franchise agreement for refuse
                     collection.
89-17    5-22-1989   Triax Associates I cable television services for 15 years
                     to May 22, 2004.
89-27    10-23-1989  Amends Ord. 88-41 re: A.X.S. Services refuse service
                     agreement.
90-28    9-10-1990   ABS Services, Inc. refuse pickup.
90-30    10-8-1990   Laidlaw Waste Systems collection of residential refuse for
                     1-year term.
90-35    12-17-1990  Toledo Edison Co. regulates electricity prices.
91-1     3-11-1991   Toledo Edison Co. furnishing street lighting for three
                     years.
2004-18  5-24-2004   Mayor and Clerk to enter into a franchise agreement with
                     Adelphia Communications for cable television service.
                    
 
TABLE VI: REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./ Date
Res.  Passed Description
No.
Res.  9-12-  Purchase of land to widen Garfield Avenue east of Clark Street.
102   1894
Res.  6-1-   Purchase of 50 feet off east side of Lot 20 of Sylvia L. Sanderson’s Third
147   1896   Addition.
Res.  6-15-  Sale of lot 26 feet wide fronting on Main Street between Chestnut and St.
149   1896   Clair Streets.
Res.  6-7-   Purchase of 1 acre of land near center of SE Quarter of Section 5, Township
153   1897   7, Range 8 from Pfaff.
215   11-30- Purchase of land near SW corner of parcel owned by Lathrop near Main Street
      1903   and Miller Avenue.
262   9-13-  Purchase of Lots 28 and 29 in Joseph Miller’s Addition for water works
      1907   purposes.
253   5-10-  Sale of 50 feet off east side of Lot 20 in Sylvia L. Sanderson’s Third
      1909   Addition.
254   6-7-   Issuance of bond for purchase of land for use as a town hall.
      1909
335   5-6-   Authorizes purchase of 2- 1/4 acres from Harrington for a rubbish deposit.
      1918
324   7-14-  Authorizes sale of 556-4/9 square rods in NE Quarter of Section 12, Township
      1924   7.
340   2-21-  Authorizes sale of west 60 feet of Lot 28 in the J.H. Miller Addition.
      1927
380   12-2-  Sale of west half of Lot 29 in J.H. Miller’s Second Addition to C.O. Castle.
      1929
385   5-12-  Purchase of land from C.O. Castle near south line of Church Street to erect
      1930   a water stand pipe.
Res.  8-26-  Purchase from Toledo and Indiana R.R. Co. of part of Lot 1 in Sylvia
387   1940   Sanderson’s Second Addition.
421   10-28- Sale of Lot 83 in Eva and Iva Sanderson’s First Addition and part of Lot 1
      1940   in Sylvia E. Sanderson’s Second Addition.
432   2-12-  Sale of Lot 83 in Eva and Iva Sanderson’s First Addition and part of Lot 1
      1944   in Sylvia E. Sanderson’s Second Addition.
468   4-13-  Lease from NYC R.R. Co. of certain land at intersection of Main and Chestnut
      1953   Streets for a municipal parking lot.
477   2-17-  Authorizes purchase of Lots 51 to 73 in Holliss S. Bassett’s Second
      1955   Addition.
483   1-10-  Authorizes purchase of Lots 51 to 73 in Holliss S. Bassett’s Second
      1955   Addition.
500   12-10- Lease of NYC Reservoir for recreational purposes.
      1956
512   6-24-  Appropriates 0.98 acre of land for a right of way to the garbage disposal
      1957   farm.
572   5-25-  Authorizes President of Swanton Park Board to sell land at southeast corner
      1964   of Lot 2 of Bassett, Brindley and Kaley’s Addition.
574   7-23-  Authorizes purchase of six acres adjacent to the Village Park from Cook for
      1964   park purposes.
     86-26  7-21-1986
89-10 3-27-  Lease with Swanton Boosters Club for Swanton Memorial Park and facilities.
      1989
89-13 4-10-  Authorizes purchase of 1.061 acres of land adjacent to Village Park from
      1989   J.B. Platek.
89-24 8-14-  Conveyance of 0.0528 acres of land and a 20-foot permanent easement to the
      1989   village from James G. and Patricia A. Miller.
90-13 5-14-  Authorizing Village Administrator to enter into lease agreements for use of
      1990   village park.
98-34 8-10-  Authorizing Village Administrator to enter into contract with Jamie Room to
      1998   purchase 0.845 acres of land.
2015- 3-23-  Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement for the
9     2015   transfer of village owned property at 112 Pennsylvania Avenue for urban
             redevelopment purposes.
2015- 5-26-  Authorizing the exchange of property with the Swanton Library Board for
14    2015   purposes of property line adjustment for Pilliod and Rotary Parks.
2018- 4-23-  Authorizing the sale of real estate being Parcel No. 14-025227- 00.000 owned
13    2018   by the village but no longer needed for municipal purposes.
2018- 6-25-  Authorizing the sale of real estate being Parcel No. 14-025227- 00.00 owned
18    2018   by the village but no longer needed for any municipal purpose.
2018- 11-12- Authorizing the sale of real estate being Parcel No. 14-025160-00 owned by
36    2018   the village but no longer needed for any municipal purpose.
2019- 1-28-  Authorizing the sale of real estate being Parcel No. 14-025160- 00.00 owned
06    2019   by the village but no longer needed for any municipal purpose.
2020- 1-13-  Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into a purchase agreement for
01    2020   the McNeill property acquisition and improvement project.
2020- 1-13-  Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into a purchase agreement for
02    2020   the McNeill property acquisition and improvement project.
2025- 4-28-  Authorizing the Village Administrator and Solicitor to file eminent domain
12    2025   for the acquisition of real property located at 116 and 118 North Main
             Street.
            
 
TABLE VII: STREET GRADE LEVELS AND STREET NAME CHANGES
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Res. 103      9-12-1894   Grade of Garfield Avenue.
174           9-12-1894   Grade of Franklin Street from Chestnut to St. Clair.
Res. 137      9-23-1895   Grade of Clark Street from Chestnut Street to
                          Garfield Avenue.
                          Grade of Church Street west of Main Street 173, 7-30-
Res. 140      11-18-1895  1894; grade of Dodge Street from Main Street to west
                          line of Sanderson, Berry and Sly Addition.
196           6-17-1901   Grade of Broadway Street from Main Street to Pilliod
                          Milling Co.
Res. 243      9-24-1906   Change of width of South Main Street.
326           10-20-1924  Name change: Mechanic Street to Woodland Avenue.
348           11-28-1927  Name change: Independence Street to Lincoln Avenue.
515           10-28-1957  Name change: Packwood Street to Parasite Street in
                          Brookside Addition.
587           10-25-1965  Name change: Chicago Road to Airport Highway.
                          Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into
2010-6        2-22-2010   an agreement with the Ohio Department of
                          Transportation to complete grade separation
                          improvements to Hallett Avenue.
2014-28       10-27-2014  Changing the name of Broadway Street to Zeiter Way.
                         
 
TABLE VIII: VACATIONS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./    Date   Description
Res. No. Passed
Petition none   Alley running east and west between Cherry and Cass.
Petition none   Wayne Street.
Petition none   Alley, Sanderson Avenue Lot 27.
Petition none   Portion of Dodge Street between Main and Miller.
Res. 192 12-2-  An alley between Lot 8 in Miller and Wales Addition and Lot 19 in Sanderson’s
         1901   Addition.
Petition - -    Alleys in L.A. Sanderson Addition.
         1912
279      6-3-   Alley between Lot 4 in Lewis Sanderson’s Addition and Lot 27 in George Haynes’s
         1912   Addition.
281      6-3-   Alley from Washington Street to an alley bounding Lot 18 in Peter Miller’s First
         1912   Addition.
281      1-13-  Alley from a point 53 feet south of southwest corner of an alley south of Lot 1
         1913   in E.B. Clark’s Addition.
367      1-28-  Alley running west from Woodlawn Avenue between Lots 35 and 36 in J.H. Miller’s
         1929   Second Addition.
420      9-4-   Alley bounded by Lot 27 on north and Lots 25 and 26 on south in J.H. Miller’s
         1939   Second Addition from Woodlawn Avenue to easterly line of Lot 24.
423      5-12-  Part of N-S alley abutting Lot 9 in Sanderson’s Second Addition.
         1941
         12-21- Alley bounded by Lots 37 and 13 in J.H. Miller’s Second Addition; part of Curtis
453      1950   Alley abutting Lots 12 and 13; part of an alley extending from Walnut to Ivy
                Streets bounded by Auditor’s Parcel 49 and Lot 64 of Sanderson’s Sixth Addition.
472      12-28- Narrowing Dodge Street by vacating a portion thereof.
         1953
Petition - -    Sewer line, north side of West Garfield.
         1957
         - -    Alley bounded on north by Lots 13 and 37 in J.H. Miller’s Second Addition, on
Petition 1959   east by Lots 28 to 36, on west by Lots 14 to 22 and on the south by Lots 22 to
                28.
535      9-14-  Alley between Lincoln and Woodland.
         1959
555      2-26-  Southerly 5 feet of an alley between Lots 2 and 3 of J.H. Miller’s Second
         1962   Addition.
642      6-8-   Alley north of Broadway, between Lincoln and Woodland.
         1970
74-17    11-1-  Portion of Elm Street.
         1974
Petition - -    Portion of Bassett Avenue.
         1975
82-17    - -    Portion of Oak Street.
         1982
85-5     2-25-  Portion of alley, West Garfield - Sloan.
         1985
85-15    3-11-  Alley running north of Broadway, between Lincoln and Woodland, J.H. Miller’s
         1985   Second Addition.
85-16    3-11-  Alley running east and west, north of Broadway, between Lots 16 and 17 in J.H.
         1985   Miller’s Second Addition, between Lincoln and Woodland.
85-17    3-11-  Alley running east and west between Lots 33 and 34 of J.H. Miller’s Second
         1985   Addition, north of Broadway, between Lincoln and Woodland.
87-13    4-27-  Alley north of East Garfield, between Pennsylvania and Clark.
         1987
2002-4   2-25-  Vacating alley behind SuperValu to FoodTown plazas, Swancreek Township, west of
         2002   Hallett, north of Airport Highway.
         2-25-  Vacating a portion of Wayne Street, running in a southerly direction from
2002-5   2002   Sanderson which abuts Lots 25, 26, 32, 33 and 34 in George H. Haynes Second
                Addition.
2005-1   2-14-  Vacating the unimproved portion of Fairfield Drive.
         2005
2012-35  2-25-  Vacating the unimproved portion of Roosevelt Street and alley.
         2013
2019-09  3-25-  Amending Ordinance 2012-35.
         2019
2019-13  3-25-  Vacating a certain dedicated, unimproved street, 60 feet in width, known as
         2019   Crossings Way Court.
2019-45  11-25- Amending Ordinance 2019-09.
         2019
2021-05  2-22-  Vacating the unimproved portion of an alley in Lacey’s addition in the village.
         2021
               
 
TABLE IX: ZONING MAP CHANGES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord.  Date   Description
No.   Passed
      11-23- Rezoning (petition of Hallett Developments, Inc.) parcel of land
539   1959   near intersection of Main Street and State Route 2 from A
             Residence to C Commercial District.
565   12-9-  Rezoning premises owned by Clendenin and Wells on Dodge Street
      1963   from A Residence to B Residence District.
89-14 4-10-  Designating zoning classification for territory annexed by Ord.
      1989   80-9, as R-2.
93-11 11-8-  Amending village zoning map by changing classification for a
      1993   portion of Giant Oaks Subdivision from R-2 to R-3.
      2-9-   Amending village zoning map by establishing new zoning
98-1  1998   classification for Lot 26, George H. Haynes Second Addition, from
             B-2 to R-3.
      4-12-  Amending village zoning map by establishing new zoning
99-4  1999   classification for OCCA Subdivision, plats 2, 3, 4 and remaining
             unplatted sections from R-1 to R-2.
99-34 12-13- Amending village zoning map for Waterwood Farms unplatted section
      1999   from R-1 to R-2 and B-2.
2000- 1-8-   Establishing zoning map of village; amending Ord. 94-2.
41    2001
2002- 11-25- New zoning classification for Aqua Garden, 203 West Airport, from
47    2002   R-2 to B-3.
2003- 4-28-  Amending village zoning map by establishing new zoning
22    2003   classification for 220 West Airport Highway from R-1 to B-3.
             Amending village zoning map by establishing new zoning
2004- 11-22- classification for Homeville Subdivision and West Airport Highway
35    2004   from township zoning to R-2 zoning classification and extending
             the Airport Highway Overlay Zoning District.
2004- 11-22- Amending village zoning map by establishing new zoning
36    2004   classification for Paigelynn Place Subdivision from R-
             2 Residential to R-2 Residential Planned Unit Development (PUD).
             Amending village zoning map by establishing new zoning
             classifications for a vacant 63 acre parcel located in the 300
2004- 1-24-  block of West Airport Highway from M-2 Heavy Industrial to B-
43    2005   3 Central Business, to R-2 One-Family Residential, to R-3 One- and
             Two-Family Residential, and to R-4 Low Density Multi-Family
             Residential.
2010- 3-22-  Rezoning from General Commercial (B-2) to One- Family (R-2)
7     2010   Residential for 109, 111, 113, 115, 117, 129, 131 and 133
             Sanderson Avenue.
2011- 3-14-  Rezoning from General Commercial (B-2) to One- Family (R-2)
1     2011   Residential for 106, 200, 202 and 208 Miller Avenue.
             Amending zoning classification from Multi-Family (R-4) Residential
2014- 4-14-  to One-Family (R-l) Residential of Parcel 14-025183-00.0 0; State
6     2014   Route 64; owners: Richard D. and Phyllis Z Wells, 305 Dodge
             Street.
2014- 8-25-  Amending township zoning classification of parcels annexed into
23    2014   the village to Central Business (B-3) Commercial and One-Family
             (R-1) Residential:
           1. 3636 Waterville Swanton Road; Parcel 73-00004: (R-1);
           2. 3812 Waterville Swanton Road; Parcel 73-00005: (R-1);
           3. 3900 Waterville Swanton Road; Parcel 73-00007: (R-1);
           4. 14130 Airport Highway; Parcel 75-08981: (B-3);
           5. 13950 Airport Highway; Parcel 73-00002; (B-3)
           6. 13930 Airport Highway; Parcel 75-00003: (B-3); and
           7. 7138 County Road 1-1; Parcel 33-061724-00.0 00: (R-1).
2015- 2-9-   Amending zoning classification from Central Business (B-3)
1     2015   Commercial to Light Industrial (M-1) for Parcel 28-054888-02.0 00;
             address: Airport Highway.
2015- 7-20-  Amending zoning classification from General Business (B-2)
11    2015   Commercial to One-Family (R-2) Residential:
           1. Parcel: 14-023880-00.0 00: address: 117 Lincoln Street; legal
             description: J.H. Miller’s Second Addition Lot 11;
           2. Parcel: 14-023884-00.0 00: address: 115 Lincoln Street: legal
             description: J.H. Miller’s Second Addition Lot 12 ex. 33.4 feet;
           3. Parcel: 14-024124-00.0 00: address: 111 Lincoln Street; legal
             description: Miller and Geysers Addition Lot 5; and
           4. Parcel: 14-024120-00.0 00; address: Lincoln Street; legal
             description: Miller and Geysers Addition Lots 3-4.
2016- 5-27-  Amending the zoning classification from Central Commercial (B- 3)
17    2016   to One- Family (R-2) Residential for 507 and 513 South Main
             Street.
2016- 6-13-  Amending the zoning classification from Central Commercial (B- 3)
18    2016   to One- Family (R-2) Residential for 503 South Main Street.
             Amending the zoning classification for multiple parcels in the
2017- 7-17-  village: Parcel ID Nos. 7509015; 7509065; 7565314; 7500009;
19    2017   7500011; 7500008; 7500015; 7500005; 7500006; 7500013; 7500012; 28-
             050176-00; 33-061728-00; 33-061728-01; 33-061728-02
             Amending the zoning classification for properties listed as
2018- 3-26-  follows:
06    2018      99 Dodge (R2)
                112 South Main (B2)
                114 South Main (R2)
2022- 2-14-  Amending the zoning classification for property described as: 98
06    2022   Dodge from General Business (B-2) to One Family Residential (R-2).
2023- 7-17-  Amending the zoning classification for West Park from Central
12    2023   Business (B-3) to Light Industrial (M-1).
2025- 11-10- Amending the zoning classification for Fulton County Parcel 28-
20    2025   054883-04.000 from Central Business (B-3) to One Family
             Residential (R-1).
            
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Ohio Revised Code
References to 1964 Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO OHIO REVISED CODE
R.C. Section Code Section
R.C. Section                Code Section
Title 57                    35.02
Title 43                    110.01
121.22                      35.21
125.30                      35.02
Chapter 135                 36.03
146.02(A)                   32.49
149.381                     33.21
149.43                      35.21
323.15                      54.07
505.44                      32.66
709.023                     35.02
Chapter 711                 Ch. 151, App. A,
                            151.202
                            Ch. 151, App. A,
711.001                     151.202, Ch. 151, App. A,
                            151.301, Ch. 151, App. A,
                            151.401
711.001 to 711.14           Ch. 151, App. A,
                            151.707
711.001(B)                  Ch. 151, App. A,
                            151.202
711.01 to 711.38            Ch. 151, App. A,
                            151.707
711.09                      Ch. 151, App. A,
                            151.104
711.09(C)                   Ch. 151, App. A,
                            151.319
711.091                     Ch. 151, App. A,
                            151.318
                            Ch. 151, App. A,
711.101                     151.319, Ch. 151, App. A,
                            151.707
711.102                     Ch. 151, App. A,
                            151.707
711.13                      Ch. 151, App. A,
                            151.707
                            Ch. 151, App. A,
711.131                     151.104, Ch. 151, App. A,
                            151.202, Ch. 151, App. A,
                            151.401
711.15                      Ch. 151, App. A,
                            151.707
711.17 to 711.23            Ch. 151, App. A,
                            151.311
713.01                      Ch. 150, App. A,
                            150.613
713.11                      Ch. 150, App. A,
                            150.614
715.26                      11.02
715.261                     92.07,
                            92.11
715.47                      92.02
715.691                     35.02,
                            35.06
715.70                      35.02,
                            35.06
715.71                      35.02,
                            35.06
715.72                      35.06
715.74                      35.02
Chapter 718                 35.01
718.01(L)                   35.02
718.03                      35.02
718.11                      33.24
723.01                      Ch. 74, Sch. I
729.52                      51.156
Chapter 731                 36.03
731.46                      31.01
731.141                     30.02
737.21                      32.60
737.22                      32.47,
                            32.63
735.271                     30.02
735.272                     30.02
743.18                      52.09
755.12 through 755.181      94.01
755.14(B)                   94.01
755.16                      94.01
955.11                      90.22
959.01                      90.03
959.13                      90.05
1332.32(B)(2)(g)            36.07
1332.32(A)                  36.07
1332.32(B)                  36.07
1531.01(Y)                  90.07
Chapter 1705                35.02
Chapter 2151                130.99
                            Ch. 150, App. A,
Chapter 2506                150.702, Ch. 152, App. A,
                            152.706
2901.01 through 2967.29     130.01
3501.28                     35.02
3501.36                     35.02
Chapter 3701                Ch. 152, App. A,
                            152.501
3719.01 through 3719.99     130.01
                            Ch. 152, App. A,
Chapter 3734                152.309, Ch. 152, App. A,
                            152.501
3743.01 through and 3743.99 130.01
3761.01 through 3761.99     130.01
3767.01 through 3767.99     130.01
Chapter 3770                35.02
3770.21                     35.02
3772.01                     35.02
3773.06 through 3773.99     130.01
3929.86                     92.12
4313.02                     35.02
4501.01                     70.08, Ch. 150, App. A,
                            150.217
4501.01 through 4549.65     70.01
Chapter 4503                76.05
Chapter 4505                76.05
4503.10                     70.08
4504.06                     70.08
4504.172                    70.08
4505.01                     70.08
4509.01(K)                  76.02
4511.214                    76.01
4511.215                    76.01
4511.69                     73.99
4513.02                     76.04
4519.01                     72.03
4703.01 to 4703.19          152.20
Chapter 4733                152.20
Chapter 4781                150.117,
                            152.20
Chapter 4906                152.38
4927.01                     35.05
4928.20                     TSO I
5103.03 to 5103.05          150.007
5139.38                     150.007
5139.39                     150.007
5577.01 through 5577.99     70.01
5589.01 through 5589.99     70.01
Chapter 5701                35.02
5703.056                    35.02,
                            35.14
5703.056(B)(3)              35.02
5705.09                     91.55
5709.61                     37.06
5709.62(C)                  37.18
5709.63(A)                  37.03
5717.011                    35.02,
                            35.21
5717.03                     35.02
Chapter 5722                36.06
5722.03                     36.06
5722.04                     36.06
5722.10                     36.06
5727.01                     35.05
5727.24                     35.02
5727.30                     35.02
Chapter 5745                35.03
Chapter 5745                35.02
5747.01                     35.02
5747.08(G)                  35.05
                            
 
REFERENCES TO 1964 CODE
1964 Code Code Section
1964 Code Code Section
103.01    11.01
121.01    31.01
141.01    32.45
141.02    32.46
141.03    32.47
141.04    32.47
141.05    32.48
141.06    32.49
303.02    70.02
303.04    70.03
303.06    70.04
303.07    73.02
311.02    70.05
311.03    70.06
313.09    70.07
331.11    71.01
331.23    71.01
331.34    71.02
331.35    71.04
331.36    71.09
331.37    71.05
331.38    71.06
339.011   71.10
339.02    71.11
339.04    71.13
339.08    71.12
351.02    73.01
351.06    73.07
351.08    71.07
351.09    73.03,
          73.04
351.10    73.06
351.99(a) 73.99
351.99(b) 73.99
373.09    72.01,
          72.02
373.11    72.05
373.12    72.08
373.13    72.04
373.15    72.07
373.17    72.06
373.22    72.09
505.01    90.01
505.02    90.02
505.03    90.03
505.04    90.04
505.05    90.05
505.06    90.06
505.08    90.08
505.09    90.07
505.10    90.21
505.99    90.99
515.01    93.01
515.02    93.02
515.03    93.03
515.04    93.04
515.05    93.05
515.06    93.06
515.08    93.07,
          93.08
515.09    93.09
515.10    93.10
515.16    93.11
515.17    93.12
515.18    93.13
515.19    93.14
515.20    93.15
515.21    93.16
515.99    93.99
517.04    95.07
517.13    93.03
545.04(a) 130.06
545.04(c) 130.06
545.05    130.05
545.08    91.41
545.09    91.40
545.10    91.42
545.99    91.99
549.01    91.20
549.02    91.21
549.03    91.22
549.04    91.23
549.05    91.24
549.06    91.25
549.08    91.26
549.99    91.99
717.01    111.01
717.99    111.99
901.01    95.01
901.02    95.02
901.03    95.03
901.04    95.04
901.05    95.05
901.06    95.06
901.07    95.07
901.08    95.07
901.09    95.08
901.10    95.09
901.11    95.10
901.12    95.11
901.99    95.99
          
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
102      9-12-1894   TSO VI
103      9-12-1894   TSO VII
126      5-20-1895   TSO III
137      9-23-1895   TSO VII
140      11-18-1895  TSO VII
147      6-1-1896    TSO VI
149      6-15-1896   TSO VI
153      6-7-1897    TSO VI
192      12-2-1901   TSO VIII
197      8-11-1902   TSO IV
243      9-24-1906   TSO VII
310      1-15-1923   TSO III
387      8-26-1940   TSO VI
458      2-27-1961   TSO II
94-3     2-28-1994   32.67
98-4     5-4-1998    TSO IV
22-128   11-15-2022  TSO I
                    
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
80-9     - -         TSO II
80-26    - -         51.162
82-65    - -         TSO II
83-34    - -         51.162
174      9-12-1894   TSO VII
153      8-24-1896   TSO IV
177      9-16-1896   TSO V
189      4-10-1899   TSO V
191      1-29-1900   TSO V
192      2-25-1901   TSO V
196      6-17-1901   TSO VII
197      7-1-1901    TSO V
207      7-14-1902   TSO III
215      11-30-1903  TSO VI
218      6-13-1904   TSO III
221      8-22-1904   TSO III
222      10-3-1904   TSO III
243      11-5-1906   TSO III
244      11-5-1906   TSO III
253      12-31-1906  TSO V
258      4-26-1907   TSO III
262      9-13-1907   TSO VI
250      12-14-1908  TSO V
252      3-22-1909   TSO IV
253      5-10-1909   TSO VI
254      6-7-1909    TSO VI
265      10-4-1909   TSO IV
280      5-20-1912   TSO V
279      6-3-1912    TSO VIII
281      6-3-1912    TSO VIII
281      1-13-1913   TSO VIII
286      7-28-1913   TSO III
288      9-29-1913   TSO V
305      2-22-1915   TSO V
303      3-15-1915   TSO V
335      5-6-1918    TSO VI
337      7-19-1920   TSO V
324      7-14-1924   TSO VI
326      10-20-1924  TSO VII
328      4-27-1925   TSO III
334      9-7-1926    TSO IV
333      11-1-1926   TSO IV
335      12-13-1926  TSO II
340      2-21-1927   TSO VI
347      11-14-1927  TSO II
348      11-28-1927  TSO VII
365      8-27-1928   TSO IV
367      1-28-1929   TSO VIII
376      5-16-1929   TSO V
380      12-2-1929   TSO VI
385      5-12-1930   TSO VI
396      4-27-1931   TSO V
409      6-26-1935   TSO V
411      9-13-1937   TSO V
417      9-26-1938   TSO V
420      9-4-1939    TSO VIII
421      10-28-1940  TSO VI
423      5-12-1941   TSO VIII
427      10-26-1942  TSO V
432      2-12-1944   TSO VI
436      7-9-1945    TSO V
440      10-14-1946  TSO V
447      10-13-1947  TSO V
448      1-28-1948   TSO V
453      12-21-1950  TSO VIII
454      12-21-1950  TSO III
468      4-13-1953   TSO VI
472      12-28-1953  TSO VIII
483      1-10-1955   TSO VI
477      2-17-1955   TSO VI
492      12-13-1955  TSO V
493      1-9-1956    TSO II
497      9-10-1956   TSO V
500      12-10-1956  TSO VI
501      1-14-1957   TSO II
502      1-14-1957   TSO II
511      5-13-1957   TSO V
512      6-24-1957   TSO VI
513      9-23-1957   TSO V
515      10-28-1957  TSO VII
514      11-11-1957  TSO V
519      11-25-1957  TSO V
523      7-14-1958   TSO V
535      9-14-1959   TSO VIII
536      9-14-1959   TSO II
537      10-12-1959  TSO II
539      11-23-1959  TSO IX
543      7-11-1960   TSO II
544      7-25-1960   111.01,
                     111.99
551      8-14-1961   TSO V
555      2-26-1962   TSO VIII
                     72.01,
558      11-12-1962  72.02,
                     72.04—
                     72.09
565      12-9-1963   TSO IX
569      4-27-1964   TSO V
570      4-27-1964   TSO II
572      5-25-1964   TSO VI
-        6-29-1964   TSO IV
574      7-23-1964   TSO VI
579      5-24-1965   73.06
583      8-9-1965    TSO IV
                     93.01—
582      8-23-1965   93.16,
                     93.99
585      9-27-1965   TSO IV
587      10-25-1965  TSO VII
591      1-10-1966   71.10
636      11-24-1969  35.99
642      6-8-1970    TSO VIII
74-4     6-12-1972   32.02
73-11    6-25-1973   31.01
73-14    8-13-1973   TSO V
73-17    10-8-1973   72.07
74-17    1-11-1974   TSO VIII
                     32.60,
74-4     1-14-1974   32.61,
                     32.63—
                     32.66
74-3     1-28-1974   72.03
74-10    6-10-1974   TSO I
76-14    10-25-1976  91.99
76-16    10-25-1976  TSO II
76-18    12-13-1976  52.40—
                     52.44
77-1     1-24-1977   71.03
77-2     3-14-1977   30.02
                     94.15—
77-11    6-27-1977   94.19,
                     94.99
77-12    8-8-1977    TSO II
                     51.001—
                     51.006,
                     51.015—
                     51.031,
                     51.045—
                     51.058,
                     51.070—
                     51.080,
                     51.095—
78-4     2-13-1978   51.100,
                     51.115—
                     51.119,
                     51.135—
                     51.142,
                     51.155—
                     51.167,
                     51.180—
                     51.182,
                     51.999
78-5     2-27-1978   TSO I
78-8     4-24-1978   51.160
78-24    8-14-1978   51.079
                     73.05,
                     73.99,
78-39    11-29-1978  Ch. 74, Sch. I,
                     Ch. 74, Sch. II,
                     Ch. 74, Sch. III
79-5     4-9-1979    51.165,
                     51.166
79-10    6-29-1979   TSO V
80-7     2-25-1980   TSO I
80-19    8-25-1980   51.161
                     52.01,
                     52.02,
                     52.04,
                     52.06,
80-26    11-10-1980  52.08,
                     52.10,
                     52.11,
                     52.20—
                     52.29
81-1     1-12-1981   TSO II
81-14    9-14-1981   TSO II
                     30.01,
                     30.03,
81-25    12-14-1981  30.05,
                     31.02,
                     34.01
82-17    - -1982     TSO VIII
82-5     3-22-1982   TSO I
82-16    6-14-1982   TSO II
83-2     1-24-1983   TSO II
83-4     2-14-1983   TSO I
83-5     2-14-1983   TSO I
83-26    7-26-1983   TSO V
83-29    8-22-1983   70.01,
                     130.01
83-31    9-26-1983   32.10—
                     32.17
83-33    9-26-1983   TSO II
84-1     1-9-1984    TSO II
84-15    7-2-1984    TSO II
84-29    12-18-1984  90.07
85-5     2-25-1985   TSO VIII
85-1     1-14-1985   130.03,
                     130.99
85-15    3-11-1985   TSO VIII
85-16    3-11-1985   TSO VIII
85-17    3-11-1985   TSO VIII
85-19    3-11-1985   TSO V
85-41    10-28-1985  130.02,
                     130.99
85-43    10-28-1985  32.15
86-7     4-14-1986   94.01—
                     94.04
86-15    5-12-1986   TSO I
86-25    7-21-1986   TSO V
86-26    7-21-1986   TSO VI
87-13    4-27-1987   TSO VIII
87-23    9-14-1987   70.08
87-34    12-21-1987  36.01
88-11    3-14-1988   90.99
88-12    3-14-1988   73.06
88-14    3-14-1988   90.06
88-15    3-14-1988   73.99
88-17    3-28-1988   TSO I
88-31    8-8-1988    130.04,
                     130.99
88-41    9-26-1988   TSO V
                     50.01—
88-45    9-26-1988   50.05,
                     50.99
88-40    10-10-1988  TSO II
89-2     1-9-1989    TSO II
89-10    3-27-1989   TSO VI
89-13    4-10-1989   TSO VI
89-14    4-10-1989   TSO IX
89-17    5-22-1989   TSO V
89-20    6-26-1989   TSO II
89-21    6-26-1989   TSO II
89-24    8-14-1989   TSO II,
                     TSO VI
89-27    10-23-1989  TSO V
89-37    12-18-1989  30.03,
                     31.02
90-5     3-26-1990   52.01,
                     52.08
90-13    5-14-1990   TSO VI
90-9     6-11-1990   73.08,
                     73.99
90-15    6-25-1990   TSO II
90-20    7-30-1990   TSO I
90-27    9-10-1990   32.15
90-28    9-10-1990   TSO V
90-30    10-8-1990   TSO V
90-34    12-17-1990  30.03,
                     31.02
90-35    12-17-1990  TSO V
90-36    12-17-1990  TSO I
90-37    12-17-1990  TSO IV
90-38    12-17-1990  TSO II
90-39    12-17-1990  TSO II
91-5     2-25-1991   TSO I
91-1     3-11-1991   TSO V
91-10    7-15-1991   51.116,
                     51.139
92-12    5-26-1992   TSO I
92-11    6-8-1992    51.161
96-26    7-26-1992   50.04
                     10.01—
                     10.17,
                     10.99,
                     11.01,
                     30.01—
                     30.03,
                     30.05,
                     30.06,
                     31.01,
                     31.02,
                     32.01—
                     32.06,
                     32.10—
                     32.17,
                     32.45—
                     32.49,
                     32.60—
                     32.66,
                     34.01,
                     35.99,
                     36.01,
                     50.01—
                     50.05,
                     50.99,
                     51.001—
                     51.006,
                     51.015—
                     51.031,
                     51.045—
                     51.058,
                     51.070—
                     51.080,
                     51.095—
                     51.100,
                     51.115—
                     51.119,
                     51.135—
                     51.142,
                     51.155—
                     51.167,
                     51.180—
                     51.182,
                     51.999,
                     52.01—
                     52.04,
                     52.06—
92-20    9-28-1992   52.08,
                     52.10,
                     52.11,
                     52.20—
                     52.29,
                     52.40—
                     52.44,
                     70.01—
                     70.08,
                     71.01—
                     71.13,
                     72.01—
                     72.09,
                     73.01—
                     73.08,
                     73.99,
                     Ch. 74, Sch. I,
                     Ch. 74, Sch. II,
                     Ch. 74, Sch. III,
                     Ch. 75, Sch. I,
                     90.01—
                     90.08,
                     90.20,
                     90.21,
                     90.99,
                     91.01,
                     91.20—
                     91.26,
                     91.40—
                     91.42,
                     91.99,
                     93.01—
                     93.16,
                     93.99,
                     94.01—
                     94.04,
                     94.15—
                     94.19,
                     94.99,
                     95.01—
                     95.11,
                     95.99,
                     110.01,
                     111.01,
                     111.99,
                     130.01—
                     130.06,
                     130.99
93-4     4-26-1993   31.03
                     37.01—
93-8     8-23-1993   37.19,
                     TSO I
93-11    11-8-1993   TSO IX
93-16    12-13-1993  34.02
93-18    12-13-1993  30.02
93-19    12-14-1993  TSO II
94-8     2-14-1994   36.02
94-18    9-12-1994   52.30
94-19    9-12-1994   51.168
95-8     3-13-1995   52.08
95-9     3-27-1995   51.181
95-7     4-10-1995   52.22
95-23    10-23-1995  73.99
96-2     1-8-1996    TSO I
96-5     2-12-1996   TSO II
96-23    7-15-1996   TSO I
96-20    8-26-1996   TSO II
96-30    11-25-1996  TSO I
32.68    12-9-1996   32.68
96-31    12-9-1996   36.03,
                     36.04
96-33    12-9-1996   32.64
97-37    1-12-1997   TSO II
97-3     3-10-1997   36.05
97-16    6-9-1997    130.03,
                     130.99
                     51.116,
                     52.06,
97-27    10-27-1997  53.01,
                     53.02,
                     95.02,
                     95.03
97-31    11-10-1997  51.181
                     32.70,
97-34    12-8-1997   52.05—
                     52.08
                     96.01—
97-36    1-12-1998   96.03,
                     96.99
98-1     2-9-1998    TSO IX
98-3     2-9-1998    TSO II
98-12    3-23-1998   TSO II
98-22    5-26-1998   53.01
98-30    8-10-1998   TSO II
98-34    8-10-1998   TSO VI
98-40    9-14-1998   TSO IV
99-4     4-12-1999   TSO IX
99-12    6-14-1999   TSO II
99-20    9-13-1999   52.01,
                     52.08
99-21    9-13-1999   51.161
99-29    11-8-1999   TSO II
99-32    11-23-1999  Ch. 75, Sch. I
99-34    12-13-1999  TSO IX
00-08    4-10-2000   36.03
2000-17  6-26-2000   Ch. 75, Sch. I
2000-31  9-11-2000   TSO III
2000-35  10-9-2000   31.01
2000-39  12-11-2000  TSO II
2000-41  1-8-2001    TSO IX
2000-40  1-22-2001   51.181,
                     52.08
2001-12  2-12-2001   Ch. 75, Sch. I
195      6-17-2001   11.01
2001-28  6-25-2001   32.10,
                     32.15
                     90.22—
2001-35  8-27-2001   90.26,
                     90.99
2002-4   2-25-2002   TSO VIII
2002-5   2-25-2002   TSO VIII
2002-13  4-22-2002   TSO II
2002-14  4-22-2002   TSO II
2002-29  8-12-2002   51.161
2002-30  8-26-2002   52.08
2002-47  11-25-2002  TSO IX
2003-10  2-24-2003   TSO IV
–      4-8-2003    34.15
2003-16  4-14-2003   TSO II
2003-22  4-28-2003   TSO IX
2003-25  5-27-2003   TSO II
2003-18  6-4-2003    90.22,
                     90.99
2003-23  6-23-2003   34.01,
                     34.15
2003-29  8-11-2003   51.016
2003-32  8-25-2003   51.158
2002-30  8-26-2003   52.01
2003-44  9-22-2003   TSO II
2003-45  9-22-2003   TSO II
2003-46  9-22-2003   TSO II
2003-49  10-13-2003  TSO II
2003-50  12-8-2003   52.24
2004-5   2-23-2004   TSO II
2004-6   2-23-2004   30.03,
                     31.02
2004-11  4-12-2004   TSO II
2004-18  5-24-2004   TSO V
2004-27  8-23-2004   73.06
2004-31  10-11-2004  52.06
2004-33  10-25-2004  73.99
2004-29  10-28-2004  TSO II
2004-35  11-22-2004  TSO IX
2004-36  11-22-2004  TSO IX
2004-43  1-24-2005   TSO IX
2004-48  1-24-2005   TSO II
2005-1   2-14-2005   TSO VIII
2005-21  1-23-2006   54.01—
                     54.10
2005-22  1-23-2006   54.04
2006-17  9-11-2006   52.01,
                     52.08
2006-18  9-11-2006   51.161
2007-4   2-26-2007   52.07
2008-24  10-27-2008  52.03
2009-1   3-9-2009    52.07
2009-36  12-14-2009  TSO I
2010-4   1-23-2010   36.07
2010-3   1-25-2010   TSO I
2010-6   2-22-2010   TSO VII
2010-7   3-22-2010   TSO IX
2010-10  5-24-2010   52.22
2010-14  5-24-2010   Ch. 74, Sch. II
2010-13  6-14-2010   TSO II
2010-15  6-14-2010   TSO I
                     70.01,
2010-16  6-28-2010   110.01,
                     130.01
2010-17  8-9-2010    TSO I
2010-24  8-9-2010    TSO I
27-2010  9-13-2010   TSO I
2010-26  9-27-2010   94.15
2010-29  10-25-2010  TSO I
2010-30  11-8-2010   TSO I
2010-31  12-13-2010  30.05
2010-32  12-13-2010  TSO I
2010-33  12-13-2010  TSO I
2011-1   3-14-2011   TSO IX
2011-5   4-11-2011   Ch. 74, Sch. II
2011-6   4-11-2011   TSO II
2011-7   4-11-2011   TSO II
2011-7   4-25-2011   TSO II
2011-10  5-9-2011    TSO I
2011-15  7-18-2011   71.14,
                     71.99
2011-16  7-18-2011   94.15
2011-19  8-22-2011   TSO II
2011-20  8-22-2011   TSO II
2011-22  11-14-2011  TSO II
2011-23  11-14-2011  TSO II
2011-24  11-14-2011  TSO II
2011-26  12-12-2011  30.05
2011-27  12-12-2011  TSO I
2011-28  12-12-2011  TSO I
2011-30  12-12-2011  TSO I
2011-31  12-12-2011  TSO I
2011-32  12-12-2011  TSO I
2011-33  12-12-2011  91.55
2012-6   3-12-2012   TSO I
2012-3   3-26-2012   TSO I
2012-7   4-9-2012    TSO I
2012-9   5-14-2012   TSO I
2012-11  7-16-2012   94.19
2012-15  8-13-2012   TSO I
2012-16  8-13-2012   TSO I
18-2012  9-10-2012   TSO I
2012-24  11-12-2012  TSO I
2012-25  11-12-2012  TSO II
2012-27  11-26-2012  TSO II
2012-28  11-26-2012  30.05
2012-29  11-26-2012  TSO I
2012-30  11-26-2012  TSO I
2012-31  11-26-2012  TSO I
2012-32  12-17-2012  TSO I
2012-33  12-17-2012  TSO I
2013-2   1-22-2013   TSO II
2012-35  2-25-2013   TSO VIII
2013-4   2-25-2013   TSO I
2013-5   3-25-2013   TSO I
2013-8   4-22-2013   TSO I
2013-9   5-28-2013   52.12
2013-10  5-28-2013   TSO I
2013-11  6-24-2013   TSO II
2013-13  7-15-2013   11.02,
                     11.99
2013-16  8-26-2013   TSO II
2013-21  9-23-2013   TSO I
2013-26  10-28-2013  TSO I
2013-24  11-11-2013  TSO I
2013-25  11-11-2013  TSO I
2013-27  11-11-2013  TSO I
2013-30  11-25-2013  TSO I
2013-28  12-9-2013   30.05
2013-32  12-9-2013   TSO I
2013-33  12-9-2013   TSO I
2013-31  1-13-2014   31.02
2014-4   3-10-2014   TSO I
2014-5   3-10-2014   TSO I
2014-3   3-24-2014   TSO I
2014-6   4-14-2014   TSO IX
2014-7   4-14-2014   95.12,
                     95.99
2014-8   4-14-2014   73.05,
                     73.99
2014-11  5-27-2014   TSO I
2014-16  5-27-2014   TSO I
2014-20  7-21-2014   153.01,
                     153.02
2014-21  7-21-2014   153.03
2014-22  7-21-2014   TSO I
2014-17  8-11-2014   90.09,
                     90.99
2014-25  8-11-2014   TSO I
2014-23  8-25-2014   TSO IX
2014-26  10-13-2014  TSO I
2014-28  10-27-2014  TSO VII
2014-30  11-24-2014  TSO I
2014-31  11-24-2014  32.18
2014-32  12-8-2014   TSO I
2014-33  12-8-2014   30.05
2014-34  12-8-2014   TSO I
2014-35  12-8-2014   TSO I
2014-36  12-29-2014  TSO I
2014-39  12-29-2014  TSO I
2014-37  1-12-2015   TSO I
2015-1   2-9-2015    TSO IX
2015-6   2-9-2015    TSO II
2015-4   3-9-2015    TSO I
2015-5   3-9-2015    TSO I
2015-7   3-23-2015   52.01,
                     52.30
2015-9   3-23-2015   TSO VI
2015-12  3-23-2015   TSO I
2015-8   4-13-2015   TSO I
2015-14  5-26-2015   TSO VI
2015-15  5-26-2015   TSO II
2015-16  6-22-2015   TSO II
2015-11  7-20-2015   TSO IX
2015-23  7-20-2015   TSO I
2015-22  8-10-2015   91.01,
                     91.02
2015-24  8-10-2015   TSO IV
2015-26  8-10-2015   TSO I
                     35.01—
2015-29  11-9-2015   35.25,
                     35.99
2015-32  11-9-2015   TSO I
2015-33  11-9-2015   TSO I
2015-34  11-9-2015   TSO I
2015-38  11-23-2015  TSO I
2015-39  12-14-2015  TSO I
2015-40  12-14-2015  TSO I
2015-41  12-14-2015  TSO I
2015-43  12-14-2015  30.05
2016-01  - -2016     TSO I
2016-05  - -2016     TSO I
2016-13  5-9-2016    TSO I
2016-15  5-23-2016   TSO I
2016-17  5-27-2016   TSO IX
2016-18  6-13-2016   TSO IX
2016-25  8-8-2016    52.05
2016-26  8-8-2016    51.168
2016-27  6-27-2016   52.02
2016-28  8-8-2016    36.08
2016-29  6-27-2016   36.09
2016-35  7-11-2016   30.01,
                     30.04
2016-45  9-26-2016   53.01
2016-50  10-24-2016  130.03,
                     130.99
2016-51  10-24-2016  90.20
                     97.01 -
2016-63  12-12-2016  97.16,
                     97.99
2017-01  1-9-2017    TSO I
2017-03  1-23-2017   35.01
2017-04  1-23-2017   130.07
                     32.70,
2017-05  2-27-2017   Ch. 32 App. A,
                     App. B
2017-06  3-13-2017   TSO I
2017-10  4-10-2017   TSO I
2017-11  4-10-2017   TSO I
2017-13  5-22-2017   Ch. 74, Schs. I,
                     II
2017-16  6-26-2017   TSO I
2017-18  6-26-2017   TSO III
2017-19  7-17-2017   TSO IX
2017-23  8-28-2017   51.161
2017-24  8-28-2017   52.01,
                     52.08
2017-25  8-28-2017   TSO I
2017-26  9-11-2017   TSO I
2017-27  9-11-2017   TSO IV
2017-28  9-25-2017   52.01,
                     52.08
2017-29  9-25-2017   TSO I
2017-32  11-13-2017  TSO I
2017-34  11-13-2017  TSO I
2017-35  11-13-2017  TSO I
2017-37  11-27-2017  36.02
                     35.01,
2017-38  12-11-2017  35.03,
                     35.04,
                     35.25
2017-39  12-11-2017  Ch. 75, Sch. II
2017-40  12-11-2017  TSO I
2017-41  12-11-2017  TSO I
2017-42  1-22-2018   52.12
                     76.01 -
2017-43  1-22-2018   76.08,
                     76.99
2018-01  1-8-2018    TSO I
2018-03  1-8-2018    TSO I
2018-04  2-12-2018   TSO I
2018-06  3-26-2018   TSO IX
2018-12  4-23-2018   TSO I
2018-13  4-23-2018   TSO VI
                     92.01 -
2018-14  5-14-2018   92.13,
                     92.99
2018-15  5-14-2018   TSO I
2018-16  6-11-2018   52.01
2018-17  6-11-2018   TSO I
2018-18  6-25-2018   TSO VI
2018-22  7-16-2018   Adopting Ordinance
2018-23  8-27-2018   Ch. 74, Sch. II
2018-25  8-27-2018   TSO I
2018-16  6-11-2018   52.01
2018-17  6-11-2018   TSO I
2018-18  6-25-2018   TSO VI
2018-22  7-16-2018   Adopting Ordinance
2018-23  8-27-2018   Ch. 74, Sch. II
2018-25  8-27-2018   TSO I
2018-27  10-9-2018   36.01
2018-28  10-9-2018   TSO I
2018-29  10-9-2018   TSO I
2018-31  10-22-2018  TSO I
2018-33  11-12-2018  TSO I
2018-34  11-12-2018  TSO I
2018-36  11-12-2018  TSO VI
2018-37  11-26-2018  TSO I
2018-38  12-10-2018  TSO II
2018-40  1-28-2018   TSO II
2018-41  1-28-2019   52.30
2019-01  1-14-2019   TSO I
2019-02  1-14-2019   TSO I
2019-04  1-14-2019   TSO I
2019-05  1-14-2019   TSO I
2019-06  1-28-2019   TSO VI
2019-07  2-11-2019   TSO I
2019-08  2-25-2019   TSO I
2019-09  3-25-2019   TSO VIII
2019-13  3-25-2019   TSO VIII
2019-16  4-22-2019   TSO II
                     52.01 -
                     52.12,
                     52.20 -
2019-17  5-13-2019   52.30,
                     52.40 -
                     52.44,
                     52.99
2019-18  5-13-2019   TSO I
2019-21  5-28-2019   TSO I
2019-22  5-28-2019   TSO II
2019-24  5-28-2019   TSO I
2019-30  8-26-2019   TSO I
2019-31  9-9-2019    TSO II
2019-33  9-23-2019   TSO II
2019-34  10-15-2019  TSO I
2019-35  10-28-2019  Adopting Ordinance
2019-36  10-28-2019  TSO I
2019-37  11-11-2019  95.13
2019-38  11-11-2019  TSO I
2019-39  11-11-2019  TSO I
2019-41  11-25-2019  TSO I
2019-43  11-25-2019  TSO I
2019-44  11-25-2019  TSO I
2019-45  11-25-2019  TSO VIII
2019-46  11-25-2019  36.09
2020-01  1-13-2020   TSO VI
2020-02  1-13-2020   TSO VI
2020-03  2-10-2020   TSO II
2020-08  4-13-2020   TSO I
2020-21  10-26-2020  Ch. 74, Schs. I,
                     II
2020-23  10-26-2020  TSO I
2020-24  10-26-2020  TSO I
2020-25  11-23-2020  30.05
2020-27  12-14-2020  TSO I
2020-28  12-14-2020  TSO I
2020-30  1-25-2021   Ch. 74, Sch. I
2021-01  1-25-2021   TSO I
2021-05  2-22-2021   TSO VIII
2021-07  4-5-2021    TSO I
2021-08  4-26-2021   TSO I
2021-09  4-26-2021   TSO I
2021-12  5-24-2021   TSO I
2021-13  6-28-2021   TSO I
2021-19  9-27-2021   TSO I
2021-21  10-12-2021  51.168
2021-22  10-12-2021  54.04,
                     54.05
2021-23  10-25-2021  TSO I
2021-25  10-25-2021  TSO I
2021-26  10-25-2021  TSO I
2021-27  11-8-2021   TSO II
2021-29  11-8-2021   TSO III
2021-30  11-8-2021   TSO I
2021-31  11-8-2021   30.05
2021-34  12-13-2021  TSO I
2021-36  12-13-2021  TSO I
2022-01  1-10-2022   TSO I
2022-02  1-24-2022   Adopting Ordinance
2022-03  1-24-2022   TSO I
2022-04  1-24-2022   TSO I
2022-05  1-24-2022   TSO I
2022-06  2-14-2022   TSO IX
2022-07  2-28-2022   TSO I
                     33.01 -
2022-14  6-13-2022   33.06,
                     33.20 -
                     33.26
                     98.01 -
2022-15  6-13-2022   98.11,
                     98.99
2022-16  6-13-2022   TSO I
2022-17  6-27-2022   32.18
2022-18  6-27-2022   TSO I
2022-21  9-12-2022   33.27
2022-23  10-24-2022  TSO I
2022-24  10-24-2022  TSO I
2022-26  11-14-2022  36.01
2022-28  12-14-2022  TSO I
2023-01  1-9-2023    31.01
2023-02  1-9-2023    31.03
                     150.01,
                     Ch. 150, App. A;
2023-03  2-27-2023   151.01,
                     Ch. 151, App. A;
                     152.01,
                     Ch. 152, App. A
2023-04  2-13-2023   TSO I
2023-06  5-8-2023    TSO IV
2023-07  4-24-2023   TSO II
2023-10  6-12-2023   TSO I
2023-11  6-26-2023   TSO II
2023-12  7-17-2023   TSO IX
2023-13  8-14-2023   30.03,
                     31.02
2023-15  9-25-2023   TSO I
2023-16  9-25-2023   TSO I
2023-19  11-13-2023  150.634
2023-20  11-27-2023  TSO I
                     35.01 -
2023-21  12-11-2023  35.26,
                     35.99
2023-22  12-11-2023  TSO I
2023-24  12-11-2023  TSO I
2024-07  6-10-2024   TSO I
2024-08  6-10-2024   150.282
2024-10  8-12-2024   TSO I
2024-11  8-26-2024   TSO I
2024-12  9-23-2024   TSO I
2024-13  10-15-2024  TSO I
2024-14  10-15-2024  TSO I
2024-16  12-9-2024   51.161
2024-18  11-25-2024  52.41
2025-02  1-27-2025   97.06
2025-03  1-27-2025   TSO II
2025-04  1-27-2025   53.01
2025-06  2-10-2025   97.06
2025-07  3-10-2025   Ch. 150, App. A;
                     150.278
2025-09  4-14-2025   TSO I
2025-12  4-28-2025   TSO VI
2025-13  6-9-2025    TSO I
2025-14  6-9-2025    52.06,
                     Ch. 52, App. A
2025-15  8-25-2025   72.01 -
                     72.09
                     35.01 -
2025-18  9-8-2025    35.26,
                     35.99
                     35.01 -
2025-19  10-27-2025  35.26,
                     35.99
2025-20  11-10-2025  TSO IX
                    
 
 
