VILLAGE OF WOODLAWN, OHIO
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-8 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through 12-10-2024
State legislation current through 12-31-2024
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
OFFICIALS
Mayor, Brian K. Poole
Mayor, Brian K. Poole
Cyndi Chandler, Vice-Mayor
Robert Lawson, Council Member
Rosemary Brown, Council Member
Esther Boyd, Council Member
Pamela Fitzgerald, Council Member
Aaron Tillman III, Council Member
Monica Yihad, Clerk of Council
Tim Engel, Interim Municipal Manager
Kevin Williams, Interim Police Chief
Amos Johnson, Fire Chief
Tim Engel, Finance Director
Emily Supinger, Law Director
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
Ordinance No. 02-2009
Passed February 5, 2009
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING, REPLACING AND ADOPTING THE CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE
VILLAGE OF WOODLAWN, OHIO AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
WHEREAS,    American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed an update of the Code of Ordinances of the Village which supplement
all ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted since the prior
supplement to the Code of Ordinances of this Political Subdivision; and
WHEREAS,   American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision
or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or
make reference to sections of the State of Ohio Code; and
WHEREAS,   it is the intent of the Village of Woodlawn to accept these updated
sections in accordance with the changes of the laws of the State of Ohio;
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Council of the Village of Woodlawn,
Hamilton County, Ohio, a majority of all concurring, that:
SECTION I   The 2008 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the Village of
Woodlawn and the Code it supplements as submitted by American Legal Publishing
Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is
hereby adopted by reference as if set out in its entirety. By the enactment of
this complete Code of Ordinances, the prior code of ordinances and any
subsequent supplementations to that code are hereby replaced and repealed.
SECTION II   Such code shall be deemed published as of the day of its adoption
and approval by the Village Council. The Clerk of the Village of Woodlawn is
hereby authorized and ordered to certify and distribute the Code of Ordinances
as outlined in the Woodlawn Charter.
SECTION III   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary
for the preservation of public peace, health, safety and general welfare for
the citizens of the Village of Woodlawn, Ohio, and shall go into effect
immediately. The reason for the emergency is so that the Village can enjoy the
benefits of this updated Code as soon as possible.
                        Johnnie Lee Rabb /s/
                        MAYOR JOHNNIE LEE RABB
Adopted the 5th day of February, 2009
Ordinance No. 18-2015
Passed November 24, 2015
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING, REPLACING AND ADOPTING THE CODE OF ORDINANCES
FOR THE VILLAGE OF WOODLAWN, OHIO AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
WHEREAS,    American Legal Publishing Corporation has completed an update of
the Code of Ordinances of the Village which supplement all ordinances of a
general and permanent nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of
Ordinances of the Village; and
WHEREAS,   American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision
or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or
make reference to sections of the Ohio Revised Code; and
WHEREAS,   it is the intent of the Village of Woodlawn to accept these updated
sections in accordance with the changes of the laws of the State of Ohio;
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Council of the Village of Woodlawn,
Hamilton County, Ohio, a majority of all concurring, that:
SECTION I   The 2015 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the Village of
Woodlawn and the Code it supplements as submitted by American Legal Publishing
Corporation, a copy of which is on file with the Clerk of Council, be and the
same is hereby adopted by reference as if set out in its entirety. By the
enactment of this complete Code of Ordinances, the prior code of ordinances and
any subsequent supplementations to that code are hereby replaced and repealed.
SECTION II   Such code shall be deemed published as of the day of its adoption
and approval by the Village Council. The Clerk of the Village of Woodlawn is
hereby authorized and ordered to certify and distribute the Code of Ordinances
as outlined in the Woodlawn Charter.
SECTION III   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary
for the preservation of public peace, health, safety and general welfare for
the citizens of the Village of Woodlawn, Ohio, and shall go into effect
immediately. The reason for the emergency is so that the Village’s laws are
current and may be administered and enforced without disruption or confusion.
                        Susan Upton Farley /s/
                        MAYOR SUSAN UPTON FARLEY
Adopted the 24th day of November, 2015.
ATTEST:
Barbara Battle /s/
BARBARA BATTLE
CLERK OF COUNCIL
CHARTER
FOR
VILLAGE OF WOODLAWN, OHIO
Editor’s note:
   The Charter of the Village of Woodlawn was adopted by the voters in
November, 2006, and became effective January 1, 2007. 
   Amendments to the Charter of the Village of Woodlawn were adopted by the
voters in November, 2012, and became effective January 1, 2013, November, 2016,
and became effective January 1, 2017, November, 2020, and became effective
January 1, 2021, and November 2024, and became effective January 1, 2025.
Preamble
Article I   Name, Boundaries and Powers
   
Section 1.01   Name and Boundaries
   
Section 1.02   Powers
Article II   Legislative Authority
   
Section 2.01   Number, Selection, Term
   
Section 2.02   Vice Mayor
   
Section 2.03   Vacancy When Vice Mayor Becomes Mayor
   
Section 2.04   Qualifications
   
Section 2.05   Compensation of Council
   
Section 2.06   Procedures for Legislation
   
Section 2.07   Subject and Amendment of Bylaws, Ordinances, and Resolutions
   
Section 2.08   Authentication and Recording
   
Section 2.09   Publication and Certification of Ordinances in Book Form
   
Section 2.10   Adoption of Technical Ordinances and Codes by Incorporation by
Reference
   
Section 2.11   Certificate of Clerk as to Publication
   
Section 2.12   Effect of Not Making Publication
   
Section 2.13   Vacancy in Office of Council
   
Section 2.14   Judge of Election and Qualification of Members; Quorum and
Special Meetings
   
Section 2.15   Rules; Journal; Expulsion of Members
   
Section 2.16   Meetings of Council
   
Section 2.17   General Powers
   
Section 2.18   Ethics
   
Section 2.19   Property
Article III   Mayor
   
Section 3.01   Mayoral Power
   
Section 3.02   Mayor of Village; Election; Term; Qualifications; Power; Duties
   
Section 3.03   Vacancy in Office of Mayor
   
Section 3.04   General Duties of the Mayor
   
Section 3.05   Filling of Vacancies in Offices
   
Section 3.06   Communications to the Council of Finances and General Conditions
   
Section 3.07   Protests Against Excessive Expenditures
   
Section 3.08   Supervision of Conduct of Officers
   
Section 3.09   Annual Report to Council
Article IV   Municipal Manager
   
Section 4.01   Municipal Manager
   
Section 4.02   Powers and Duties of Municipal Manager
   
Section 4.03   Contracts by Municipal Manager; Central Purchasing
Administrative Officials and Departments
   
Section 4.04   Conflict of Interest
   
Section 4.05   Law Director
   
Section 4.06   Appointment of Finance Director
   
Section 4.07   Powers and Duties of Finance Director
   
Section 4.08   Accounts of Finance Director
   
Section 4.09   Quarterly Account; Annual Report
   
Section 4.10   Receipt and Disbursement of Funds
   
Section 4.11   Duty of Delivering Money and Property
   
Section 4.12   Clerk of Council
   
Section 4.13   Police Protection
   
Section 4.14   Fire Department
   
Section 4.15   Public Works Director
   
Section 4.16   Parks and Recreation Director
   
Section 4.17   Building Commissioner/Inspector
   
Section 4.18   Engineer
Article V   Boards and Commissions
   
Section 5.01   Effect of Charter Action on Pre-existing Boards and Commissions
   
Section 5.02   Planning Commission
   
Section 5.03   Board of Zoning Appeals
   
Section 5.04   Recreation Commission
   
Section 5.05   Charter Review Commission
   
Section 5.06   General Provisions
   
Section 5.07   Vacancy in Boards or Commissions
Article VI   Taxation and Borrowing
   
Section 6.01   Power to Incur Indebtedness
   
Section 6.02   Issuance of Bonds
   
Section 6.03   Procedure in Bond Issue
   
Section 6.04   Short-Term Borrowing
   
Section 6.05   Municipal Earnings Tax Limitation
Article VII   Initiative, Referendum, Recall
   
Section 7.01   Initiative, Referendum, Recall
Article VIII   General Provisions
   
Section 8.01   Separability
   
Section 8.02   City Status
   
Section 8.03   Transitional Procedure
Preamble
We the people of the Village of Woodlawn, Ohio, in order to secure home rule,
provide efficient and fair methods of administering affairs of the community,
ensure the continuation of our present form of government, and provide the best
possible protection for the health, safety, and welfare of the community, do
hereby adopt this Charter.
Article I
Name, Boundaries and Powers
Section 1.01 Name and Boundaries
The people of the Village of Woodlawn, Ohio, within the corporate limits as
established at the time of the adoption of this Charter, or as thereafter
established in the manner provided by law, shall be and continue to be a
municipal corporation of the name of "the Village of Woodlawn." The corporation
will thereinafter be referred to as "the Village."
Section 1.02 Powers
The Village shall have all the powers of local self-government and the benefits
of municipal home rule that may now or thereafter be lawfully possessed or
exercised by municipal corporations under the Constitution or laws of the State
of Ohio. All such powers shall be exercised in the manner prescribed in this
Charter, or, to the extent that the manner is not prescribed herein, in such a
manner as shall be provided by ordinance or resolution of the Council. Any such
ordinance or resolution shall supersede and override State statutes. In the
absence of such provisions as to any power, such power shall be exercised in
the manner now or hereafter prescribed by the general laws of the state
applicable to municipalities.
Article II
Legislative Authority
Section 2.01 Number, Selection, Term
The legislative power of the Village shall be vested in the Council, which
shall be a continuing body consisting of six Members at-large.
Members of Council shall serve four (4) year, at-large, staggered terms, where
three (3) members shall be elected biennially beginning with the Council
election to be held in November of 2017.
The term of office of each Member of Council shall begin on January 1 following
their election. Council members shall serve such elected terms of four years or
until the respective successors are chosen and qualified. Any vacancy on
Council, whether by resignation or disqualification, shall be filled under the
provisions of Section
2.13 of this Charter.
Section 2.02 Vice Mayor
At Council's Organizational Meeting, which shall be held on January 1st or as
soon as practicable thereafter each year, the Council shall choose by majority
vote one of its members as Vice Mayor, who shall assume office at the time of
such selection and shall hold office until a successor is chosen at the
Organizational Meeting held the next January.
When the Mayor is absent from the Village or is unable, for any cause, to
perform their duties, the Vice Mayor shall be the Acting-Mayor, and shall have
the same powers and perform the same duties as the Mayor.
Section 2.03 Vacancy When Vice Mayor Becomes Mayor
When the Vice Mayor of the Council becomes the Mayor, the vacancy thus created
shall be filled as provided in the Charter, and the Council shall choose by
majority vote one of its members to serve as Vice Mayor, who shall have the
same rights, powers and duties as their predecessor.
Section 2.04 Qualifications
Each Member of the Council shall have resided in the Village one year preceding
their election and be an elector of the Village and shall continue to be an
elector of the Village throughout the term of office. No Member of the Council
shall hold any other public office, have a vested interest in any contract with
the Village, or hold employment with the Village, except that such a Member may
be a notary public, a member of the state militia, or a volunteer firefighter
of the Village, provided that such Member shall not receive any compensation
for their services as a volunteer firefighter in addition to their regular
compensation as a Member of the Council. Any Member who ceases to possess any
such qualifications or who moves from the Village shall forfeit their office.
Section 2.05 Compensation of Council
Ordinances presently enforcing and establishing salaries shall remain in effect
for the Council. The compensation of a Council Member shall not be changed
during the term for which such Council Member is elected or appointed. Council
salaries shall be established by a majority of Council, to be effective at the
beginning of the term of office of the next newly elected Council Members, and
Council Members whose terms shall continue beyond the beginning of such new
terms shall be entitled to vote on such compensation issues.
Section 2.06 Procedures for Legislation
   1.   Generally. The following procedures shall apply to the passage of
ordinances and resolutions of the Village:
      (i)   In order to vote, any Member must be present. A Member shall be
considered present if he or she attends in person or, in the event a meeting is
held by electronic, teleconference, web, or video means as provided in this
Charter, if the Member attends through such means. Each ordinance and
resolution shall be read by title only, provided the Council may require any
reading to be in full by a majority vote of its Members.
      (ii)   The vote on the passage of each ordinance or resolution shall be
taken by yeas and nays and entered upon the journal.
      (iii)   Each ordinance or resolution shall be passed, except as otherwise
provided by law, by vote of at least a majority of all the Members of Council.
   2.   Ordinances.
      (i)   Each ordinance shall be read on three different days, provided the
Council may dispense with this rule by a vote of at least three-fourths of its
Members.
      (ii)   Unless the ordinance specifies a later date, the effective date of
any ordinance shall be thirty (30) days after its adoption, except as otherwise
provided in this Charter or by the Constitution of the State of Ohio.
Ordinances providing for appropriations for the current expenses of the
Village, or for street improvements petitioned for by the owners of the
majority of the front frontage of the property benefitted to be assessed for
the improvement shall go into effect immediately.
      (iii)   Emergency ordinances may be passed by the affirmative votes of
two-thirds of Council for enactment, and shall become effective upon adoption,
or the time indicated therein. If any emergency ordinance or resolution shall
fail to receive the required majority affirmative votes, but receives the
necessary majority for passage as non-emergency legislation, it shall become
effective as non-emergency legislation. The Council, before enacting an
emergency ordinance or resolution, shall determine the ordinance or resolution
is necessary for the immediate preservation for the public peace, health,
safety, or welfare of the citizens of the Village, and the ordinance or
resolution shall contain a statement of the necessity of declaring the
emergency.
   3.   Resolutions.
      (i)   Each resolution shall be read one time.
      (ii)   Each resolution shall become effective upon its adoption.
   4.   Motions. Action by Council, not required by law to be by ordinance or
resolution, may be taken by motion approved by at least a majority vote of the
Members present at the meeting when the action is taken.
Section 2.07 Subject and Amendment of Bylaws, Ordinances, and Resolutions
No ordinance, resolution, or bylaw shall contain more than one subject, which
shall be clearly expressed in its title. Each such bylaw, resolution, and
ordinance shall be adopted or passed by a separate vote of the Council of the
Village, and the yeas and nays shall be entered into the minutes.
Section 2.08 Authentication and Recording
Ordinances, resolutions, and bylaws shall be authenticated by the signature of
the presiding officer and clerk of the Council of the Village.
Section 2.09 Publication and Certification of Ordinances in Book Form
Ordinances and Resolutions shall be published to inform the public of their
passage and effect. Council shall pass legislation prescribing the method of
publication of ordinances and resolutions in the Village. In the absence of any
such legislation, ordinances and resolutions shall be published as required by
state law.
When ordinances are revised, codified, rearranged, published in book form, and
certified as correct by the Clerk of the Council and the Mayor, such
publication shall be a sufficient publication, and the ordinances so published,
under appropriate titles, chapters and sections, shall be held the same in law
as though they had been published as required by Council's adopted method of
timely publication. If such revision or codification is made by the Village and
contains new matter, it shall be a sufficient publication of such codification,
including the new matter, to publish, in the manner required by such Sections,
a notice of the enactment of such codifying ordinance, containing the title of
the ordinance and a summary of the new matters covered by it. Such revision or
codification may be made under appropriate titles, chapters, and sections, and
in one ordinance containing one or more subjects.
Section 2.10 Adoption of Technical Ordinances and Codes by Incorporation by
Reference
The Council of the Village may adopt standard ordinances and codes, prepared
and promulgated by the State, or any department, board, or other agency
thereof, or any code prepared and promulgated by a public or private
organization which publishes a model or standard code, including but not
limited to codes and regulations pertaining to fire, fire hazards, fire
prevention, plumbing code, electrical code, building code, property
maintenance, refrigeration machinery code, piping code, boiler code, heating
code, or air conditioning code by incorporation by reference, the publication
required by
Section 2.09, inclusive, of the Charter, shall clearly identify such code,
shall state the purpose of the code, shall state that a complete copy of such
code is on file with the Clerk of Council for inspection by the public, and
also on file in the Law Library of the County in which the Village is located
and that said Clerk has copies available for distribution to the public at
cost. If the Village amends or deletes any provisions of such code, the
publication shall contain a brief summary of such deletion or amendment.
If the agency which originally promulgated or published the code thereafter
amends that code, the Village may adopt such amendment or change by
incorporation, by reference and in amending ordinance by the same procedure as
required for the adoption of the original code without the necessity of setting
forth in full in the amending ordinance the provisions of the original
ordinance or code.
Ordinances or codes adopted by the Village under the provisions of this Section
shall be deemed to be in full and complete compliance with
Section 2.09 of the Charter and no other publication is necessary.
Section 2.11 Certificate of Clerk as to Publication
Immediately after the expiration of the period of publication for ordinances or
summaries of ordinances required by
Section 2.09 of the Charter, the Clerk of the Council shall enter on the record
of ordinances, in a section to be left for such purpose under the recorded
ordinance, a certificate attesting to the completed publication and on what
dates such publication was made and shall sign his/her name thereto officially.
Such a certificate shall be prima-facie evidence that legal publication of the
ordinance or summary of the ordinance was made.
Section 2.12 Effect of Not Making Publication
It is a sufficient defense to any suit or prosecution under an ordinance, to
show that no publication or posting was made as required by Charter.
Section 2.13 Vacancy in Office of Council
When the office of a Member of the Council becomes vacant, Council shall choose
by majority vote a successor to fill the vacancy for the unexpired term. If the
Council fails within 30 days to fill such vacancy, the Mayor shall fill it by
appointment.
Section 2.14 Judge of Election and Qualification of Members; Quorum and Special
Meetings
The Council shall be the judge of the election and qualification of its
Members. A majority of all the Members elected shall be a quorum, but a less
number may adjourn from day to day and compel attendance of absent Members in
such a manner and under such penalties as are prescribed by ordinance. The
Council shall provide rules for the manner of calling special meetings.
Section 2.15 Rules; Journal; Expulsion of Members
The Council shall determine its own rules and keep a journal of its proceedings
and may punish or expel any Member for conduct unbecoming of a public official
or violation of its rules and declare their seat vacant for absence without
valid excuse where such absence has continued for two months. No expulsion
shall take place without the affirmative vote of the majority of all Members of
Council and until the delinquent Member has been notified of the charge against
them and has had an opportunity to be heard.
Section 2.16 Meetings of Council
Council shall hold one regular meeting each calendar month, with the exception
of the month of July, during which Council shall not hold a regular meeting but
may call a special meeting as provided in this Charter, if needed. The meetings
may be held at such time and place as is prescribed by ordinance, and may be
conducted by electronic, teleconference, web, or video means during a declared
emergency, or as otherwise permitted by the Charter or under Ohio law. Council
meetings shall at all times be open to the public, with the exception that
Council may go into executive session for any reason permissible under Ohio law
or as may be prescribed by ordinance. The Mayor or any three members of the
Council may call special meetings upon at least 12 hours' notice to each member
served personally, left at their usual place of residence, or other reasonable
method that may be prescribed by ordinance or Council rule.
Section 2.17 General Powers
The Council shall have the management and control of the finances and property
of the Village, except as otherwise provided.
Section 2.18 Ethics
Members of Council are expected at all times to adhere to the requirements of
Ohio Ethics Laws, as they may be amended from time to time.
Section 2.19 Property
Council shall have the power, by ordinance, to control the development or use
of land within the corporate limits of the municipality and to regulate
construction thereon. Council shall not have the power to vacate public use of
parks or other green areas municipally owned without the approval of a majority
of the Electorate at a public vote. Council may acquire land for purposes of
redevelopment and may dispose of such land at fair market value on the terms
and conditions it deems in the best interest of the Municipality. Any real
property having a value of less than $25,000.00 as determined by a licensed
appraiser who is not a resident of the Municipality may be disposed of by
Council as it determines is in the best interest of the Municipality.
Article III
Mayor
Section 3.01 Mayoral Power
The Mayor shall be recognized as the official and ceremonial head of the
Municipality and by the Governor for military purposes.
The Executive Power of the Village shall be vested in the Municipal Manager,
Finance Director, Mayor and such other officers as may be determined by Council
ordinance.
Section 3.02 Mayor of Village; Election; Term; Qualifications; Power; Duties
The Mayor of the Village shall be elected for a term of four years, commencing
on January 1 following their election. The Mayor shall have resided in the
Village for at least one-year preceding said election and be an elector of the
Village and shall remain an elector throughout the term of office. Such Mayor
shall be the chief conservator of the peace therein and shall have the powers
and duties provided by law. The Mayor shall be the President of the Council and
shall preside at all regular and special meetings thereof, but shall have no
vote except in case of a tie.
Section 3.03 Vacancy in Office of Mayor
When the Mayor is absent from the Village or is unable for any cause to perform
their duties, the Vice Mayor shall be Acting-Mayor. In case of the death,
resignation or removal of the Mayor, the Vice Mayor shall become the Mayor and
shall hold the office for the remainder of the unexpired term.
Section 3.04 General Duties of the Mayor
The Mayor shall perform all the duties prescribed by the bylaws and ordinances
of the Village. The Mayor shall see that all ordinances, bylaws and resolutions
of the Council are faithfully obeyed and enforced. The Mayor shall sign all
commissions, licenses and permits granted by the Council or authorized by the
Charter, and such other instruments as by law or ordinance is required by
certificate.
Section 3.05 Filling of Vacancies in Offices
   1.   Unless otherwise provided by law, vacancies arising in appointive and
elective offices of the Village shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor for
the remainder of the unexpired term, provided that:
      (i)   Vacancies in the Office of Mayor shall be filled in the manner
provided by
Section 3.03 of the Charter;
      (ii)   Vacancies in a member of the Council shall be filled in the manner
provided by
Section 2.13 of the Charter.
      (iii)   Vacancies in the Office of Vice Mayor of the Council shall be
filled in the manner provided by
Section 2.03 of the Charter.
      (iv)   In the event of a vacancy in the Office of Finance Director or
Municipal Manager, the Mayor with approval of Council may appoint a person to
serve as an acting-officer to perform the duties of the office until a
permanent officer is appointed to fill the vacancy.
Section 3.06 Communications to the Council of Finances and General Conditions
The Mayor shall communicate to Council as to the general condition of the
affairs of the Village as the Mayor deems proper or as is required by the
Council to assist Council in its decision-making role.
Section 3.07 Protests Against Excessive Expenditures
If, in the opinion of the Mayor, an expenditure authorized by the Council
exceeds the revenues of the Village for the current year, the Mayor shall
protest against such expenditure, and enter such protest, and the reason
therefore, on the journal of the Council.
Section 3.08 Supervision of Conduct of Officers
The Mayor shall oversee the conduct of all elected officials of the Village.
The Mayor shall inquire into and examine the grounds of all reasonable
complaints against such officials, and cause their violations or neglect of
duty to be promptly punished or reported to the proper authority for
corrections.
Section 3.09 Annual Report to Council
At the regular meeting in March of each year, and at such other times as the
Mayor deems expedient, the Mayor shall report to the Council concerning the
affairs of the Village, and recommend such measures as they see proper.
Article IV
Municipal Manager
Section 4.01 Municipal Manager
The Municipal Manager shall be appointed by the Mayor, but that appointment
does not become effective until it is approved by a majority vote of the
Council. The Municipal Manager shall be appointed considering all relevant
factors, including education and experience in the field of public
administration. The Municipal Manager shall have those powers provided by this
Charter and those of a Village Administrator under Ohio law. The Municipal
Manager shall not be an elected official, nor hold any other public office,
during their tenure in office. If the Municipal Manager does hold such position
at the time of their appointment the Municipal Manager shall have 30 days to
resign such position or office. The Municipal Manager shall serve at the
pleasure of the Mayor and the Council and the Manager may be removed without
cause by the Mayor with a consent of the majority of the members elected to the
Council; or they may be removed without cause by the affirmative vote of three-
fourths of the members elected to the Council, without the consent of the
Mayor.
Section 4.02 Powers and Duties of Municipal Manager
Unless otherwise provided herein, the Municipal Manager shall appoint
department heads, officers, employees, agents, clerks, and assistants,
excluding the Finance Director, any personnel who report to the finance
director, and the Clerk of Council, provided such positions are first
authorized by the Council. Such appointments shall be subject to approval by
the Mayor and shall be in writing and filed with the Finance Director.
The Municipal Manager shall be under the general supervision and control of the
Mayor and shall have such other powers and duties as are prescribed by
ordinance or by law and which are not inconsistent herewith. The Municipal
Manger shall perform all duties and shall have all the powers of boards of
public affairs and street commissioners as prescribed by law, except as
otherwise provided by this Charter.
Section 4.03 Contracts by Municipal Manager; Central Purchasing
The Municipal Manager shall make contracts, purchase supplies and materials,
and provide labor for any work under their supervision involving not more than
the similar limitation prescribed for Village Administrators under state
statute. The process for contracting including competitive bidding, or
exceptions to the requirements for competitive bidding, shall be governed by
Village ordinance, or, in the absence of such ordinance, by Ohio law. When an
expenditure other than the compensation of persons employed by the Village
exceeds the similar limitation prescribed for Village Administrators under
state statute, such expenditure shall first be authorized and directed by
Council.
Administrative Officials and Departments
Section 4.04 Conflict of Interest
The laws of the State of Ohio pertaining to interest of municipal officials,
contracts, and the expenditure of money on behalf of the Village shall apply to
the officials of the Village.
Section 4.05 Law Director
The Law Director shall be appointed by, and serves at the pleasure of, Council.
The Law Director must be an attorney-at-law, admitted to practice in the State
of Ohio. The Law Director's compensation shall be established by ordinance or
contract. The Law Director shall be the legal counsel for the Village and for
all officials and departments thereof; and shall, when requested by Council,
give legal opinions in writing. The Law Director shall represent the Village
unless council has approved additional legal counsel. Any additional legal
counsel shall be appointed and serve at the pleasure of Council, and may be a
party to and shall perform such other duties as may be assigned by Council as
well as those imposed by this Charter. The Law Director shall, upon request,
prepare all contracts, bonds, except when Council has approved additional
counsel for bonds, and other instruments in writing in which the Village is
concerned.
Section 4.06 Appointment of Finance Director
The Finance Director shall be appointed by the Mayor of the Village, but that
appointment does not become effective until it is approved by a majority vote
of the Council. The Finance Director shall be appointed considering all
relevant factors, including education and experience in the field of
governmental accounting, taxation, budgeting, and finance.
The Finance Director may be removed without cause either by the Mayor with the
consent of a majority of the members of the Council, or by a three-fourths vote
of the Council, with or without the consent of the Mayor.
If the position of Finance Director is filled on an acting basis, such
appointment shall be limited to a period of six months.
Section 4.07 Powers and Duties of the Finance Director
The Finance Director shall have the powers that would otherwise rest in the
offices of Clerk and Treasurer, or the combined office of Clerk-Treasurer under
Ohio law, unless otherwise resting in the Clerk of Council, as described in
this Charter or properly adopted ordinance.
The Finance Director shall appoint the Tax Administrator and employees of the
finance department, provided such positions are first authorized by the
Council. Such appointments shall be subject to approval by the Mayor and shall
be in writing and filed with the Finance Director.
The Finance Director shall demand and receive, and deposit in the Village
treasury from the County Treasurer, taxes levied and assessments made and
certified to the County Auditor by the Council of the Village and placed on the
tax list by such auditor for collection, monies, from persons authorized to
collect or required to pay them, accruing to the Village from any judgments
fines, penalties, forfeitures, licenses, and costs taxed in Mayor's Court and
debts due to the Village. Such funds shall be disbursed by the Finance Director
on the order of any person authorized by law or ordinance to issue orders
therefore.
The Finance Director shall keep the books of the Village, exhibit accurate
statements of all monies received and expended, of all the property owned by
the Village and the income derived there-from, and of all taxes and
assessments. The Finance Director shall communicate to Council, on a monthly
basis, a statement of the finances of the Village, and such other information
relating thereto, or other reports as may be requested by Council.
Section 4.08 Accounts of Finance Director
The Finance Director of the Village shall keep an accurate account of:
   1.   All monies received by him/her, showing the amount thereof, the time
received, from whom, and on what account received;
   2.   All disbursements made by him/her, showing the amount thereof, the time
made, to whom, and on what account paid.
The Finance Director shall so arrange the Finance Director's books that the
amount received and paid on accounts are separate funds or specified
appropriations, shall be exhibited in separate accounts. In addition to the
ordinary duties of such Finance Director, they shall have such powers and
perform such duties as are required by any ordinance of the Village, not
inconsistent with Title 7 of the Ohio Revised Code, and not incompatible with
the nature of their office.
Section 4.09 Quarterly Account; Annual Report
The Finance Director shall settle an account with the Council, quarterly, and
at any other time which it by resolution or ordinance requires. At the first
regular meeting of such Council in January, each year, the Finance Director
shall report to it the condition of the finances of the Village, the amount
received, the sources of such receipts, the disbursements made, and on what
account, during the year preceding. Such account shall exhibit the balance due
on each fund which has come into the Finance Director's hands during the year.
Section 4.10 Receipt and Disbursement of Funds
The Finance Director shall receive and disburse all funds of the Village and
such other funds as arise in or belong to any department or part of the
Village.
Section 4.11 Duty of Delivering Money and Property
The Finance Director, at the expiration of their term of office, or on their
resignation or removal, shall deliver to their successor, all monies, books,
papers, and other property in their possession as Finance Director. In the case
of the death or incapacity of such Finance Director, their legal
representatives shall, in like manner, deliver the money and property which
were in the Finance Director's hands to the person entitled thereto.
Section 4.12 Clerk of Council
The Clerk of Council shall be appointed by Council. Council shall establish the
salary of the Clerk of Council by ordinance. The Clerk of Council may hold
other office or position of employment in the municipality, subject to Council
approval. The Clerk of Council who reports to and serves at the pleasure of
Council shall have those powers, duties, and functions as are provided in this
Charter, by the Rules of Council, by ordinance, resolution, or as required by
law. Included in the duties of the Clerk of Council shall be the maintenance of
a record of proceedings of the Council and a record of all ordinances and
resolutions adopted by the Council. The Clerk of Council shall give notice of
regular and special meetings of the Council to its members and to the public as
may be provided by this Charter, by the Rules of Council, or by ordinance or
resolution. The Mayor may appoint any person as an Acting Clerk of Council,
subject to the approval of Council, to serve in the event of a vacancy in the
office or of temporary absence or disability of the Clerk of Council.
Section 4.13 Police Protection
Council shall provide for police protection adequate to meet the needs
regarding health and safety of the Village with a sense of public service. The
Police Chief must have a sense of public service, possess strong leadership
skills which will enable them to establish and maintain discipline and
efficiency as well as direct the activities of the police department. The
minimum qualification for appointment as Chief of Police shall be established
by the Municipal Manager, which shall be consistent with the requirements of
Ohio law, and confirmed by Village Council.
The Police Department shall be under the direction of a Chief of Police, who
shall be the Department Head and who shall report to the Municipal Manager for
administrative purposes.
The Police Chief is responsible for the efficient operation of the police
department, which shall include hiring, promotion and discipline of employees;
budget and control of supplies and equipment; in-service education of officers
and employees and all other activities which will assure the department's
ability to function at the highest level possible to serve and protect the
people of Woodlawn.
   1.   Disciplinary action in the police department shall be taken as provided
in the Village of Woodlawn employment policies, as they may be amended from
time to time. The appointment, promotion and removal of the Police Chief shall
be made by the Municipal Manager with the approval of Council. The appointment,
promotion and removal of
      members of the Police Department shall be made by the Police Chief in
accordance with rules provided for by the Council and this Charter.
   2.   A newly appointed Police Chief shall be on probation for one year and
semi- annual evaluations will be conducted during the first year and thereafter
the Police Chief shall be reviewed on an annual basis. These reviews shall be
conducted by the Municipal Manager.
   3.   Before any employee is hired in the Police Department, a thorough
background check and investigation shall be done utilizing accepted industry
standards and best practices and the employee must be approved by the Mayor and
Municipal Manager prior to employment.
   4.   The Police Department shall uphold the laws of the State of Ohio and
the Village of Woodlawn.
   5.   The Police Chief shall report to the Municipal Manager, except during
any ongoing criminal or sensitive investigations regarding such matters.
Section 4.14 Fire Department
Council shall provide for fire protection adequate to meet the needs regarding
health and safety of the Village, with a sense of public service. The Fire
Chief must have a sense of public service, possess strong leadership skills
which will enable them to establish and maintain discipline and efficiency as
well as direct the activities of firefighters. The minimum qualification for
appointment as Fire Chief shall be established from time to time by the
Municipal Manager, which shall be consistent with the requirements of Ohio law,
and confirmed by Village Council.
The Fire Department shall be under the direction of a Fire Chief, who shall be
the Department Head and who shall report to the Municipal Manager for
administrative purposes.
The Fire Chief is responsible for the efficient operation of the fire
department, which shall include hiring, promotion and discipline of employees;
budget and control of supplies and equipment; in-service education of
firefighters and employees and all other activities which will assure the
department's ability to function at the highest level possible to serve and
protect the people of Woodlawn.
   1.   Disciplinary action in the fire department shall be taken as provided
in the Village of Woodlawn employment policies, as they may be amended from
time to time. The appointment, promotion and removal of the Fire Chief shall be
made by the Municipal Manager with the approval of Council. The appointment,
promotion and removal of members of the Fire Department shall be made by the
Fire Chief in accordance with rules provided for by Council and this Charter.
   2.   A newly employed Fire Chief shall be on probation for one year and
semi-annual reviews will be conducted during the first year and thereafter the
Fire Chief shall be reviewed on an annual basis. These reviews shall be done by
the Municipal Manager.
   3.   Before any employee is hired in the Fire Department, a thorough
background check and investigation shall be done utilizing accepted industry
standards and best practices and the employee must be approved by the Mayor and
Municipal Manager prior to employment.
   4.   The Fire Department shall uphold the laws of the State of Ohio and the
Village of Woodlawn.
   5.   The Fire Chief shall report to the Municipal Manager, except for during
any ongoing criminal or sensitive investigation regarding such matters.
Should Council vote to have the Village join a joint fire district to provide
for the fire protection needs of the Village, the provisions of this Section
shall not apply.
Section 4.15 Public Works Director
The appointment, promotion and removal of the Public Works Director shall be
made by the Municipal Manager. The Public Works Director shall supervise the
improvement and repair of streets, avenues, alleys, lands, lanes, squares,
landings, bridges, sidewalks, sewers, drains, ditches, culverts, streams, and
water courses, as well as the lighting, sprinkling, and cleaning and snow
removal of all streets, alleys and public buildings in places throughout the
Village of Woodlawn. The Public Works Director shall supervise public works
employees and may perform other duties as assigned. A newly employed Public
Works Director shall be on probation for one year and semi-annual reviews will
be conducted during the first year and thereafter the Director shall be
reviewed on an annual basis. These reviews shall be done by the Municipal
Manager.
Section 4.16 Parks and Recreation Director
The appointment, promotion and removal of the Parks and Recreation Director
shall be made by the Municipal Manager. The Parks and Recreation Director shall
supervise and is responsible for management oversight of all municipal programs
and services offered for adults and children of all ages. This Director is the
lead staff person for the Woodlawn Recreation Commission and acts as liaison
with other institutions, entities, and community-based groups to enhance the
quality and quantities of recreation services to the residents.
The Director plans and implements approved municipal-sponsored events utilizing
the assistance of volunteers and staff as needed. The Parks and Recreation
Director shall supervise recreation department employees and perform other
duties as assigned. A newly employed Parks and Recreation Director shall be on
probation for one year and semi-annual reviews will be conducted during the
first year and thereafter the Director shall be reviewed on an annual basis.
These reviews shall be done by the Municipal Manager.
Section 4.17 Building Commissioner/Inspector
The Municipal Manager shall provide for the appointment of a Building
Commissioner/Inspector, or may contract for such services, to meet the needs of
the Village after approval of Council.
Section 4.18 Engineer
The Municipal Manager shall provide for the appointment of a Village Engineer,
or may contract for such services, to meet the needs of the Village after
approval of Council.
Article V
Boards and Commissions
Section 5.01 Effect of Charter Action on Pre-existing Boards and Commissions
All official opinions, rulings, findings, decisions and other prior action of
pre-existing Boards, commissions, and/or committees shall remain in effect,
unimpaired and in full force until changed, modified, rescinded, or repealed
according to this Charter's provision by any new Boards, commissions, and/or
committees or until superseded by Council action.
Section 5.02 Planning Commission
A Planning Commission consisting of five (5) members shall be established. The
members shall be the Mayor, one Council member appointed by the Mayor, and
three (3) citizens of the Village appointed by the Mayor with the approval of
Council. The Planning Commission shall have the powers conferred on it by the
Ohio Revised Code, this Charter, and by ordinances of Council. The members,
except for the member who also is a Council member whose term shall be for one
year, shall have terms of six (6) years on a staggered basis. The Planning
Commission shall be a continuing body and its past members may be reappointed.
The Planning Commission shall be responsible for maintaining a Master Plan and
the planning and advising of municipal development and redevelopment, and other
duties assigned by Council. The Planning Commission shall adopt its own rules
of procedure, to be made available to the public. The chairperson is selected
by the Commission membership.
The Master Plan shall be reviewed on an annual basis. Notice of any amendment
to the Zoning Code or the rezoning of any property within the Village shall be
provided as required by ordinance, or in the absence of an ordinance as
required by Ohio law.
Section 5.03 Board of Zoning Appeals
A Board of Appeals shall consist of seven (7) Village of Woodlawn residents.
The composition of the Board shall be as follows:
   1.   Two (2) members of Council shall be selected annually by the Council.
   2.   One (1) member of the Planning Commission shall be selected annually by
the Commission.
   3.   Four (4) citizens of the Village shall be selected by recommendation of
the Mayor with the concurrence of Council. Citizens shall serve a four (4) year
staggered terms
      (i)   Rules and Regulations
         The Mayor, or in their absence the Vice-Mayor, shall preside at all
meetings. The Mayor may not vote in a Board of Appeals meeting other than to
break a tie by the members. No member may abstain from voting "yea" or "nay"
unless there is a conflict of interest involved.
   (ii)   Meetings
      Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the Mayor and at such
times as the Board may determine. The Mayor, or in their absence the Vice-
Mayor, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. The Board
shall keep minutes of all proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon
each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicate such fact.
Section 5.04 Recreation Commission
A Recreation Commission consisting of seven (7) members shall be established.
At least five (5) members shall be residents of the Village, selected at large.
It is recommended that two members be recruited from the Woodlawn business
community and/or Woodlawn Chamber of Commerce. The Recreation Commission shall
have the powers conferred upon it by general law and by Council ordinances.
This Commission shall serve as an advisory board to Council regarding the
recreation needs of the Village. The Recreation Commission shall be a
continuing body. Recreation Commission members shall be appointed by Council
and the Mayor, with six (6) members appointed by Council and one (1) member
being appointed by the Mayor. Each member shall be appointed for two years on
the basis of staggered terms. Former members may be reappointed.
Section 5.05 Charter Review Commission
The Mayor and each Council member shall each appoint a member to the Charter
Review Commission in January in the year immediately following the election or
re-election of the Mayor. The Commission shall consist of seven (7) members;
all qualified electors.
The Commission shall appoint a Chairperson who shall preside at its meetings.
The Commission shall complete minutes of its meetings. Actions shall be
accomplished by a motion, a second and a vote of each member by "yea" or "nay".
All votes and motions shall be recorded in the minutes.
A quorum shall consist of four (4) members.
The Commission shall review the Charter of the municipality and submit a
report/recommendation to Council at their last meeting in July of the year in
which they were appointed.
Council shall consider and may then submit any recommended changes as amended
by Council to the electors of the municipality in the manner provided by the
Ohio Constitution at the next general election.
The terms of the members of the Charter Review Commission shall terminate upon
their submission of the report/recommendations to Council.
Section 5.06 General Provisions
Members of all boards and commissions of the Village, whether established by
this Charter or by ordinance, shall be comprised of a majority of qualified
electors of the Village at the time of their appointment and during their
respective terms of office. Members of all municipal boards and commissions
shall serve without compensation; provided, however, that the Council may
provide for the payment of mileage and for the reimbursement of expenses
incurred by such members in the performance of their duties.
A majority of all the members of each of the municipal boards and commissions
shall constitute a quorum for meetings of such boards and commissions. A
majority vote by the members of a board or commission present at a meeting is
required for approval of any action or matter brought before the board or
commission.
All meetings of each board and commission shall comply with all rules for
notification of meetings to the public. All meetings of any board or commission
at which a majority of its members are present shall be open to the public, but
any board or commission may go into executive session for any reason
permissible under Ohio law or as may be prescribed by ordinance. Meetings of
any board of commission may be conducted by electronic, teleconference, web, or
video means during a declared emergency, or as otherwise permitted by the
Charter or under Ohio law.
Except as otherwise provided herein, specifically Section 5.03 governing the
Board of Zoning Appeals, at the first meeting in each calendar year of
municipal boards and commissions, each board or commission shall elect a
chairperson and a secretary by a majority vote of all the members appointed
thereto. The chairperson shall be a member of the respective body; but the
secretary need not be a member of the board or commission and may hold other
office or employment with the Village. The chairperson shall be the presiding
officer at all meetings of the board or commission; and the secretary shall
keep an accurate record of the proceedings of such board or commission.
Section 5.07 Vacancy in Boards or Commissions
A vacancy during the term of any member of a municipal board or commission
established by this Charter or by an ordinance passed by the Council, shall be
filled in the manner as originally appointed and for the remainder of the
unexpired term.
Article VI
Taxation and Borrowing
Section 6.01 Power to Incur Indebtedness
After a public hearing, in conformance with State law, the Village may incur
indebtedness, upon authorization of the Council, by issuing its bonds and notes
in anticipation of bonds, pursuant to this Article, to finance any necessary
capital project which the Council may decide to construct or acquire.
Section 6.02 Issuance of Bonds
The Council shall authorize the issuance of bonds or notes by ordinance, passed
by the affirmative votes of at least the majority of its members.
Section 6.03 Procedure in Bond Issue
In all respects not provided for otherwise in this Charter, the procedure
followed in authorization of an issuing of bonds and notes and applying the
proceeds shall be in accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Bond Law as
established by the Ohio Revised Code and applicable provisions of the
Constitution of the State of Ohio.
Section 6.04 Short-Term Borrowing
At any time in any budget year, when the Council shall determine that revenues
will, for any reason, be insufficient to meet authorized expenditures, it may,
by ordinance, borrow money and/or issue notes. These notes may be of three (3)
different types:
   1.   Those issued to finance emergency appropriations, when available funds
are insufficient for that purpose;
   2.   Those issued in anticipation of the collection of taxes upon real
estate and income;
   3.   Those issued in anticipation of the collection of other types of
revenue.
In the case of public emergency as authorized by the Ohio Revised Code, the
Council of the Village may borrow money for any municipal purpose valid under
the Constitution of Ohio or this Charter to the extent of the maximum debt
limitations imposed by this Charter and the Constitution, and may create debt
in any form and under any procedure not in conflict with any express
prohibition of the Constitution and laws of Ohio and/or of this Charter.
Section 6.05 Municipal Earnings Tax Limitation
Council may not increase the Municipal Income Tax without submission of the
question of levying such additional tax to the electors of the Village at a
primary or general election. Council shall conduct a public hearing prior to
voting to place any such measure on the ballot.
Article VII
Initiative, Referendum, Recall
Section 7.01 Initiative, Referendum, Recall
   1.   Initiative: The electors of the Village shall have the power to propose
ordinances and other measures by initiative petition in accordance with the
provisions of the  Constitution and the laws of the State of Ohio now or
hereafter in effect.
   2.   Referendum: The electors of the Village shall have the power to approve
or reject at the polls any ordinance or other measure enacted by Council in
accordance with the provisions of the Constitution and laws of the State of
Ohio now or hereafter in effect.
   3.   Recall: The electors of the Village shall have the power to remove from
office by recall election any elected official of the Village. If an elected
official shall have served six (6) months of the term, a petition demanding
removal may be filed with the Clerk of Council, who shall note thereon the name
and address of the person filing the petition and the date of such filing, and
deliver to such person a receipt therefore and attach a copy thereof to said
petition. The petition may be circulated in separate parts, but the separate
parts shall be bound together and filed as one instrument.
      Each part shall contain the name and office of the person whose removal
is sought and a statement in not more than two hundred (200) words of the
grounds for the removal. Such petition shall be signed by at least that number
of electors which equals twenty (20) percent of the total number of electors
voting at the last preceding regular municipal election.
      Within ten (10) days after the day on which such petition shall have been
filed, the Clerk of Council shall determine whether or not it meets the
requirements hereof. If the said Clerk shall find the petition insufficient,
the Clerk shall promptly certify the particulars in which the petition is
defective, deliver a copy of the certificate to the person who filed the
petition, and make a record of such delivery.
      If such official shall not resign within five (5) days after the day on
which delivery of a valid petition shall have been made, the Council shall
thereupon fix a day for holding a recall election, not less than sixty (60)
days nor more than seventy-five (75) days after the date of such delivery. At
such recall election, this question shall be placed upon the ballot: "Shall
(naming the official) be allowed to continue as (naming of office)?", with
provision being made on the ballot for voting affirmatively or negatively on
such question.
      If a majority of the votes cast at such election shall be voted
affirmatively, such official shall remain in office. If a majority of such
votes cast shall be voted negatively, such official shall be considered as
removed, the office shall be declared vacant, and such vacancy shall be filled
as provided by this Charter. The official removed by such recall election shall
not be eligible for appointment to the vacancy created thereby.
Article VIII
General Provisions
Section 8.01 Separability
In any provision, section, or part of a section of this Charter is held invalid
by the court, the other provisions of this Charter, section, or part of a
section shall not be invalidated thereby.
Section 8.02 City Status
The term "Village" as used in this Charter shall, upon achievement of City
status, be construed as "City," and editorially altered in all new copies of
this achievement.
Section 8.03 Transitional Procedure
The revisions of this 2020 Charter shall be submitted to the electors at the
General Election of November, 2024. If approved, the revised Charter shall
become effective on January 1, 2025. All elected officials shall hold office
until the expiration of their terms, when the next elected officials shall
serve as indicated in the separate sections of this Charter. All elected
officials and employees of the Village, as of January 1, 2025, shall continue
in such employment; and thereafter shall be subject, in all respects, to the
provisions of this Charter, and ordinances, resolutions, rules or regulations
enacted or promulgated thereunder.
PART TWO: ADMINISTRATION CODE
TITLE TWO - General Provisions
         
Chap. 202.   Codified Ordinances.
         
Chap. 204.   Official Standards.
         
Chap. 206.   Public Contracts.
         
Chap. 208.   Public Meetings.
TITLE FOUR - Legislation
         
Chap. 220.   Council.
         
Chap. 221.   Mayor-President of Council.
         
Chap. 222.   Ordinances and Resolutions.
TITLE SIX - Administration
         
Chap. 230.   Mayor.
         
Chap. 231.   Manager.
         
Chap. 232.   Village Administrator. (Repealed)
         
Chap. 234.   Law Director.
         
Chap. 236.   Clerk-Treasurer. (Repealed)
         
Chap. 237.   Department of Finance.
         
Chap. 238.   Engineer.
         
Chap. 240.   Public Works Inspector. (Repealed)
         
Chap. 242.   Police Department. (Repealed)
         
Chap. 244.   Fire Department. (Repealed)
         
Chap. 246.   Service Department. (Repealed)
         
Chap. 248.   Recreation Department. (Repealed)
         
Chap. 250.   Building Department.
         
Chap. 252.   Community Improvement Corporation.
         
Chap. 258.   Employees Generally. (Repealed)
TITLE EIGHT - Boards, Commissions and Committees
         
Chap. 270.   Planning Commission.
         
Chap. 272.   Board of Zoning Appeals.
         
Chap. 274.   Board of Building Appeals.
         
Chap. 276.   Recreation Advisory Board. (Repealed)
         
Chap. 277.   Recreation Commission.
         
Chap. 278.   Community Development Citizens Advisory Committee.
         
Chap. 280.   Economic Development Committee.
         
Chap. 282.   Personnel Selection Committee.
         
Chap. 284.   Board of Review (Income Tax).
         
Chap. 285.   Board of Health.
         
Chap. 286.   Volunteer Fire Fighters Dependents Fund Board.
         
Chap. 287.   Charter Review Commission.
         
Chap. 288.   Civil Service Board.
TITLE TEN - Judicial
         
Chap. 290.   Mayor’s Court.
TITLE TWO: GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 202: CODIFIED ORDINANCES
202.01   Designation; citation; headings.
202.02   General definitions.
202.03   Rules of construction.
202.04   Revivor; effect of reenactment, amendment, or repeal.
202.05   Construction of section references.
202.06   Severability.
202.99   General Code penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar State law
   Codification in book form - see CHTR. §
2.06; Ohio R.C. 731.23
   Imprisonment until fine paid - see Ohio R.C. 1905.30, 2947.14
   Ordinances and resolutions - see CHTR. §
2.06; ADM. Ch. 212
   Traffic Code penalties - see TRAF.
Ch. 408
   Statute of limitations on prosecutions - see GEN. OFF.
606.06
   General Offenses Code penalties and sentencing - see GEN. OFF.
Ch. 698
§ 202.01 DESIGNATION; CITATION; HEADINGS.
   This document, consisting of general and permanent legislation relating to
Ohio villages in general, together with such general and permanent legislation
of the Municipality that Council may wish to include herein, as revised,
arranged, compiled, numbered, codified and printed herewith, consolidated into
component codes, titles, chapters and sections, shall be known and may be
designated as the Codified Ordinances of Woodlawn, Ohio, 2006, for which
designation the term “Codified Ordinances” may be substituted. Code, title,
chapter and section headings do not constitute any part of the law as contained
in the Codified Ordinances.
(ORC 1.01)
§ 202.02 GENERAL DEFINITIONS.
   As used in the Codified Ordinances, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   AND may be read OR, and OR may be read AND, if the sense requires it.
   (b)   ANOTHER. When used to designate the owner of property which is the
subject of an offense, includes not only natural persons but also every other
owner of property.
   (c)   BOND. Includes an undertaking.
   (d)   CHILD. Includes child by adoption.
   (e)   COUNCIL. The legislative authority of the Municipality.
   (f)   COUNTY. Hamilton County.
   (g)   FIRE CHIEF. Include the Chief of the Fire Department if such Fire
Department has been established in the Municipality, and shall include the Fire
Prevention Officer if no Fire Department has been established in the
Municipality.
   (h)   IMPRISONED. The same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 1.05.
   (i)   INTERNET. The international computer network of both Federal and non-
Federal interoperable packet switched data networks, including the graphical
subnetwork known as the world wide web.
   (j)   KEEPER or PROPRIETOR. Includes all persons, whether acting by
themselves or as a servant, agent, or employee.
   (k)   LAND or REAL ESTATE. Includes rights and easements of incorporeal
nature.
   (l)   LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY. The legislative authority of the Municipality.
   (m)   MAY. Is permissive.
   (n)   MUNICIPALITY or VILLAGE. The Village of Woodlawn.
   (o)   OAC. To the Ohio Administrative Code.
   (p)   OATH. Includes affirmation; and “swear” includes affirm.
   (q)   OF UNSOUND MIND. The person lacks the relevant mental capacity.
   (r)   OHIO R.C., ORC or REVISED CODE. The Ohio Revised Code.
   (s)   OWNER. When applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner,
or tenant in common of the whole or part of such property.
   (t)   PERSON. Includes an individual, corporation, business trust, estate,
trust, partnership, and association.
   (u)   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes all property except real property.
   (v)   PLAN OF SEWERAGE, SYSTEM OF SEWERAGE, SEWER, and SEWERS. Includes
sewers, sewage disposal works and treatment plants, and sewage pumping
stations, together with facilities and appurtenances necessary and proper
therefor.
   (w)   PREMISES. As applied to property, includes land and buildings.
   (x)   PROPERTY. Includes real, personal, mixed estates, and interests.
   (y)   PUBLIC AUTHORITY. Includes boards of education; the Municipal, County,
State, or Federal government, its officers, or an agency thereof; or any duly
authorized public official.
   (z)   PUBLIC PLACE. Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school
yard, body of water or watercourse, public conveyance, or any other place for
the sale of merchandise, public accommodation, or amusement.
   (aa)   REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments.
   (bb)   REGISTERED MAIL. Includes certified mail; and “certified mail”
includes registered mail.
   (cc)   SHALL. Is mandatory.
   (dd)   SIDEWALK. That portion of the street between the curb line and the
adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
   (ee)   STATE. The State of Ohio.
   (ff)   STREET. Includes alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, roads, highways,
viaducts, and all other public thoroughfares within the Municipality.
   (gg)   TENANT or OCCUPANT. As applied to premises, includes any person
holding a written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part
of such premises, alone or with others.
   (hh)   UNDERTAKING. Includes a bond.
   (ii)   WEEK. Seven consecutive days.
   (jj)   WHOEVER. Includes all persons, natural and artificial; partners;
principals, agents, and employees; and all officials, public or private.
   (kk)   WRITING. Includes printing.
   (ll)   WRITTEN or IN WRITING. Include any representation of words, letters,
symbols, or figures; this provision does not affect any law relating to
signatures.
   (mm)   YEAR. Twelve consecutive months.
(ORC 1.02, 1.05, 1.44, 1.59, 701.01)
§ 202.03 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (a)   Common and technical use. Words and phrases shall be read in context
and construed according to the rules of grammar and common usage. Words and
phrases that have acquired a technical or particular meaning, whether by
legislative definition or otherwise, shall be construed accordingly.
(ORC 1.42)
   (b)   Singular and plural; gender; tense. As used in these Codified
Ordinances, unless the context otherwise requires:
      (1)   The singular includes the plural, and the plural includes the
singular.
      (2)   Words of one gender include the other genders.
      (3)   Words in the present tense include the future tense.
(ORC 1.43)
   (c)   Computation of time.
      (1)   The time within which an act is required by law to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first and including the last day; except that when
the last day falls on Sunday or a legal holiday, then the act may be done on
the next succeeding day that is not a Sunday or a legal holiday.
      (2)   When a public office, in which an act required by law is to be
performed, is closed to the public for the entire day that constitutes the last
day for doing the act or before its usual closing time on that day, the act may
be performed on the next succeeding day that is not a Sunday or a legal
holiday.
      (3)   LEGAL HOLIDAY, as used in divisions (c)(1) and (c)(2) of this
section, means the following days:
         A.   The first day of January, known as New Year’s day;
         B.   The third Monday in January, known as Martin Luther King day;
         C.   The third Monday in February, known as Washington-Lincoln day;
         D.   The day designated in the “Act of June 28, 1968,” 82 Stat. 250, 5
U.S.C. § 6103, as amended, for the commemoration of Memorial day;
         E.   The nineteenth day of June, known as Juneteenth day;
         F.   The fourth day of July, known as Independence day;
         G.   The first Monday in September, known as Labor day;
         H.   The second Monday in October, known as Columbus day;
         I.   The eleventh day of November, known as Veteran’s day;
         J.   The fourth Thursday in November, known as Thanksgiving day;
         K.   The twenty-fifth day of December, known as Christmas day;
         L.   Any day appointed and recommended by the Governor of this State
or the President of the United States as a holiday.
      (4)   If any day designated in this section as a legal holiday falls on a
Sunday, the next succeeding day is a legal holiday.
(ORC 1.14)
      (5)   When an act is to take effect or become operative from and after a
day named, no part of that day shall be included. If priority of legal rights
depends upon the order of events on the same day, such priority shall be
determined by the times in the day at which they respectively occurred.
(ORC 1.15)
      (6)   If a number of months is to be computed by counting the months from
a particular day, the period ends on the same numerical day in the concluding
month as the day of the month from which the computation is begun, unless there
are not that many days in the concluding month, in which case the period ends
on the last day of that month.
(ORC 1.45)
§ 202.04 REVIVOR; EFFECT OF RE-ENACTMENT, AMENDMENT, OR REPEAL.
   (a)   The repeal of a repealing provision of these Codified Ordinances does
not revive the provision originally repealed nor impair the effect of any
saving clause therein.
(ORC 1.57)
   (b)   The re-enactment, amendment, or repeal of these Codified Ordinances
does not, except as provided in division (c) of this section:
      (1)   Affect the prior operation of the provision or any prior action
taken thereunder.
      (2)   Affect any validation, cure, right, privilege, obligation, or
liability previously acquired, accrued, accorded, or incurred thereunder.
      (3)   Affect any violation thereof or penalty, forfeiture, or punishment
incurred in respect thereto, prior to the amendment or repeal.
      (4)   Affect any investigation, proceeding, or remedy in respect of any
privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture, or punishment; and the
investigation, proceeding, or remedy may be instituted, continued, or enforced,
and the penalty, forfeiture, or punishment imposed, as if the provision had not
been repealed or amended.
   (c)   If the penalty, forfeiture, or punishment for any offense is reduced
by a re-enactment or amendment of these Codified Ordinances, the penalty,
forfeiture, or punishment, if not already imposed, shall be imposed according
to these Codified Ordinances as amended.
(ORC 1.58)
§ 202.05 CONSTRUCTION OF SECTION REFERENCES.
   (a)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation of a
section or an inclusive group of sections, or of divisions or subdivisions of a
section, such reference shall be construed to mean a violation of any provision
of the section, sections, divisions or subdivisions included in the reference.
   (b)   References in these Codified Ordinances to action taken or authorized
under designated sections of these Codified Ordinances, in every case, action
taken or authorized under the applicable legislative provision which is
superseded by these Codified Ordinances.
(ORC 1.23)
   (c)   A reference to any portion of a provision of these Codified Ordinances
applies to all re-enactments or amendments thereof.
(ORC 1.55)
   (d)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered, unless the subject matter be
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 202.06 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provisions of a section of these Codified Ordinances or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the
invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of the section or
related sections which can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application, and to this end the provisions are severable.
(ORC 1.50)
§ 202.99 GENERAL CODE PENALTY.
   Whenever, in this municipal code or in any ordinance of the municipality,
any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a
misdemeanor, or whenever the doing of any act is required or the failure to do
any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is otherwise
provided, whoever violates any such provision shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding $500, a term of imprisonment not exceeding six months, or both. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a
violation continues or occurs.
CHAPTER 204: OFFICIAL STANDARDS
Editor’s note:
   The State of Ohio operates on Eastern Daylight Savings Time from 2:00 a.m.
of the first Sunday in April until 2:00 a.m. of the last Sunday in October.
Congress, on March 22, 1966, passed the Uniform Time Act requiring uniform
observance throughout the nation of Daylight Savings Time starting in 1967,
except that a State legislature could exempt the entire state from Daylight
Savings Time or divide a state into not more than two parts, each with a
different time standard. The Ohio legislature, through inaction, has elected to
observe Eastern Daylight Savings Time throughout the State.
   On August 8, 2005, the Energy Policy Act of 2005 was enacted. This Act
changed the time change dates for Daylight Saving Time in the United States.
Beginning in 2007, the State of Ohio begins Daylight Saving Time at 2:00 a.m.
on the second Sunday in March and reverts to standard time at 2:00 a.m. on the
first Sunday in November. The Secretary of Energy will report the impact of
this change to Congress. Congress retains the right to resume the 2005 Daylight
Saving Time schedule once the Department of Energy study is complete.
   There are no sections in Chapter 204. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross references and any future legislation.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   State standard of time - see Ohio R.C. 1.04
   State legal holidays - see Ohio R.C. 1.14, 5.20 et seq., 1303.45
   State flag and other insignia - see Ohio R.C. 5.01 et seq.
   State motto - see Ohio R.C. 5.06
   State seals - see Ohio R.C. 5.10 et seq.
   Official newsletter of Council - see ADM.
220.02
CHAPTER 206: PUBLIC CONTRACTS
206.01   Home rule authority.
206.02   Competitive bidding and notice requirements.
206.03   Exceptions and alternatives to competitive bidding.
206.04   Execution and modification of contracts.
206.05   Bidding procedures.
206.06   Contents of bids generally.
206.07   Invalid terms and conditions.
206.08   Discrimination; equal opportunity.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Contracts and purchasing - see CHTR. §
5.06
   Contracts for utility services without advertising for bids - see Ohio R.C.
9.30
   Contracts for work on public buildings and improvements - see Ohio R.C.
153.50 et seq.
   Bids and proceedings - see Ohio R.C. 731.15 et seq.
   Mutual aid contracts - see ADM. 230.01
   Unlawful interest in contracts - see GEN. OFF.
606.17
§ 206.01 HOME RULE AUTHORITY.
   The Village of Woodlawn, as a home rule charter Village, shall not be
obligated to follow Ohio statutory procedures regarding contracting and
competitive bidding.
(Ord. 33-2022, passed 9-27-2022)
§ 206.02 COMPETITIVE BIDDING AND NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Competitive bidding and legislative authorization shall be required
for all contracts reasonably anticipated by the Village to involve expenditures
equal to or greater than the amount specified in R.C. § 9.17, unless an
exception or alternative exists under §
206.03. In estimating the anticipated expenditure to determine whether the
competitive bidding threshold will be exceeded, the labor portions of the
expenditure may be calculated without the use of prevailing wage rates.
   (b)   The Municipal Manager may, without competitive bidding or further
legislative authorization, enter into contracts for expenditures of less than
the amount specified in R.C. § 9.17 for which Village funds have been
appropriated.
   (c)   Notice. All bid advertisements or other solicitations for competitive
bidding shall be placed in a timely manner and with a reasonable period allowed
for response, at least once in any of the following: a newspaper of general
circulation within the Village; on the Village's website; on any other website
accessible to the public and reasonably calculated to solicit bids.
(Ord. 33-2022, passed 9-27-2022; Ord. 30-2023, passed 9-26-2023)
§ 206.03 EXCEPTIONS AND ALTERNATIVES TO COMPETITIVE BIDDING.
   (a) The following are exceptions or alternatives to competitive bidding
requirements set forth in §
206.02(a):
      (1)   Professional services. Contracts for professional services
requiring training or expertise to an advanced, specialized, or significant
degree, such as services performed by attorneys, architects, engineers,
accountants, physicians, insurance agents/brokers, and or third party
administrators are not subject to competitive bidding requirements.
       (2)   Cooperative purchasing. Contracts for goods or services made
through cooperative purchasing programs, whether operated by a public or
private entity, are not subject to competitive bidding requirements.
      (3)   Intergovernmental purchases. Contracts for the purchase of goods
from the federal government, the state, a county or contracting authority of a
county, board of education, a township, or another municipal corporation are
not subject to competitive bidding requirements.
      (4)   Design-build. Design-build construction projects let under
procedures established by the Municipal Manager are not subject to competitive
bidding requirements.
      (5)   Construction-manager-at- risk. Construction-manager-at-risk
construction projects let under procedures established by the Municipal Manager
are not subject to competitive bidding requirements.
      (6)   Single source. Contracts for goods or services that only available
from a single source are not subject to competitive bidding.
      (7)   No bid or rejected bids. If, after advertisement as provided in
this chapter, no bids are received or if all bids are rejected, the Municipal
Manager may either seek new, competitive bids, or solicit proposals and/or
quotes, negotiate the terms, conditions and other relevant factors to obtain a
contract advantageous and beneficial to the Village.
      (8)   Emergencies. In the event of an emergency, the Municipal Manager
may enter into a contract for the construction of a public improvement or the
purchase of equipment, supplies or materials that is estimated to exceed the
amount specified in R.C. § 9.17 without competitive bidding. In such case, the
Municipal Manager shall report the facts to Council at its next meeting.
      (9)   Waiver by Council. In addition to the provisions contained in items
(1) through (7) herein, by vote of not less than five members, Council may
waive the competitive bidding requirement if Council determines that a waiver
of the competitive bidding requirement is in the best interest of the Village.
(Ord. 33-2022, passed 9-27-2022; Ord. 30-2023, passed 9-26-2023)
§ 206.04 EXECUTION AND MODIFICATION OF CONTRACTS.
   (a)   No contract shall be enforceable against the Village unless it has
been duly authorized, as provided herein, and executed in the name of the
Village by the Municipal Manager or designee, and bears the signature of the
Finance Director, certifying the availability and appropriation of funds.
   (b)   Approval procedure for alterations or modifications. An alternation or
modification to a competitively bid contract shall be approved only upon the
order of the Municipal Manager or designee. No order shall be effective until
the sum to be paid under the altered or modified contract is agreed to in
writing and signed by the contractor, the Municipal manager or designee, and
the Finance Director certifying the availability and appropriation of funds.
   (c)   Limited to appropriations. No contract alteration or modification to a
competitively bid contract shall be approved when the amount of the alteration
or modification causes the contract sum for the project or purchase to exceed
the amount appropriate by Council.
(Ord. 33-2022, passed 9-27-2022)
§ 206.05 BIDDING PROCEDURES.
   Pursuant to Section
4.03 of the Village of Woodlawn Charter, the following procedures shall apply
to contracts that require competitive bidding:
   (a)   Time between notice and bid opening. There shall be no minimum time
requirement between the publishing of the notice and the opening of bids. The
Village shall notify prospective bidders of the bid opening date and time in
the notice and shall adjust the same to meet the needs of the Village by
issuing addenda when necessary.
   (b)   Addenda do not extend bid opening. The Village may issue such addenda
to the bid documents as it feels necessary and such addenda may be issued up to
and including the last business day before the bid opening without any
extension of the bid opening date. Addenda issued the same day as the bid
opening shall cause the bid opening date to be extended to the date and time
set forth in such addenda.
   (c)   Estimate of cost. The Village shall disclose the estimated cost of the
project when it determines that doing so is in the best interest of the
Village.
   (d)   Time for award of bids. In the notice required for the bid
solicitation, the Village shall establish the time limit for awarding a
contract. Submitted bids may not be withdrawn during this time period. The
Village's failure to award and execute the contract within this period
invalidates the entire bid proceedings and all bids submitted, unless the time
for awarding and executing the contract is extended by mutual consent of the
Village and the bidder whose bid the Village accepts and with respect to whom
the Village subsequently awards and executes a contract. Such extension shall
not entitle the contractor to delay costs.
   (e)   Withdrawal of bids. Bidders may withdraw bids pursuant to R.C. § 9.31;
such withdrawal shall not modify the Village's right to award to the next
lowest and best bidder.
   (f)   Bids in excess of estimate. The Village may award contracts regardless
of the value of the bid as compared to the value of the estimated cost.
   (g)   Bonus and liquidated damages for time. The Village may offer a bonus
for completion of a contract prior to a specified date, or may exact liquidated
damages for each day of delay beyond a specified date, or both. The amounts of
the bonus and liquidated damages may be different.
   (h)   Return of bid guarantees. The Village shall return bid guarantees to
bidders to which it does not award a contract in a reasonably timely manner.
(Ord. 33-2022, passed 9-27-2022)
§ 206.06 CONTENTS OF BIDS GENERALLY.
   Bids submitted to the Village shall specifically detail all labor, equipment
and materials of every description and all work to be supplied that is
necessary to fully complete the construction required in strict conformity with
plans, specifications and instructions prepared by the Village Engineer.
(Ord. 33-2022, passed 9-27-2022)
§ 206.07 INVALID TERMS AND CONDITIONS.
   No contract entered into by the Village for the procurement of goods or
services shall include any of the following:
   (a)   A provision that requires the Village to indemnify or hold harmless
another person.
   (b)   A provision by which the Village agrees to binding arbitration or any
other binding extra-judicial dispute resolution process.
   (c)   A provision that names a venue for any action or dispute against the
state other than a court of proper jurisdiction in Hamilton County, Ohio.
   (d)   A provision that requires the state to agree to limit the liability
for any direct loss to the state for bodily injury, death, or damage to
property of the Village caused by the negligence, intentional or willful
misconduct, fraudulent act, recklessness, or other tortious conduct of a person
or a person's employees or agents, or a provision that would otherwise impose
an indemnification obligation on the Village.
   (e)   A provision that requires the Village to be bound by a term or
condition that is unknown to the Village at the time of signing a contract,
that is not specifically negotiated with the Village, or that may be
unilaterally changed by the other party.
   (f)   A provision that is inconsistent with the Village's obligations under
R.C. §§ 121.22 and/or 149.43.
   (g)   A provision for automatic renewal such that Village fund are or would
be obligated in subsequent fiscal years.
   If a contract contains a term or condition described in this section, the
term or condition is void ab initio, and the contract containing that term or
condition otherwise shall be enforceable as if it did not contain such term or
condition. A contract that contains a term or condition described in this
section shall be governed by and construed in accordance with Ohio law
notwithstanding any term or condition to the contrary in the contract.
(Ord. 33-2022, passed 9-27-2022)
§ 206.08 DISCRIMINATION; EQUAL OPPORTUNITY.
   It is the policy of the Village of Woodlawn, Ohio, to prohibit all forms of
illegal discrimination on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, national
origin, and disability or handicap in the competitive bidding and the award of
public contracts. By application of this policy of nondiscrimination, the
Village of Woodlawn, Ohio, seeks to ensure equal treatment and equal
opportunities for economic inclusion of all persons. The Village will not allow
itself to become a passive participant in illegal discrimination and will take
affirmative steps to ensure that all persons contracting with the Village of
Woodlawn, Ohio, comply with its policy of nondiscrimination.
(Ord. 33-2022, passed 9-27-2022)
CHAPTER 208: PUBLIC MEETINGS
208.01   Purposes; application.
208.02   Definitions.
208.03   Notice of regular and organizational meetings.
208.04   Continuation of adjourned meetings.
208.05   Notice of special meetings.
208.06   Statement of meeting’s purpose.
208.07   Notice to news media of special meetings.
208.08   Notification of discussion of specific types of public business.
208.09   Miscellaneous regulations.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Council meetings to be public - see CHTR. §
2.03
   Public meetings - see Ohio R.C. 121.22
   Meetings of Council - see Ohio R.C. 121.22, 731.44, 731.46
   Disturbing lawful meetings - see GEN. OFF.
648.05
§ 208.01 PURPOSES; APPLICATION.
   (a)   Council has adopted this chapter, pursuant to Ohio R.C. 121.22(F), for
the following purposes:
      (1)   To establish a reasonable method for any person to determine the
time and place of all regularly scheduled meetings and the time, place and
purpose of all special meetings;
      (2)   To make provisions for giving advance notice of special meetings to
the news media that have requested such notification; and
      (3)   To make provisions for persons to request and obtain reasonable
advance notification of all meetings at which any specific type of public
business is to be discussed.
   (b)   The provisions of this chapter apply to each Municipal body of the
Village and are in addition to any applicable legal requirements as to notices
to members of a Municipal body or to others in connection with specific
meetings or specific subject matters.
(Ord. 3-1976, passed 2-24-1976)
§ 208.02 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   DAY. A calendar day.
   (b)   MEETING. Any prearranged discussion of the public business of a
Municipal body by a majority of the members of such body.
   (c)   MUNICIPAL BODY. Any of the following: Council, the Planning
Commission, the Recreation Commission, the Board of Zoning Appeals, Assessment
Equalization Boards, the Safety Committee, the Service Committee, the Law
Committee, the Finance Committee, the Recreation Committee, the Planning
Committee and the Economic Development Committee. MUNICIPAL BODY also means
committees of such previously listed Municipal bodies comprised of members of
such bodies if such committees are comprised of a majority of the members of
the main Municipal body or are decision-making committees.
   (d)   ORAL NOTIFICATION. Notification given orally either in person or by
telephone, directly to the person for whom such notification is intended, or by
leaving an oral message for such person at the address, or if by telephone, at
the telephone number, of such person as shown on the records kept by the Clerk
of Council under this chapter.
   (e)   POST. To post in an area accessible to the public during the usual
business hours at the office of the Clerk of Council and at locations specified
by Council. A notice identifying the locations at which notifications will be
posted pursuant to this chapter shall be published by the Clerk of Council
within ten calendar days after the adoption of this chapter.
   (f)   PUBLISHED. Published once in a newspaper having a general circulation
in the Village, as defined in Ohio R.C. 7.12, except that no portion of the
newspaper need be printed in the Village. If, at the time of any publication,
there is no newspaper of general circulation, then the publication shall be in
a newspaper then determined by the Clerk of Council to have the largest
circulation in the Village.
   (g)   SPECIAL MEETING. A meeting that is neither a regular meeting nor an
adjournment of a regular or special meeting to another time or day to  consider
items specifically stated on the original agenda of the regular or special
meeting.
   (h)   WRITTEN NOTIFICATION. Notification in writing mailed, telegraphed or
delivered to the address of the person for whom the notification is intended,
as shown on the records kept by the Clerk of Council under this chapter, or in
any way delivered to such person. If mailed, the notification shall be mailed
by first-class mail, deposited in a U.S. Postal Service mailbox not later than
the second day preceding the day of the meeting to which the notification
refers, provided that at least one regular mail delivery day falls between the
day of mailing and the day of the meeting.
§ 208.03 NOTICE OF REGULAR AND ORGANIZATIONAL MEETINGS.
   (a)   The Clerk of Council shall post a statement of the time and place of
every regular meeting of each Municipal body for each calendar year not later
than the second day preceding the day of the first regular meeting (other than
the organizational meeting) of the calendar year of the body. The Clerk of
Council shall check at reasonable intervals to ensure that such statement
remains so posted during such calendar year. If, at any time during the
calendar year, the time or place of regular meetings, or of any regular
meeting, is changed on a permanent or temporary basis, a statement of the time
and place of the changed regular meetings shall be so posted by the Clerk of
Council at least 24 hours before the time of the first changed regular meeting.
   (b)   The Clerk of Council shall post a statement of the time and place of
any organizational meeting of a Municipal body at least 24 hours before the
time of the organizational meeting.
§ 208.04 CONTINUATION OF ADJOURNED MEETINGS.
   Upon the adjournment of any regular or special meeting to another day, the
Clerk of Council shall promptly post notice of the time and place of the
adjourned meeting.
§ 208.05 NOTICE OF SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   Except in the case of the special meeting referred to in §
208.07(d), the Clerk of Council shall, not later than 24 hours before the time
of a special meeting of a Municipal body, post a statement of the time, place
and purposes of the special meeting.
§ 208.06 STATEMENT OF MEETING’S PURPOSE.
   The statement provided for in §
208.05 and the notifications provided for in §
208.07 shall state the specific or general purpose or purposes then known to
the Clerk of Council to be intended to be considered at the special meeting.
However, the statement and notifications may state, as an additional general
purpose, that any other business as may properly come before the Municipal body
at the meeting may be considered and acted upon.
§ 208.07 NOTICE TO NEWS MEDIA OF SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   (a)   Any news medium organization that wishes to be given advance
notification of special meetings of a Municipal body shall file with the Clerk
of Council a written request therefor. Except in the event of an emergency
requiring immediate official action, as referred to in division (d) hereof, a
special meeting shall not be held unless at least 24 hours advance notice of
the time, place and purposes of such special meeting is given to the news media
that have requested the advance notification in accordance with division (b)
hereof.
   (b)   News media requests for such advance notification of special meetings
shall specify the Municipal body that is the subject of such request; the name
of the medium; the name and address of the person to whom written notifications
to the medium may be mailed, telegraphed or delivered; and the names, addresses
and telephone numbers (including addresses and telephone numbers at which
notifications may be given either during or before or after business hours) of
at least two persons to either one of whom oral notifications to the medium may
be given, and at least one telephone number which the request identifies as
being manned and which can be called at any hour for the purpose of giving oral
notification to such medium.
   Any media request shall be effective for one year from the date of filing
with the Clerk of Council or until the Clerk of Council receives written notice
from such medium canceling or modifying such request, whichever is earlier.
Each requesting news medium shall be informed of such period of effectiveness
at the time it files its request. The requests may be modified or extended only
by filing a complete new request with the Clerk of Council. A request shall not
be deemed to be made unless it is complete in all respects and unless the
request can be conclusively relied upon by the Village, the Municipal body that
is the subject of the request and the Clerk of Council.
   (c)   The Clerk of Council shall give oral notification or written
notification, or both, as he or she determines, to the news media that have
requested the advance notification in accordance with division (b) hereof, of
the time, place and purposes of each special meeting, at least 24 hours prior
to the time of the special meeting.
   (d)   In the event of an emergency requiring immediate official action, a
special meeting may be held without giving 24 hours advance notification
thereof to the requesting news media. The persons calling the meeting, or any
one or more of such persons or the Clerk of Council on their behalf, shall
immediately give oral or written notification, or both, as determined by the
person or persons giving the notification, of the time, place and purposes of
the special meeting to the news media that have requested advance notification
in accordance with division (b) hereof. The minutes or the call, or both, of
any special meeting shall state the general nature of the emergency requiring
immediate official action.
§ 208.08 NOTIFICATION OF DISCUSSION OF SPECIFIC TYPES OF PUBLIC BUSINESS.
   (a)   Any person, upon written request and as provided in this section, may
obtain reasonable advance notification of all meetings at which any specific
type of public business is scheduled to be discussed.
   Such written request shall be filed with the Clerk of Council and shall
specify the person’s name, the address(es) and telephone number(s) at or
through which the person can be reached during and before or after business
hours, the specific type of public business the discussion of which the person
is requesting advance notification of, the Municipal body that is the subject
of the request and the number of calendar months (not to exceed 12) which the
request covers. Such request may be canceled by request from such person to the
Clerk of Council.
   Each such written request shall be accompanied by cash, or a check or money
order payable to the Village, in the amount of four dollars ($4.00) for each
month covered by the request, which amount has been determined by Council to
represent a reasonable fee to cover costs of providing such advance
notification.
   Such requests may be modified or extended only by filing a complete new
request with the Clerk of Council. A request shall not be deemed to be made
unless it is complete in all respects and unless such request can be
conclusively relied upon by the Village, the Municipal body that is the subject
of the request and the Clerk of Council.
   (b)   The Clerk of Council shall give such advance notification under this
section by written or oral notification, or both, as the Clerk of Council
determines. The contents of a written notification may be a copy of the agenda
of the meeting, and the written notification may be accomplished by providing
copies of the agendas of all meetings of the Municipal body that is the subject
of the request for notification provided for in this section.
§ 208.09 MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Any person may visit or telephone the office of the Clerk of Council
during the regular office hours of that office to determine, based on
information available at that office, the time and place of regular meetings;
the time, place and purposes of any then known special meetings; and whether or
not the available agenda of any future meeting states that any specific type of
public business, identified by the person, is to be discussed at the meeting.
   (b)   Any notification provided for in this chapter to be given by the Clerk
of Council may be given by any person acting on behalf of or under the
authority of the Clerk of Council.
   (c)   A reasonable attempt at notification shall constitute notification in
compliance with this chapter.
   (d)   A certificate by the Clerk of Council as to compliance with this
chapter shall be conclusive upon the Village and the Municipal body involved.
   (e)   The Clerk of Council shall maintain a record of the date and manner,
and of the time if pertinent under this chapter, of all actions taken with
regard to notices and notifications under §§
208.04 through
208.08, and shall retain copies of proofs of publication of any notifications
or notices published thereunder.
TITLE FOUR: LEGISLATION
CHAPTER 220: COUNCIL
220.01   Rules of Order.
220.02   Official newsletter.
Appendix: Council Member Travel Policy
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Number, terms and qualifications - see CHTR. §
2.01
   Compensation - see CHTR. §
2.02
   Meetings - see CHTR. §
2.03
   Role of Mayor and veto power - see CHTR. §
2.04
   Powers - see CHTR. §
2.05
   Ordinances and resolutions - see CHTR. §§
2.06,
2.09; ADM. Ch.
222
   Officers - see CHTR. §
2.07
   Organization and rules - see CHTR. §
2.08
   Duties of Clerk of Council - see CHTR. §
4.12
   Traffic control powers - see TRAF.
406.07
§ 220.01 RULES OF ORDER.
   (a)   Newly elected officials.
      (1)   All newly elected officials shall present their certificate of
election to the Clerk of Council prior to being sworn into office and assuming
their official duties.
      (2)   All newly elected officials shall attend training specific to their
responsibilities as public officials within 120 days of taking office.
   (b)   Council meetings.
      (1)   The Council of the Village of Woodlawn, Ohio, shall consist of six
members. Council shall meet at 7:00 p.m. on the last Tuesday of each month.
      (2)   The Mayor shall be the presiding officer of all Council meetings.
The Mayor shall preserve order and decorum and confine members in debate to the
question. Any member of Council may raise a point of order if he or she
believes there is a violation of these rules, which shall be decided by the
Mayor.
      (3)   A special meeting of Council may be called by the Mayor or by any
three members of Council upon at least 12 hours' notice to each member by
electronic mail to his or her Village email address. Whenever a special meeting
is called by the Mayor, the Mayor shall advise the Clerk of Council of the date
and time of the meeting for posting and notification of members of Council.
Whenever a special meeting is called by three or more members of Council, a
member shall be designated to advise the Clerk of Council of the date and time
of the meeting for posting and notification of the Mayor and members of
Council. The Clerk of Council shall post the notice of the Special Council
meeting at the municipal building at least 24 hours' prior to the meeting, and
if possible, the meeting notice shall also be posted on the Village website
      (4)   It is the Mayor or any Council member's responsibility to notify
the Clerk of Council in the event of late arrivals or absence of any regularly
scheduled or special Council, Committee and/or Commission meeting. Such
notification shall occur a minimum of one hour prior to the meeting. In the
event that the Mayor or the Council member is unable to reach the Clerk of
Council, he or she must attempt to reach the Vice-Mayor to report his or her
absence or late arrival. Upon motion duly made and seconded, and the
affirmative vote of a majority of Council, Committee and/or Commission Members,
the tardy or absent member may be excused.
   (c)   Holiday meetings. When any regular meeting of the Council falls due on
a Village observed holiday, Council may reschedule the meeting or, if there are
no outstanding issues, cancel the meeting. Council may move the December
meeting as needed to avoid conflict with holiday plans.
   (d)   Open proceedings. The Mayor shall take the chair at the time appointed
for the Council to meet, and shall immediately call the members to order and
the Clerk of Council shall call the roll following the Pledge of Allegiance and
prayer. The Mayor shall then seek approval or disposition by Council for the
minutes of the preceding sessions. In the absence of the Mayor, the Vice-Mayor
shall perform such duties as are imposed upon the Mayor. In the absence of both
the Mayor and the Vice-Mayor, the Council may appoint a temporary chairperson
or presiding officer.
   (e)   Rules of order. In the absence of any rule upon the matter of
business, Council shall be governed by “Robert’s Rules of Order”. The Law
Director shall act as Parliamentarian.
   (f)   Order of business.
      (1)   The business of the regular meetings of Council shall be transacted
according to the printed agenda, available to the public at every regular
Council meeting, as follows:
         A.   Pledge of Allegiance;
         B.   Invocation;
         C.   Roll call;
         D.   Reading and disposal of the minutes of Council;
         E.   Motion to approve or amend agenda;
         F.   Appointments and confirmations;
         G.   Reports of Committees/ Commissions;
         H.   Report of the Municipal Manager;
         I.   Communications, petitions and claims of the public: 2-minute time
limit each;
         J.   Report of the Finance Director;
         K.   Report of the Law Director;
         L.   Reports and communications from the Mayor;
         M.   Approval of bonds, contracts, plats, etc.;
         N.   Ordinances and resolutions;
         O.   Miscellaneous business and/or new business; and
         P.   Adjournment.
      (2)   The Presiding Officer of the Council may at any time permit a
member to present an ordinance, motion or resolution out of the regular order
for the same, unless the same be objected to by a majority of the members
present.
   (g)   Executive session. Council may hold an executive session for the sole
purpose of the consideration of any of the following matters:
      (1)   To consider the appointment, employment, dismissal, discipline,
promotion, demotion, evaluation, or compensation of a public employee or
official, or the investigation of charges or complaints against a public
employee, official, licensee, or regulated individual;
      (2)   To consider the purchase or lease of property for public purposes
or the sale or lease of Village property by competitive bidding or in any
manner provided by Village Charter or Ohio law. If the minutes show that all
meetings and deliberations were conducted in compliance with this section, any
instrument executed by the Village purporting to convey, lease, or otherwise
dispose of any right, title, or interest in any public property shall be
conclusively presumed to have been executed in compliance with this section
insofar as title or other interest of any bona fide purchasers, lessees, or
transferees of the property is concerned;
      (3)   Conferences with an attorney for the Village concerning disputes
involving the Village that are the subject of pending or imminent court action,
or that pertain to any other legal matter requiring the attention of Council;
      (4)   Matters required to be kept confidential by federal law or
regulations or state statutes;
      (5)   Details relative to the security arrangements and emergency
response protocols for the Village or other public office, if disclosure of the
matters discussed could reasonably be expected to jeopardize the security of
the Village or other public office;
      (6)   To consider confidential information related to economic
development issues where the executive session is necessary to protect the
interests of an applicant for economic assistance or the possible investment or
expenditure of public funds made in connection with the economic development
project.
      (7)   Where Council is sitting to decide an issue or matter in a quasi-
judicial proceeding, but only after all of the evidence to come before such
body has been heard.
   (h)   Standing committees.
      (1)   At no later than the first regular meeting of the Council after its
organization, the Vice-Mayor shall appoint three standing Council members to
each committee, naming one as the Chair and one as the Vice Chair. The Chair
shall preside over his or her respective committee meetings. In the event the
Chair is absent, the Vice-Chair may preside. Council shall have committees
regarding the following named subjects:
         A.   Safety;
         B.   Law;
         C.   Finance;
         D.   Recreation;
         E.   Public service;
         F.   Economic development;
      (2)   With the exception of the Finance Committee, standing committees
shall meet on an as-needed basis, as determined by the Chairperson of the
Committee. Finance Committee shall meet once per month unless there is a lack
of agenda items. Standing committees shall not take any action, but shall work
by consensus, with the Chair of the Committee reporting the discussions of the
Committee to Council. Two members of a committee need to be present to hold a
meeting.
      (3)   The Vice-Mayor or Council by a majority vote may at any time
reassign any member or members of any committee appointed by him/her and
appoint a new member or members of such committee to serve in place of such a
member or members so reassigned.
      (4)   In addition to the standing committees above, Council shall have a
Committee of the Whole consisting of all the members of Council. A majority of
the members of Council must be present for a Committee of the Whole meeting.
The Committee of the Whole shall have no designated Chair. The Committee of the
Whole shall meet on the second Tuesday of every month.
   (i)   Reports of the committee.
      (1)   The report of any committee of the Council, or municipal officer,
concerning matters referred to the Council, shall be made in writing and shall
be accompanied by the original papers upon which such report is based, unless
otherwise ordered by the Council.
      (2)   If any matter referred by the Council to any committee, or officer,
is not reported upon at the next scheduled Council meeting, such matter/s shall
be brought to the attention of the Council by the Clerk of Council.
   (j)   Reference to committees.
      (1)   Any report, resolution, ordinance or matter to come before Council
for consideration (except appropriation ordinances), including any request to
censure a Council member, before their final passage, shall be referred either
to the standing committee to which the subject matter is most closely related
or to a committee specially appointed by the Presiding Officer. Any such
committee shall consider the matter thus referred to it and report thereon to
the Council without unnecessary delay.
      (2)   Any matter referred to a committee may, by two-thirds vote of
Council (four out of six members) at any time prior to report of such
committee, be taken from the hands of such committee for consideration.
   (k)   Voting. Every member present shall vote on any question on the call of
the yeas and nays, and any member who refuses to vote on any questions when the
yeas and nays are being taken, shall be deemed guilty of contempt of the
Council. Violators of this rule will be subject to any ramifications under
state law and further subject to public reprimand or censure, as approved by a
majority of Council. This not apply for an abstention for reason of actual or
possible conflict of interest. Every member's vote should be respected and
should not be subjected to further critical or negative commentary.
   (l)   Introduction of legislation. Ordinances and resolutions shall be
prepared by the Law Director at direction of the Finance Director, Municipal
Manager, Mayor, or Members of Council. Copies of proposed ordinances and
resolutions shall be delivered to all members of Council, the Mayor and the
Municipal Manager, at least three days prior to their introduction in a Council
meeting. In the event of an emergency, the three-day delivery period may be
waived.
   (m)   Acceptable motions, order of precedence.
      (1)   When a question or proposition is before the Council, or under
debate, no motion shall be received except the following:
         A.   To lay on the table;
         B.   For the previous question;
         C.   To postpone to a certain day;
         D.   To commit;
         E.   To amend;
         F.   To postpone indefinitely; and
         G.   To adjourn.
      (2)   The several motions shall have precedence in the order in which
they are herein arranged.
   (n)   Motions; when debatable, withdrawal. When a motion is made and
seconded, it shall be stated by the presiding officer before any debate shall
be in order; any such motion, and any amendment thereto, may be withdrawn by
the movers thereof at any time before decisions.
   (o)   Suspension of rules. These rules or any other rules may be temporarily
suspended at any meeting of Council, by a concurrent vote of the majority of
all members elected, except when a greater number is required by law or by
these rules. The vote on such suspension shall be taken by the yeas and nays
and entered on the journal. In case any rule herein shall not have been adhered
to by Council, the same shall be regarded as having been suspended.
   (p)   Division of question. Any member, including the presiding officer, may
call for a division of the question, and in either case, the same shall be
divided if it contains questions so distinct that one being taken away, the
other will stand as an entire question for decision.
   (q)   To refer; precedence. When there is a question, or when referring a
given subject to a standing committee or select committee, the question of
reference to a standing committee shall be put first.
   (r)   Limitation on debate or discussion. No member of Council, while
Council is in session, shall engage in debate or discussion with anyone, except
the presiding officer, another member of Council, or someone who has either
been granted by Council the privilege to address Council or is present at a
Council meeting upon invitation of Council. All such debate or discussion shall
be governed by, “Robert's Rules of Order”.
   (s)   Communications, petitions and claims of the general public.
      (1)   Any person may appear before the Council of the Village of
Woodlawn, Ohio for the purpose of addressing Council, provided that such
persons signs in prior to the meeting in a register book provided for such
purpose.
      (2)   A person who has been permitted to address Council shall be granted
a maximum of two minutes to address Council. Any person addressing Council who
becomes disorderly, unruly, abusive or disruptive of Council shall be held in
contempt of Council and be removed from the Council Chambers. Such person shall
also be subject to having charges filed against him or her.
      (3)   In the event that the number of applicants to address Council is
deemed by the Mayor and/or Village Council to be too numerous to handle in a
regular Council meeting, a special meeting of Council shall be scheduled under
Rule 20 herein for the purpose of hearing the applicants.
   (t)   To adjourn. The motion to adjourn shall always be in order, unless the
Council is engaged in voting, and the motion to adjourn or to lay on the table,
or for the previous question, shall be decided without debate.
   (u)   Hearing before Council. Any person or persons desiring a hearing on
any matter pending before Council may make application, therefore Council may,
by majority vote (at least four out of six) grant a public hearing by arranging
for a specific time and place which may be during a regular Council meeting or
at a special Council meeting.
   (v)   Conduct of Mayor and Councilpersons. The powers and duties of the
Mayor and members of Council are enumerated by the Village Charter, State
Statute and Village Ordinances. The Mayor and all Councilpersons shall conduct
themselves at all times with courtesy, civility and decorum. The Mayor and
Council shall be respectful of the time given by citizens to attend public
hearings and council and committee meetings and endeavor to hear from them in a
prompt and timely manner. Citizens' views shall be heard respectfully without
reproach or admonition. The Mayor and members of Council shall hold themselves
and each other accountable for complying with these standards and remember that
Council does the peoples' business. Council members and the Mayor shall not use
cell phones or communication devices while Council is in session. Side bar
conversations shall be kept to a minimum.
   (w)   Conduct of the Mayor and Council persons regarding personnel. The
Finance Director is the supervisor of all employees in the Finance Department.
The Municipal Manager is the supervisor of all other Village employees with the
exception of those employees who report directly to Council under Village
Charter or ordinance. The Mayor (unless otherwise permitted by statute), any
member of the Council, and/or any member of a committee thereof shall be able
to communicate with but shall not give orders to any employee of the Village,
either publicly or privately, unless that employee is assigned said duties and
such orders are approved, in writing, by the Finance Director (in the case of
an order given to an employee of the Finance Department) or the Municipal
Manager (in the case of an order given to any other employee who does not
report directly to Council) or noted in a job description.
   (x)   Travel policy. Resolution 08-2011 establishing a Council Member Travel
Policy, as it may be amended from time to time, is hereby included as an
Appendix to The Rules of Council.
   (y)   Evaluations. Council members are responsible for conducting
evaluations of Village employees who report directly to Council (Municipal
Manager, Finance Director, and Clerk of Council). Evaluations shall be
performed annually, but may be performed more frequently in the case of an
employee in probationary status. All Council members are expected to cooperate
and provide feedback in a timely fashion to ensure that evaluations are
performed in a timely and meaningful manner.
   (z)   Resignation. Resignation of a Council member who is otherwise
qualified to continue in office shall not take effect until the same has been
accepted by a vote of the majority of the members exclusive of the person
tendering the resignation. If a Council member becomes unqualified to serve as
a Council member during his or her term of office, the seat shall be considered
vacated as of the date the council member became unqualified. Reference is
further made in Section
2.13 of the Woodlawn Charter, “Vacancies.”
   (aa)   Return of Village property. Any Council member who is issued Village
property for his or her use during his or her term of office shall return such
property within seven days of coming off Council. Such property shall be
returned to the Village Police Chief. Council members who fail to return such
Village property shall be billed for the replacement value of the property.
   (bb)   Amendment. Rules may be amended, altered or new rules adopted at any
Council meeting, by a vote of the majority of all Council members elected and
upon the report of a committee to which the subject has been referred from a
previous meeting.
(Ord. 01-2007, passed 1-17-2007; Ord. 01-2009, passed 2-5-2009; Ord. 02-2010,
passed 1-8-2010; Ord. 01-2013, passed 1-29-2013; Ord. 01-2014, passed 1-28-
2014; Ord. 01-2015, passed 3-31-2015; Ord. 01-2018, passed 2-27-2018; Ord. 03-
2019, passed 1-29-2019; Ord. 12-2021, passed 3-2-2021; Ord. 03-2024, passed 1-
30-2024)
§ 220.02 OFFICIAL NEWSLETTER.
   Council hereby authorizes the publication of an official newsletter for the
purpose of disseminating information pertaining to the official business of
Council and other official information of the Village.
   The newsletter shall be used exclusively for the purpose of disseminating
public information to the residents of the Village. Use of the publication for
the purpose of presenting information intended to influence elections or
information of a political nature is prohibited.
   The cost of the newsletter shall be paid out of the General Fund of the
Village. Rules and regulations governing the method and manner in which the
publication is presented may be promulgated by Council as needed.
(Ord. 37-1981, passed 12-8-1981)
APPENDIX: COUNCIL MEMBER TRAVEL POLICY
   PURPOSE: The purpose of this Policy is to document, control and establish a
procedure for the travel of Woodlawn members of council.
   SCOPE: The scope of this policy is for use and attachment to the Rules of
Council. This policy is to ensure that those who travel on Village business do
so safely, comfortably and efficiently to accomplish the business mission of
each trip.
   POLICY: Every year during the annual Village of Woodlawn budget process an
equal dollar amount limit shall be established and agreed upon for each council
member by a voting majority of council members. Council members will have use
of their individual amount during the budget year for the purpose of traveling
to and from Village of Woodlawn related business, training or activities which
benefit the Village of Woodlawn.
   ROLES: Council Member requests travel funds, Finance Director tracks
individual amounts available. Clerk of Council makes any necessary travel
arrangements, Vice Mayor attest and approves request and keeps track of
individual amounts used during the budget year. When/if necessary Council
Members may make their own arrangements still coordinating with the Finance
Director for tracking and payment.
   PROCEDURE: A completed travel request form must be turned in to Finance
Director for approval of the amount available. The Finance Director must sign
off on the completed form to be passed on to the Vice Mayor for approval. Once
the Vice Mayor approves the completed form a copy is presented to the Clerk of
Council to make any necessary travel arrangements. The original form previously
signed by the Finance Director, Vice Mayor with any arrangements verified by
the Clerk of Council is returned to the Finance Director for processing.
   Should any member of council have a travel event that would take them over
their allocated amount for that budget year, they have the option of being
responsible for the additional amount or approaching another council member who
may not be using their full allotment for the budget year to borrow/use the
additional amount. That council member(s) allowing the use must also sign off
on the completed travel request form for tracking purposes by the Vice Mayor
and the Finance Director in order to document the amount borrowed, the borrower
and tracking the council member giving up the amount being borrowed.
   Any council member may refuse the use of their allocated amount to another
council member.
   COUNCIL EXPENSE PAYMENT: Per Diem rates shall be based on the published
federal Government Services Administration's (GSA) rates for traveling to
various cities, and as it may be amended from time to time. Per Diem shall be
paid in full for every day of the employee's travel, regardless of whether the
day constitutes a partial travel day. Per Diem may be either reimbursed or paid
in advance of travel. If paid in advance, it shall be provided to the council
person no earlier than _____ business days prior to travel.
   Registration fees will, whenever possible, be paid in advance by the Village
upon presentation of an invoice, online notice or registration form.
   Lodging will be secured in advance and arrangements made for full payment
upon arrival.
   Other reimbursable items:
      Phone calls necessary for official Village business
      Parking and tolls
      Additional expense for handicapped or injured Council Members will be
covered.
   Expense Report: An expense report shall be completed by each council member
upon their return from travel to the Finance Director within 14 calendar days
from the last day of travel. The expense report should document days traveled
and any paid or unpaid expense adjustments. Expense adjustments should be
documented with receipts.
   COUNCIL PROFILE: As elected Officials of the Village of Woodlawn all council
members must represent the Village with the highest of standards and safety.
   Business reason is determined and approved by Vice-Mayor signing travel
request and must be related to member's related to official's duties and
beneficial to the Village.
   Council Members using their own vehicles for travel must have a valid
driver's license and show proof of insurance. Traffic violations will not be
reimbursed nor are the responsibility of the Village.
   Council Member should follow Village employee policy for accident reporting.
   Council Members will be on an honor system for Per Diem reimbursements.
   No Council Member can accept travel expenses or reimbursements from any
person or entity that is doing business with, regulated by or interested in
matters before the Village of Woodlawn for which the Council Member may have a
vote.
REVISION HISTORY
   VERSION      DATE      DESCRIPTION OF CHANGES
               9/27/2011   Initial
               5/19/2014   Update
               01/20/2015   Update
               03/23/2015   Update
CHAPTER 221: MAYOR-PRESIDENT OF COUNCIL
221.01   Mutual-aid contracts.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Mayor as President of Council - see CHTR. §
2.04
   Role of Mayor and veto power - see CHTR. §
2.04
   Mayor generally - see CHTR.
Art. III
   Mayor’s account - see ADM.
237.03
   Mayor’s Court - see ADM. Ch.
290
§ 221.01 MUTUAL-AID CONTRACTS.
   The Mayor is hereby authorized to execute mutual-aid contracts between the
Village and the various municipalities, townships and fire departments that
execute similar contracts providing for the rendering of aid to each other. The
form of such mutual-aid contracts is attached to original Ordinance 38-1983,
passed September 27, 1983, and is hereby made a part of this section by
reference as if fully rewritten herein.
(Ord. 38-1983, passed 9-27-1983)
CHAPTER 222: ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS
222.01   Publication of Ordinances and Resolutions.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Ordinances and resolutions generally - see CHTR. §
2.06
   Adoption of technical codes - see CHTR. §
2.06; Ohio R.C. 731.231
   Amending legislation - see CHTR. §
2.09
   Legislative powers of Mayor - see CHTR. §
3.02
   Initiative, referendum and recall - see CHTR. §
7.01
   Codified Ordinances - see ADM.
Ch. 202
§ 222.01 PUBLICATION OF ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS.
   (a)   Section 2.09 of the Village Charter authorizes the Village to
establish requirements for publication of ordinances and resolutions.
   (b)   The publication of all ordinances and resolutions shall, unless
otherwise provided by law, be published in the following manner:
      (1)   By posting online on the Village website; and
      (2)   By posting copies of all such legislation in the following places
in the Village:
         A.   The Woodlawn Municipal Building;
         B.   The Woodlawn Recreation Center; and
         C.   The Woodlawn Police Station.
   (c)   The Clerk of Council shall make all ordinances and resolutions
available for viewing or copying at the office of the Clerk of Council.
(Ord. 21-2005, passed 7-26-2005; Ord. 26-2012, passed 10-30-2012)
TITLE SIX: ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 230: MAYOR
Editor’s note:
   Because of the adoption of the Village Charter, on November 3, 1992,
provisions relating to the Mayor have been recodified in
Chapter 221 of this Administration Code.
CHAPTER 231: MANAGER
Editor’s note:
   There are no sections in Chapter 231. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross references and any future legislation.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Manager generally - see CHTR. §
4.01
   Qualifications - see CHTR. §
4.02
   Acting Manager - see CHTR. §
4.03
   Removal from office - see CHTR. §
4.04
CHAPTER 232: VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR (REPEALED)
Editor’s note:  
   The Village Charter, adopted by the voters on November 3, 1992, established
the position of Municipal Manager, thereby abolishing, by implication, the
position of the Village Administrator.
CHAPTER 234: LAW DIRECTOR
Editor’s note:
   The Village Charter adopted by the voters on November 3, 1992, changed the
title of the Municipal Legal Officer from Solicitor to Law Director.
   There are no sections in Chapter 234. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross references and any future legislation.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Law Director generally - see CHTR. §
4.05; Ohio R.C. 733.48
   Approval of leases - see Ohio R.C. 715.011
   Preparation of bonds - see Ohio R.C. 733.70
   Attorneys - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4705
CHAPTER 236: CLERK-TREASURER (REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
   The Village Charter adopted by the voters on November 3, 1992, established
the positions of Clerk of Council and Director of Finance, thereby abolishing,
by implication, the position of Clerk-Treasurer. The provisions of this chapter
that were not repealed by implication by said Charter have been recodified in
new Chapter 237.
CHAPTER 237: DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE
237.01   General standards.
237.02   Interest on invested moneys.
237.03   Mayor’s account.
237.04   Federal General Revenue Sharing Trust Fund.
237.05   Petty cash funds.
237.06   Responsibility of landlords to furnish information re tenants.
237.07   Charges for returned checks.
237.08   Law Enforcement Fund.
237.09   Review and approval of expenditures exceeding $500.
237.10   Tax/Payroll Clerk.
237.11   Tax Commissioner.
237.12   Village Funds Usage Policy.
237.13   Convenience fee for credit card payments made to the Village.
237.14   Liability for loss of public funds.
237.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Taxation and borrowing - see CHTR.
Art. VI
§ 237.01 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   The following standards shall be observed on a regular basis by the office
of the Director of Finance:
   (a)   Village financial accounts shall be balanced on a monthly basis by the
tenth day of the following month.
   (b)   Purchase orders are to be signed by the Director not more than two
working days upon receipt unless there is a specific question about the
legality. This question should then be posed, in writing, in this same period.
   (c)   Check release forms are to be signed by the Director not more than two
working days upon receipt unless there is a specific question about the bill.
This question should then be posed, in writing, in this same period.
   (d)   Checks are to be written on the tenth and twenty-fourth days of each
month.
   (e)   Transfers are to be done on the working day immediately following
Council passage.
   (f)   Reports that need the Director’s signature or information from the
office shall be done on a timely basis.
   (g)   The Director shall give to Council a full and complete monthly
statement as to where Village funds are invested.
§ 237.02 INTEREST ON INVESTED MONEYS.
   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized and directed to return all
interest on invested moneys to the account from which the interest was derived.
§ 237.03 MAYOR’S ACCOUNT.
   (a)   The funds of the Mayor’s account shall be deposited in its name with
the First National Bank of Cincinnati, Woodlawn Branch, and are subject to
withdrawal by checks, drafts, bills of exchange, acceptances, promissory notes
or other orders for the payment of money, made, signed, drawn, accepted or
endorsed in the corporate name and signed by the Mayor, including those drawn
to the individual order of any officer or other person signing the same without
further inquiry or regard to the authority of the person or the use of any such
check, draft, bill of exchange, acceptance or promissory note or the proceeds
thereof.
(Res. 5-1977, passed 4-12-1977)
   (b)   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized to transfer the sum of
three hundred dollars ($300.00) from the General Fund into the Mayor’s account
to be used for Mayor’s Court purposes, which sum shall be used as a cash
reserve in the Mayor’s account for the purpose of covering insufficient fund
checks written to the Village by persons charged with traffic or misdemeanor
offenses who pay their fines and costs out of court.
§ 237.04 FEDERAL GENERAL REVENUE SHARING TRUST FUND.
   (a)   Pursuant to Ohio R.C. 5705.12, there is hereby established a special
fund to be known as the Federal General Revenue Sharing Trust Fund.
   (b)   All moneys paid to the Village under the State and Local Fiscal
Assistance Act of 1972, being 31 U.S.C. §§ 1221 et seq., to such Fund and
expended in accordance with the provisions of such Act.
(Ord. 24-1972, passed 11-14-1972)
§ 237.05 PETTY CASH FUNDS.
   (a)   There is hereby established a petty cash fund for the administrative
offices of the Village, in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00).
   (b)   There is hereby established a petty cash fund for the Police
Department, in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00).
(Ord. 27-1982, passed 8-10-1982)
   (c)   There is hereby established a petty cash fund for the Mayor’s Court,
in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
(Ord. 21-1984, passed 8-14-1984)
   (d)   The petty cash funds established in this section shall be operated in
a manner similar to petty cash funds previously established and maintained by
the Village and in accordance with generally accepted accounting procedures.
§ 237.06 RESPONSIBILITY OF LANDLORDS TO FURNISH INFORMATION RE TENANTS.
   (a)   Beginning April 24, 1981, and thereafter, within 30 days after a new
tenant occupies an apartment, room, place of business or other rental property
within the Village, the owner of such rental property shall file with the Tax
Collector of the Village a report showing the name, address and telephone
number, if available, of such tenant.
   (b)   Beginning April 24, 1981, and thereafter, within 30 days after a
tenant vacates an apartment, room, place of business or other rental property
within the Village, the owner of such vacated rental property shall file with
the Tax Collector a report showing the date of such vacation and identifying
such vacating tenant.
(Ord. 7-1981, passed 3-24-1981)
§ 237.07 CHARGES FOR RETURNED CHECKS.
   There shall be a fee equal to the charge incurred by the Village for a
returned check plus ten dollars ($10.00) for any check returned to the Village
by any bank, for any reason whatsoever. The charge shall be owed to the Village
by the drawer of a returned check and upon receipt shall be deposited into the
General Fund of the Village.
(Ord. 46-1986, passed 10-28-1986; Am. Ord. 16-2007, passed 6-26-2007)
§ 237.08 LAW ENFORCEMENT FUND.
   (a)   There is hereby created and established a fund to be known as the Law
Enforcement Fund, for the deposit and disbursement of the proceeds from the
public auction of contraband, in accordance with the provisions of Ohio R.C.
2933.43, as amended, effective September 3, 1986.
(Ord. 21-1988, passed 4-26-1988)
   (b)   Moneys deposited into the Law Enforcement Fund shall be disbursed by
the Director of Finance upon presentation of the proper vouchers.
§ 237.09 REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF EXPENDITURES EXCEEDING $500.
   Any Village expenditure in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be
reviewed by the Director of Finance and subject to final approval by the
Finance Committee.
§ 237.10 TAX/PAYROLL CLERK.
   (a)   There is hereby established the position of Tax/Payroll Clerk.
   (b)   The requirements, duties and responsibilities of the Tax/Payroll Clerk
shall be as specified in the position description. The position of Tax/Payroll
Clerk shall be classified as a labor grade two.
(Ord. 16-1989, passed 3-28-1989)
§ 237.11 TAX COMMISSIONER.
   (a)   The position of Tax Commissioner is hereby established in and for the
Village.
   (b)   The requirements, duties and responsibilities of the Tax Commissioner
shall be as specified in the position description.
   (c)   The Tax Commissioner shall be appointed by the Finance Director,
subject to the approval by the Mayor. He or she need not be, or become, a
resident of the Village. His or her dismissal shall be at the discretion of the
Finance Director.
   (d)   As the fiscal officer of the Village under its Charter, the Finance
Director shall have full authority to audit any and all records of the Tax
Commissioner as he or she deems necessary.
(Ord. 09-2011, passed 1-25-2011; Ord. 08-2017, passed 4-25-2017)
§ 237.12 VILLAGE FUNDS USAGE POLICY.
   The use of public funds to publish, distribute or communicate information
that supports or opposes the nomination or election of a candidate for public
office, the investigation, prosecution or recall of a public official, or the
passage of a levy or bond issue shall be prohibited.
(Ord. 27-2009, passed 10-27-2009)
§ 237.13 CONVENIENCE FEE FOR CREDIT CARD PAYMENTS MADE TO VILLAGE.
   Village Council authorizes the imposition of a 3% convenience fee and any
associated processing fee that may be imposed by the payment processing vendor
for payments made by credit card. The Finance Director is authorized and
directed to implement a policy to ensure that such fees are properly collected
and applied.
(Ord. 20-2020, passed 9-29-2020)
§ 237.14 LIABILITY FOR LOSS OF PUBLIC FUNDS.
   The Treasurer, or other officer of the municipality having the duties of a
treasurer or of a city auditor, shall not be held liable for a loss of public
funds when the officer has performed all official duties required of the
officer with reasonable care, but shall be liable only when a loss of public
funds results from the officer's negligence or other wrongful act.
(R.C. § 733.82)
§ 237.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of §
237.06 is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or
continues.
CHAPTER 238: ENGINEER
Editor’s note:
   There are no sections in Chapter 238. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross references and any future legislation.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Engineer generally - see CHTR. §
4.18
   To approve plats - see Ohio R.C. 711.08
   Inspection of streets as acceptance - see Ohio R.C. 711.091
   General duties - see Ohio R.C. 735.22
   Power to regulate sewerage system and issue permits - see Ohio R.C. 3781.03
   Registration as a professional engineer - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4733
CHAPTER 240: PUBLIC WORKS INSPECTOR (REPEALED)
Editor’s note: Chapter 240 was repealed by the Village as part of the 2015
updating and revision of these Codified Ordinances. Please see
Chapter 238.
CHAPTER 242: POLICE DEPARTMENT (REPEALED)
Editor’s note: Chapter 242 was repealed by the Village as part of the 2015
updating and revision of these Codified Ordinances. Please see Charter §
4.13.
CHAPTER 244: FIRE DEPARTMENT (REPEALED)
Editor’s note: Chapter 244 was repealed by the Village as part of the 2015
updating and revision of these Codified Ordinances. Please see Charter §
4.14.
CHAPTER 246: SERVICE DEPARTMENT (REPEALED)
Editor’s note: Chapter 246 was repealed by the Village as part of the 2015
updating and revision of these Codified Ordinances. Please see Charter §
4.15.
CHAPTER 248: RECREATION DEPARTMENT (REPEALED)
Editor’s note: Chapter 248 was repealed by the Village as part of the 2015
updating and revision of these Codified Ordinances. Please see Charter §
4.16.
CHAPTER 250: BUILDING DEPARTMENT
Editor’s note:
   Provisions relating to the Building Department are codified in
Chapter 1440 of Part Fourteen - the Building and Housing Code.
CHAPTER 252: COMMUNITY IMPROVEMENT CORPORATION
252.01   Designation.
252.02   Approval of agreement.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Industrial and economic development - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 761
   Community improvement corporations - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 1724
   Community redevelopment corporations - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 1728
   Community Development Citizens Advisory Committee - see ADM.
Ch. 278
   Economic Development Committee - see ADM.
Ch. 280
§ 252.01 DESIGNATION.
   The Woodlawn Community Improvement Corporation is hereby designated as the
agency of the Village for the industrial, commercial, distribution and research
development of the Village.
(Ord. 26-1981, passed 8-17-1981)
§ 252.02 APPROVAL OF AGREEMENT.
   The form of agreement prepared by the Community Improvement Corporation and
submitted to Council, which agreement, upon due execution by parties thereto,
will constitute the plan of industrial, commercial, distribution and research
development for the Village, is hereby approved and confirmed. The Mayor and
the Finance Director are hereby authorized and directed to execute such
agreement on behalf of the Village.
CHAPTER 258: EMPLOYEES GENERALLY (REPEALED)
Editor’s note: Chapter 258 was repealed by the Village as part of the 2015
updating and revision of these Codified Ordinances. Please see Woodlawn
Personnel Policies and Procedures Manual.
TITLE EIGHT: BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
CHAPTER 270: PLANNING COMMISSION
Editor’s note:
   Provisions relating to the Planning Commission are codified in
Chapter 1220 of Part Twelve - the Planning and Zoning Code.
CHAPTER 272: BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
Editor’s note:
   Provisions relating to the Board of Zoning Appeals are codified in
Chapter 1256 of Part Twelve - the Planning and Zoning Code.
CHAPTER 274: BOARD OF BUILDING APPEALS
Editor’s note:
   Provisions relating to the Board of Building Appeals are codified in
Chapter 1442 of Part Fourteen - the Building and Housing Code.
CHAPTER 276: RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD (REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
   The Recreation Advisory Board was abolished by implication by the Village
Charter adopted by the voters on November 3, 1992, which established a
Recreation Commission. See
Chapter 277.
CHAPTER 277: RECREATION COMMISSION
277.01   Rules and regulations; funding.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Recreation Commission generally - see CHTR. §
5.04
   Boards and commissions generally - see CHTR. §
5.06
   Vacancy in boards or commissions - see CHTR. §
5.07
   Land appropriation for parks - see Ohio R.C. 715.21, 719.01
   Playgrounds, recreation centers, swimming pools - see Ohio R.C. 755.12 et
seq.
   Recreation Board - see Ohio R.C. 755.14 et seq.
   Board of Park Trustees - see Ohio R.C. 755.19 et seq.
   Power to regulate vehicle speed in parks - see Ohio R.C. 4511.07(E)
   Council member of Board - see ADM.
220.01(b) (Rule 5)
   Parks and recreation areas - see S.U. & P.S.
Ch. 1062
   Community Swimming Pool - see S.U. & P.S.
Ch. 1064
§ 277.01 RULES AND REGULATIONS; FUNDING.
   (a)   The Recreation Commission may adopt rules and regulations for the
conduct of all business within its jurisdiction that is not in direct conflict
with by- laws, job descriptions, rules and procedures set by Council.
   (b)   Expenses incurred in the operation of activities necessary to meet the
recreation needs of the residents of the Village shall be payable from the
Treasury of the Village or any other designated recreation levy that is
restricted to recreation purposes only.
   (c)   Council may annually appropriate and cause to be raised by taxation an
amount for the purpose of equipping, operating, supervising and maintaining all
existing public playgrounds, athletic fields, swimming pools, tennis courts,
baseball diamonds, indoor recreation centers and other recreation facilities on
or in any public grounds or building owned by the Village or on any public
grounds hereafter acquired which Council may from this time authorize,
designate, restrict or set apart for such use.
CHAPTER 278: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CITIZENS ADVISORY COMMITTEE
278.01   Establishment.
278.02   Duties.
278.03   Composition; terms of office; appointments.
278.04   Rules; quorum; meetings.
278.05   Officers.
278.06   Village representative on County Committee.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Boards and commissions generally - see CHTR. §
5.06
   Vacancy in boards or commissions - see CHTR. §
5.07
   Industrial and economic development - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 761
   Community improvement corporations - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 1724; ADM. Ch. 252
   Community redevelopment corporations - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 1728
   Committees of Council - see ADM.
220.01(b) (Rules 5, 8, 11, 15)
   Economic Development Committee - see ADM.
Ch. 280
§ 278.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is hereby established in and for the Village a Community Development
Citizens Advisory Committee.
(Ord. 44-1980, passed 9-23-1980)
§ 278.02 DUTIES.
   The general duties of the Community Development Citizens Advisory Committee
are to:
   (a)   Host local public meetings during which the concerns and ideas of the
residents of the community can be expressed;
   (b)   Distribute community development program information and solicit and
summarize community opinion about program activities, needs, objectives and
priorities;
   (c)   Advise Council of its findings by submitting project and program
recommendations to Council; and
   (d)   Evaluate the citizen participation process and report the results and
any recommendations for improving the process to Council and to the County
Community Development Department.
(Ord. 44-1980, passed 9-23-1980)
§ 278.03 COMPOSITION; TERMS OF OFFICE; APPOINTMENTS.
   (a)   The membership of the Community Development Citizens Advisory
Committee shall consist of 12 residents of the Village and shall be selected so
as to best reflect the composition of the total community. Members shall serve
a four-year term, and the terms shall be staggered so that three members are to
be appointed each year to a four-year term on the Committee.
   (b)   Upon the adoption of this chapter (Ordinance 44-1980, passed September
23, 1980), the present members shall draw numbers of one to four to determine
their time remaining on the Committee. All members hereafter shall be appointed
by the Mayor and confined by Council at the second regular Council meeting in
June. Such appointments shall take effect immediately.
(Ord. 44-1980, passed 9-23-1980)
§ 278.04 RULES; QUORUM; MEETINGS.
   In addition to Robert’s Rules of Order, the following rules shall be
followed by the Community Development Citizens Advisory Committee:
   (a)   The quorum for the Committee is six members present.
(Ord. 44-1980, passed 9-23-1980)
   (b)   Each member must attend at least six meetings during a year. If a
member does not attend the number of meetings without an explanation acceptable
to the Committee, such member’s seat on the Committee shall be declared vacant
and a replacement shall be named as outlined in §
278.03(b).
(Ord. 45-1980, passed 11-11-1980)
   (c)   Special meetings will be called with two days notice to members of the
Committee and to all media.
   (d)   The time of meetings is 7:30 p.m. to 9:30 p.m., with permission to
extend meetings.
   (e)   The date of meetings is the fourth Wednesday of every month, except
July and August.
However, during July and August the Committee has the option of calling a
needed meeting.
(Ord. 44-1980, passed 9-23-1980)
§ 278.05 OFFICERS.
   The officers of the Community Development Citizens Advisory Committee shall
be a Chairperson and a Recording Secretary. The officers shall be selected by a
majority vote of the members, at the September meeting, for a term of one year.
(Ord. 44-1980, passed 9-23-1980)
§ 278.06 VILLAGE REPRESENTATIVE ON COUNTY COMMITTEE.
   (a)   The Village Administrator shall be appointed to represent the Village
on the County Community Development Advisory Committee.
   (b)   The Vice-Mayor shall be appointed as the alternate representative and
shall serve as representative to the County Committee in the absence of the
Village Administrator.
   (c)   The major responsibilities of the County Community Development
Advisory Committee representative are to:
      (1)   Represent the Village at meetings of the Committee;
      (2)   Serve as an adviser to the local Community Citizens Advisory
Committee;
      (3)   Serve as a liaison to the local Committee, Council and the County
Community Development Department in all community development program-related
activities; and
      (4)   Implement the citizen participation requirements of the community
development plan and ultimately certify on behalf of Council that these
requirements have been met, prior to submitting project requests for funding to
the County.
(Ord. 35-1977, passed 9-27-1977)
CHAPTER 280: ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE
280.01   Establishment.
280.02   Duties.
280.03   Composition; terms of office; appointments.
280.04   Officers; quorum; meetings; removal from office; rules and
regulations.
280.05   Requests for assistance.
280.06   Termination.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Boards and commissions generally - see CHTR. §
5.06
   Vacancy in boards or commissions - see CHTR. §
5.07
   Industrial and economic development - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 761
   Community improvement corporations - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 1724; ADM. Ch. 252
   Community redevelopment corporations - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 1728
   Committees of Council - see ADM.
220.01(b) (Rules 5, 8, 11, 15)
   Community Development Citizens Advisory Committee - see ADM.
Ch. 278
§ 280.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is hereby established in and for the Village an Economic Development
Committee.
(Ord. 35-1980, passed 6-10-1980)
§ 280.02 DUTIES.
   The general duties of the Economic Development Committee are to:
   (a)   Develop lines of communication between businesses and the Village;
   (b)   Promote new businesses in the Village and promote improvements and
expansion of existing businesses in the Village;
   (c)   Assist in solving business problems in the Village;
   (d)   Promote development of residential areas with suitable housing;
   (e)   Promote a positive image of businesses in the Village; and
   (f)   Promote the Village as a good place to live, work and recreate.
(Ord. 35-1980, passed 6-10-1980)
§ 280.03 COMPOSITION; TERMS OF OFFICE; APPOINTMENTS.
   (a)   The Economic Development Committee shall be composed of nine members
selected as follows:
      (1)   Four members on the Committee shall be selected from the business
community in the Village.
      (2)   Two members of the Committee shall be residents of the Village.
      (3)   Two members of the Committee shall be members of Council.
      (4)   The Village Manager shall be a member of the Committee.
   (b)   For the first year of the existence of the Committee, two members
shall be selected from the business community of the Village and one
Councilperson shall be selected, all of whom shall be appointed for one year.
Further, two members of the business community and one other Councilperson
shall be appointed to the Committee for a term of two years. Thereafter, all
appointments shall be made for two-year terms, and three people shall be
appointed each year.
   (c)   Members of the business community and the residents of the Village
shall be appointed to the Committee by the Mayor with the concurrence of
Council. The members of the Committee who are Councilpersons shall be appointed
by Council.
(Ord. 48-1992, passed 11-24-1992)
§ 280.04 OFFICERS; QUORUM; MEETINGS; REMOVAL FROM OFFICE; RULES AND
REGULATIONS.
   (a)   After the members of the Economic Development Committee have been
appointed, they shall forthwith proceed to select a Chairperson and Vice-
Chairperson by a majority vote of the Committee members. Four members of the
Committee shall constitute a quorum.
(Ord. 35-1980, passed 6-10-1980)
   (b)   Meetings shall be held on the fourth Monday of each month at 7:00 p.m.
(Ord. 48-1990, passed 11-13-1990)
   (c)   A member of the Committee may be removed therefrom by a majority vote
of the Committee for three consecutive unexcused absences from regular
Committee meetings. Any Committee member may be removed from the Committee for
good cause by a majority vote of Council. The Committee may promulgate its own
rules and regulations, subject to the approval of Council.
(Ord. 35-1980, passed 6-10-1980)
§ 280.05 REQUESTS FOR ASSISTANCE.
   The Economic Development Committee is hereby authorized to request
assistance from other members of the business and residential community to
assist it in fulfilling its purposes.
(Ord. 35-1980, passed 6-10-1980)
§ 280.06 TERMINATION.
   The Economic Development Committee, having been established at the pleasure
of Council, is hereby subject to being terminated and disbanded at any time,
for any reason, at the pleasure of Council.
(Ord. 35-1980, passed 6-10-1980)
CHAPTER 282: PERSONNEL SELECTION COMMITTEE
Editor’s note:
   There are no sections in Chapter 282. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross references and any future legislation.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Worker’s compensation - see Ohio Const., Art. III, Sec. 35; Ohio R.C. Ch.
4123
   Public Employee’s Retirement System - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 145
   Expenses for attendance at conference or convention - see Ohio R.C. 733.79
   Strikes by public employees - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4117
   Leave for military training - see Ohio R.C. 5923.05
CHAPTER 284: BOARD OF REVIEW (INCOME TAX)
Editor’s note:
   There are no sections in Chapter 284. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross references and any future legislation.
CHAPTER 285: BOARD OF HEALTH
Editor’s note:
   There are no sections in Chapter 285. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross references and any future legislation.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Boards and commissions generally - see CHTR. §
5.06
   Vacancy in boards or commissions - see CHTR. §
5.07
   Safety, sanitation and health - see GEN. OFF. Ch.
660
CHAPTER 286: VOLUNTEER FIRE FIGHTERS DEPENDENTS FUND BOARD
Section
286.01   Board established; purpose.
286.02   Board members; vacancies.
286.03   Board officers; organization.
286.04   Meetings; notice.
286.05   Filing of claims.
286.06   Certifying claims for payment.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Volunteer Fire Fighters’ Dependents Fund Board generally - see Ohio R.C.
146.02 et seq.
   Boards and commissions generally - see CHTR. §
5.06
   Vacancy in boards or commissions - see CHTR. §
5.07
§ 286.01 BOARD ESTABLISHED; PURPOSE.
   Pursuant to the provisions of R.C. § 146.02(A) the Village does hereby
establish the Woodlawn Volunteer Firefighters' Dependents Fund Board for the
administration of the Village's participation in the Ohio Volunteer
Firefighters' Dependents Fund.
(Ord. 35-2021, passed 11-30-2021)
§ 286.02 BOARD MEMBERS; VACANCIES.
   (a)   The Volunteer Firefighters' Dependents Fund Board shall consist of
five members elected annually for terms beginning January 1 in accordance with
the following:
      (1)   Two members elected by Village Council. The election of such
members shall be held each year no earlier than the first day of November and
no later than the second Monday in December.
      (2)   Two members elected by the employees of the Woodlawn Fire
Department who shall be employees of the same. The election of such members
shall be held each year on or before the second Monday in December.
         A.   The Secretary of the Volunteer Firefighters' Dependents Fund
Board shall give notice of such election by posting it in a conspicuous place
at the Woodlawn Fire Department.
         B.   Voting shall take place from 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. on the day of
the election during which time each member of the Fire Department shall send in
writing the names of two persons, who are members of the Department, who are
the member’s choices.
         C.   All votes cast shall be counted and recorded by the Board which
shall announce the result. The two persons receiving the highest number of
votes are elected. If any two persons receive the same number of votes, the tie
shall be broken by lot or in a manner agreed to by both persons for whom such
the vote was cast.
      (3)   One member elected by the other four members of the Board who were
elected pursuant to divisions (a)(1) and (a)(2) above, who shall be an elector
of the Village, but who shall not be a public employee and who shall hold no
other elected or appointed municipal office. The election of such member shall
take place each year on or before December 31st.
   (b)   Any vacancy occurring on the Volunteer Firefighters' Dependents Fund
Board shall be filled at a special election called by the Secretary of the
Board.
(Ord. 35-2021, passed 11-30-2021)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state provisions, see R.C. §§ 146.03 and 146.04
§ 286.03 BOARD OFFICERS; ORGANIZATION.
   (a)   The Board shall meet promptly after its election and elect from among
its members a Chairperson and a Secretary.
   (b)   The Secretary shall keep a complete record of proceedings of the Board
which record shall be maintained as a permanent file.
   (c)   The Board may adopt rules as it deems necessary for the handling and
processing of claims and such other duties as are required by R.C. Chapter 146.
   (d)   The Secretary of the Board shall immediately certify to the state fire
marshal the names and addresses of the members elected, by whom elected, and
the names of the Board Chairperson and Secretary. The Secretary shall also
forward a certificate prepared by the Finance Director of the current assessed
valuation of the Village.
(Ord. 35-2021, passed 11-30-2021)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state provisions, see R.C. § 146.05
§ 286.04 MEETINGS; NOTICE.
   (a)   The Board shall meet at a Village-owned facility as necessary to
conduct its business in accordance with this chapter and R.C. Chapter 146.
   (b)   The Secretary of the Board shall post notice of all such meetings in
accordance with R.C. § 121.22.
(Ord. 35-2021, passed 11-30-2021)
§ 286.05 FILING OF CLAIMS.
   (a)   Initial claims made under R.C. § 146.14 for benefits payable under
R.C. § 146.12 for volunteer members of the Woodlawn Fire Department shall be
filed with the Volunteer Firefighters' Dependents Fund Board in accordance with
R.C. § 146.14.
   (b)   After such initial filing, claims may be transferred at the request of
the claimant or the Board to another Volunteer Firefighters' Dependents Fund
Board near the current residence of the claimant provided that the transfer is
mutually agreed to by the Boards involved.
(Ord. 35-2021, passed 11-30-2021)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state provisions, see R.C. § 146.15
§ 286.06 CERTIFYING CLAIMS FOR PAYMENT.
   (a)   The Board shall meet within five days after receipt of a claim to
consider the claim and, if satisfied with the validity of the claim, shall make
a determination of the amount due and to become due and shall certify its
determination to the State Fire Marshal for payment.
      (1)   The certificate shall show the name and address of the Board, the
name and address of each beneficiary of the claim, the amount to be received by
or on behalf of each beneficiary, and the name and address of the person to
whom the payments shall be made.
      (2)   The Board may make a continuing order for monthly payments to
become due to a claimant for a period not exceeding three months from the date
of the determination.
      (3)   The determination may be modified after issuance to reflect any
changes in eligibility of the claimant.
      (4)   If no changes occur at the end of the three-month period, it is
sufficient authority for the State Fire Marshal to provide for payment if the
Board certifies to the State Fire Marshal that the original certificate is
continued for an additional three-month period.
   (b)   If the Board, after consideration of a claim, finds that the claimant
has no right to benefits or that the claim is without merit, it shall deny the
claim and issue notice of such action by delivering to the claimant a copy of
the order, or by leaving a copy at the claimant's place of residence, or by
mailing to the claimant a copy thereof by registered mail.
(Ord. 35-2021, passed 11-30-2021)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state provisions, see R.C. §§ 146.16, 146.17
 
CHAPTER 287: CHARTER REVIEW COMMISSION
Editor’s note:
   There are no sections in Chapter 287. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross references and any future legislation.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Charter Review Commission generally - see CHTR. §
5.05
   Boards and commissions generally - see CHTR. §
5.06
   Vacancy in boards or commissions - see CHTR. §
5.07
CHAPTER 288: CIVIL SERVICE BOARD
Editor’s note:
   There are no sections in Chapter 288. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross references and any future legislation.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Boards and commissions generally - see CHTR. §
5.06
   Vacancy in boards or commissions - see CHTR. §
5.07
TITLE TEN: JUDICIAL
CHAPTER 290: MAYOR’S COURT
290.01   Contract with County Public Defender for representation of indigents.
290.02   Clerk of Court. (Repealed)
290.03   Electronically monitored house arrest.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Mayor’s court jurisdiction - see Ohio R.C. 1905.01 et seq.
   Mayor’s powers and duties - see Ohio R.C. 1905.20 et seq.
   Contempt of court - see Ohio R.C. 1905.28, 1907.171 et seq., 2935.11
   Peace and search warrants - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 2933
   Detection and arrest - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 2935
   Preliminary examination; bail - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 2937
   Trial - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 2938
   Notification to Director of liquor law convictions - see Ohio R.C. 4301.991
   Record of traffic violations - see Ohio R.C. 4513.37
   Mayor/President of Council - see ADM.
Ch. 221
§ 290.01 CONTRACT WITH COUNTY PUBLIC DEFENDER FOR REPRESENTATION OF INDIGENTS.
   The Mayor is hereby authorized and directed to enter into a contract with
the County Public Defender for the purpose of representing indigent defendants
in the Village, a copy of which contract is attached to original Ord. 4-1986,
passed February 11, 1986, and is hereby made a part of this section by
reference as if fully rewritten herein.
(Ord. 4-1986, passed 2-11-1986)
§ 290.02 CLERK OF COURT. (REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
   Section 290.02 was repealed by implication by the Village Charter adopted by
the voters on November 3, 1992, which provided for the position of Clerk of
Courts (§ 5.04).
§ 290.03 ELECTRONICALLY MONITORED HOUSE ARREST.
   (a)   Any part or all of the term of imprisonment authorized under the
ordinances of the Village may be served by means of electronically monitored
house arrest, in the sole discretion of the Mayor. In such case, the Mayor
shall determine the number of days of electronically monitored house arrest and
whether any of the days of actual imprisonment shall be suspended on the
condition of successful completion of the incarceration by electronically
monitored house arrest. The sum of the days of actual imprisonment plus the
days of electronically monitored house arrest shall not exceed the stated
maximum number of days of imprisonment for the particular offense.
   (b)   No individual may serve a term of imprisonment by electronically
monitored house arrest unless he or she first executes an appropriate agreement
made available to all defendants, whereby the defendant agrees to pay the cost
of the system (or, in the sole discretion of the Mayor, such portion of the
cost as he or she can afford to pay) and agrees to abide by all of the rules
and regulations of the electronically monitored house arrest procedure. The
agreement shall provide that no credit for suspended days of actual
incarceration shall be granted unless the defendant successfully completes all
of the days of the electronically monitored house arrest.
   (c)   No person, knowing that he or she is under the restrictions of
electronically monitored house arrest, shall purposely break or attempt to
break such detention.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of escape, a misdemeanor of
the first degree, and shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
698.02.
(Ord. 39-1990, passed 10-25-1990)
PART FOUR: TRAFFIC CODE
TITLE TWO - Administration, Enforcement and Penalties
         
Chap. 402.   Definitions.
         
Chap. 404.   Enforcement; Impounding.
         
Chap. 406.   Traffic Control.
         
Chap. 408.   Penalties.
TITLE FOUR - Public Ways and Traffic Control Devices
         
Chap. 412.   Obstruction and Special Uses of Public Ways.
         
Chap. 414.   Traffic Control Devices.
         
Chap. 416.   Pedestrians.
TITLE SIX - Operation and Vehicles
         
Chap. 432.   Operation Generally.
         
Chap. 434.   O.V.I.; Reckless Operation; Speed.
         
Chap. 436.   Licensing; Accidents.
         
Chap. 438.   Safety and Equipment.
         
Chap. 440.   Commercial and Heavy Vehicles.
         
Chap. 442.   Drivers of Commercial Vehicles.
         
Chap. 444.   Offenses Relating to Theft and Fraud.
TITLE EIGHT - Parking
         
Chap. 452.   Parking Generally.
TITLE TEN - Bicycles, Motorized Bicycles, Motorcycles and Snowmobiles
         
Chap. 474.   Bicycles and Motorcycles Generally.
         
Chap. 476.   Snowmobiles, Off-Highway Vehicles and All-Purpose Vehicles.
TITLE TWO: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
CHAPTER 402: DEFINITIONS
402.01   Meaning of words and phrases.
402.02   Agricultural tractor; multi-wheel agricultural tractor.
402.03   Alley.
402.04   Arterial street.
402.045   Beacon.
402.05   Bicycle.
402.06   Bus.
402.07   Business district.
402.075   Chauffeured limousine.
402.077   Child care center or Type A family child care home.
402.08   Commercial tractor.
402.09   Controlled-access highway.
402.10   Crosswalk.
402.11   Driver or operator.
402.115   Electric bicycle.
402.12   Emergency vehicle.
402.13   Explosives.
402.14   Expressway.
402.15   Flammable liquid.
402.16   Freeway.   
402.165   Funeral escort vehicle.
402.17   Gross weight.
402.173   Highway maintenance vehicle.
402.175   Highway traffic signal.
402.177   Hybrid beacon.
402.18   Intersection.
402.19   Laned highway.
402.195   Local authorities.
402.196   Low-speed micromobility device.
402.197   Median.
402.20   Motor vehicle.
402.21   Motorcycle.
402.22   Motorized bicycle or moped.
402.225   Motorized wheelchair.
402.226   Natural resources officer.
402.227   Operate.
402.23   Parking.
402.24   Pedestrian.
402.25   Person.
402.26   Pole trailer.
402.27   Police officer.
402.275   Predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense.
402.277   Private road open to public travel.
402.28   Private road or driveway.
402.29   Public safety vehicle.
402.30   Railroad.
402.31   Railroad sign or signal.
402.32   Railroad train.
402.33   Residence district.
402.335   Ridesharing arrangement.
402.34   Right-of-way.
402.345   Road service vehicle.
402.35   Roadway.
402.355   Rural mail delivery vehicle.
402.36   Safety zone.
402.37   School bus.
402.38   Semitrailer.
402.39   Sidewalk.
402.393   Shared use path.
402.395   State highway.
402.40   State route.
402.41   Stop.
402.42   Stop intersection.
402.43   Stopping and standing.
402.44   Street or highway.
402.45   Through street or highway.
402.46   Thruway.
402.47   Traffic.
402.48   Traffic control device.
402.49   Traffic control signal.
402.50   Trailer.
402.51   Truck.
402.52   Urban district.
402.53   Vehicle.
402.54   Waste collection vehicle.
402.55   Wildlife officer.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar State law
   Blind person defined - see TRAF.
416.02
   Funeral procession defined - see TRAF.
432.21
   Street racing defined - see TRAF.
434.07
   Commercial car defined - see TRAF.
442.01
   Snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle and all-purpose vehicle defined - see
TRAF.
476.01
§ 402.01 MEANING OF WORDS AND PHRASES.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided, the definitions set forth in Ohio R.C.
4501.01 shall apply to this Traffic Code and the penal laws of the
Municipality.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided, the following words and phrases, when
used in this Traffic Code, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to
them in this chapter.
§ 402.02 AGRICULTURAL TRACTOR; MULTI-WHEEL AGRICULTURAL TRACTOR.
   (a)   “Agricultural tractor” means every self- propelled vehicle designed or
used for drawing other vehicles or wheeled machinery, but having no provision
for carrying loads independently of such other vehicles, and used principally
for agricultural purposes.
(ORC 4511.01(J))
   (b)    “Multi-wheel agricultural tractor” means a type of agricultural
tractor that has two or more wheels or tires on each side of one axle at the
rear of the tractor, is designed or used for drawing other vehicles or wheeled
machinery, has no provision for carrying loads independently of the drawn
vehicles or machinery, and is used principally for agricultural purposes.
(ORC 4511.01(GGG))
§ 402.03 ALLEY.
   “Alley” means a street or highway intended to provide access to the rear or
side of lots or buildings in urban districts, and not intended for the purpose
of through vehicular traffic, and any street or highway that has been declared
an “alley” by the Council.
(ORC 4511.01(XX))
§ 402.04 ARTERIAL STREET.
   “Arterial street” means any United States or State numbered route,
controlled-access highway, or other major radial or circumferential street or
highway designated by local authorities within their respective jurisdictions
as part of a major arterial system of streets or highways.
(ORC 4511.01(CCC))
§ 402.045 BEACON.
   “Beacon” means a highway traffic signal with one or more signal sections
that operate in a flashing mode.
(ORC 4511.01(KKK))
§ 402.05 BICYCLE.
   “Bicycle” means every device, other than a device that is designed solely
for use as a play vehicle by a child, that is propelled solely by human power
upon which a person may ride, and that has two or more wheels, any of which is
more than 14 inches in diameter.
(ORC 4511.01(G))
§ 402.06 BUS.
   “Bus” means every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than nine
passengers, and used for the transportation of persons other than in a
ridesharing arrangement, and every motor vehicle, automobile for hire, or
funeral car, other than a taxicab or motor vehicle used in a ridesharing
arrangement, designed and used for the transportation of persons for
compensation.
(ORC 4511.01(L))
§ 402.07 BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   “Business district” means the territory fronting upon a street or highway,
including the street or highway, between successive intersections within the
Municipality, where 50 percent or more of the frontage between successive
intersections is occupied by buildings in use for business, or within or
outside the Municipality where 50 percent or more of the frontage for a
distance of 300 feet or more is occupied by buildings in use for business, and
the character of the territory is indicated by official traffic-control
devices.
(ORC 4511.01(NN))
§ 402.075 CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINE.
   “Chauffeured limousine” means a motor vehicle that is designed to carry nine
or fewer passengers and is operated pursuant to a prearranged contract for the
transportation of passengers on public roads and highways along a route under
the control of the person hiring the vehicle and not over a defined and regular
route. “Prearranged contract” means an agreement, made in advance of boarding,
to provide transportation from a specific location in a chauffeured limousine.
“Chauffeured limousine” does not include any vehicle that is used exclusively
in the business of funeral directing.
(ORC 4501.01(LL))
§ 402.077 CHILD CARE CENTER OR TYPE A FAMILY CHILD CARE HOME.
   “Child care center” and “Type A family child care home” have the same
meanings as set forth in Ohio R.C. 5104.01.
(ORC 4511.01(FFF))
§ 402.08 COMMERCIAL TRACTOR.
   “Commercial tractor” means every motor vehicle having motive power designed
or used for drawing other vehicles, and not so constructed as to carry any load
thereon, or designed or used for drawing other vehicles while carrying a
portion of the other vehicles, or the load thereon, or both.
(ORC 4511.01(I))
§ 402.09 CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY.
   “Controlled-access highway” means every street or highway in respect to
which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal
right or access to or from the same except at certain points only and in a
manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over
the street or highway.
(ORC 4511.01(CC))
§ 402.10 CROSSWALK.
   “Crosswalk” means:
   (a)   That part of a roadway at intersections ordinarily included within the
real or projected prolongation of property lines and curb lines or, in the
absence of curbs, the edges of the traversable roadway;
   (b)   Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere, distinctly
indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface;
   (c)   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this definition, there
shall not be a crosswalk where the Legislative Authority has placed signs
indicating no crossing.
(ORC 4511.01(LL))
§ 402.11 DRIVER OR OPERATOR.
   “Driver” or “operator” means every person who drives or is in actual
physical control of a vehicle.
(ORC 4511.01(Y))
§ 402.115 ELECTRIC BICYCLE.
   “Electric bicycle” means a “class 1 electric bicycle”, a “class 2 electric
bicycle”, or a “class 3 electric bicycle” as defined below.
   (a)   “Class 1 electric bicycle” means a bicycle that is equipped with fully
operable pedals and an electric motor of less than 750 watts that provides
assistance only when the rider is pedaling and ceases to provide assistance
when the bicycle reaches the speed of 20 miles per hour.
(R.C. § 4511.01(SSS))
   (b)   “Class 2 electric bicycle” means a bicycle that is equipped with fully
operable pedals and an electric motor of less than 750 watts that may provide
assistance regardless of whether the rider is pedaling and is not capable of
providing assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed of 20 miles per hour.
(R.C. § 4511.01(TTT))
   (c)   “Class 3 electric bicycle” means a bicycle that is equipped with fully
operable pedals and an electric motor of less than 750 watts that provides
assistance only when the rider is pedaling and ceases to provide assistance
when the bicycle reaches the speed of 28 miles per hour.
(R.C. § 4511.01(UUU))
§ 402.12 EMERGENCY VEHICLE.
   “Emergency vehicle” means emergency vehicles of municipal, township or
county departments or public utility corporations, when identified as such as
required by law, the Director of Public Safety, or local authorities, and motor
vehicles when commandeered by a police officer.
(ORC 4511.01(D))
§ 402.13 EXPLOSIVES.
   “Explosives” means any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is
intended for the purpose of producing an explosion that contains any oxidizing
and combustible units or other ingredients in such proportions, quantities, or
packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by concussion, by percussion, or
by a detonator of any part of the compound or mixture may cause a sudden
generation of highly heated gases, such that the resultant gaseous pressures
are capable of producing destructive effects on contiguous objects, or of
destroying life or limb. Manufactured articles shall not be held to be
explosives when the individual units contain explosives in limited quantities
of such nature or in such packing that it is impossible to procure a
simultaneous or a destructive explosion of the units, to the injury of life,
limb, or property by fire, friction, concussion, percussion, or by a detonator,
such as fixed ammunition for small arms, firecrackers, or safety fuse matches.
(ORC 4511.01(T))
§ 402.14 EXPRESSWAY.
   “Expressway” means a divided arterial highway for through traffic with full
or partial control of access with an excess of 50 percent of all crossroads
separated in grade.
(ORC 4511.01(ZZ))
§ 402.15 FLAMMABLE LIQUID.
   “Flammable liquid” means any liquid which has a flash point of 70°F or less,
as determined by a tagliabue or equivalent closed cup test device.
(ORC 4511.01(U))
§ 402.16 FREEWAY.
   “Freeway” means a divided multi-lane highway for through traffic with
crossroads separated in grade and with full control of access.
(ORC 4511.01(YY))
§ 402.165 FUNERAL ESCORT VEHICLE.
   “Funeral escort vehicle” means any motor vehicle, including a funeral
hearse, while used to facilitate the movement of a funeral procession.
(ORC 4511.01(WW))
§ 402.17 GROSS WEIGHT.
   “Gross weight” means the weight of a vehicle plus the weight of any load
thereon.
(ORC 4511.01(V))
§ 402.173 HIGHWAY MAINTENANCE VEHICLE.
   “Highway maintenance vehicle” means a vehicle used in snow and ice removal
or road surface maintenance, including a snow plow, traffic line striper, road
sweeper, mowing machine, asphalt distributing vehicle, or other such vehicle
designed for use in specific highway maintenance activities.
(ORC 4511.01(QQQ))
§ 402.175 HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SIGNAL.
   “Highway traffic signal” means a power-operated traffic control device by
which traffic is warned or directed to take some specific action. The term does
not include a power-operated sign, steadily illuminated pavement marker,
warning light, or steady burning electric lamp.
(ORC 4511.01(MMM))
§ 402.177 HYBRID BEACON.
   “Hybrid beacon” means a type of beacon that is intentionally placed in a
dark mode between periods of operation where no indications are displayed and,
when in operation, displays both steady and flashing traffic control signal
indications.
(ORC 4511.01(LLL))
§ 402.18 INTERSECTION.
   “Intersection” means:
      (1)   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines, or, if none, the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of
two highways that join one another at, or approximately at, right angles, or
the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways that join at
any other angle might come into conflict. The junction of an alley or driveway
with a roadway or highway does not constitute an intersection unless the
roadway or highway at the junction is controlled by a traffic control device.
      (2)   If a highway includes two roadways that are 30 feet or more apart,
then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting
highway constitutes a separate intersection. If both intersecting highways
include two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of any two
roadways of such highways constitutes a separate intersection.
      (3)   At a location controlled by a traffic control signal, regardless of
the distance between the separate intersections as described in division (2) of
this definition:
         A.   If a stop line, yield line, or crosswalk has not been designated
on the roadway within the median between the separate intersections,
the two intersections and the roadway and median constitute one intersection.
         B.   Where a stop line, yield line, or crosswalk line is designated on
the roadway on the intersection approach, the area within the crosswalk and any
area beyond the designated stop line or yield line constitute part of the
intersection.
         C.   Where a crosswalk is designated on a roadway on the departure
from the intersection, the intersection includes the area that extends to the
far side of the crosswalk.
(ORC 4511.01(KK))
§ 402.19 LANED HIGHWAY.
   “Laned highway” means a highway the roadway of which is divided into two or
more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.
(ORC 4511.01(GG))
§ 402.195 LOCAL AUTHORITIES.
   “Local authorities” means every county, municipal, and other local board or
body having authority to adopt police regulations under the Constitution and
laws of this State.
(ORC 4511.01(AA))
§ 402.196 LOW-SPEED MICROMOBILITY DEVICE.
   “Low-speed micromobility device” means a device weighing less than 100
pounds that has handlebars, is propelled by an electric motor or human power,
and has an attainable speed on a paved level surface of not more than 20 miles
per hour when propelled by the electric motor.
(R.C. § 4511.01(WWW))
§ 402.197 MEDIAN.
   “Median” means the area between two roadways of a divided highway, measured
from edge of traveled way to edge of traveled way, but excluding turn lanes.
The width of a median may be different between intersections, between
interchanges, and at opposite approaches of the same intersection.
(ORC 4511.01(NNN))
§ 402.20 MOTOR VEHICLE.
   “Motor vehicle” means every vehicle propelled or drawn by power other than
muscular power or power collected from overhead electric trolley wires, except
motorized bicycles, electric bicycles, road rollers, traction engines, power
shovels, power cranes and other equipment used in construction work, and not
designed for or employed in general highway transportation, hole- digging
machinery, well-drilling machinery, ditch- digging machinery, farm machinery,
and trailers designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place
of storage and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a
street or highway for a distance of no more than ten miles and at a speed of 25
miles per hour or less.
(ORC 4511.01(B))
§ 402.21 MOTORCYCLE.
   “Motorcycle” means every motor vehicle, other than a tractor, having a seat
or saddle for the use of the operator and designed to travel on not more than
three wheels in contact with the ground, including but not limited to motor
vehicles known as “motor-driven cycle”, “motor scooter,” “autocycle,” “cab-
enclosed motorcycle,” or “motorcycle” without regard to weight or brake
horsepower.
(R.C. § 4511.01(C))
§ 402.22 MOTORIZED BICYCLE OR MOPED.
   “Motorized bicycle or moped” means any vehicle having either two tandem
wheels or one wheel in the front and two wheels in the rear, that may be
capable of being pedaled, and that is equipped with a helper motor of not more
than 50 cubic centimeters piston displacement that produces not more than one
brake horsepower, and is capable of propelling the vehicle at a speed of not
greater than 20 miles per hour on a level surface. The terms do not include an
electric bicycle.
(R.C. § 4511.01(H))
§ 402.225 MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIR.
   “Motorized wheelchair” means any self-propelled vehicle designed for, and
used by, a person with a disability and that is incapable of a speed in excess
of eight miles per hour.
(ORC 4511.01(EEE))
§ 402.226 NATURAL RESOURCES OFFICER.
   “Natural resources officer.” An officer appointed pursuant to R.C. §
1501.24.
(R.C. § 4511.01(XXX))
§ 402.227 OPERATE.
   “Operate” means to cause or have caused movement of a vehicle.
(ORC 4511.01(HHH))
§ 402.23 PARKING.
   “Parking,” when prohibited, means the standing of a vehicle, whether
occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while
actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.
§ 402.24 PEDESTRIAN.
   “Pedestrian” means any natural person afoot. The term includes a personal
delivery device as defined in R.C. § 4511.513 unless the context clearly
suggests otherwise.
(R.C. § 4511.01(X))
§ 402.25 PERSON.
   “Person” means every natural person, firm, partnership, association or
corporation.
(ORC 4511.01(W))
§ 402.26 POLE TRAILER.
   “Pole trailer” means every trailer or semitrailer attached to the towing
vehicle by means of a reach, pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to
the towing vehicle, and ordinarily used for transporting long or irregular
shaped loads such as poles, pipes, or structural members capable, generally, of
sustaining themselves as beams between the supporting connections.
(ORC 4511.01(O))
§ 402.27 POLICE OFFICER.
   “Police officer” means every officer authorized to direct or regulate
traffic, or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
(ORC 4511.01(Z))
§ 402.275 PREDICATE MOTOR VEHICLE OR TRAFFIC OFFENSE.
   “Predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense” means any of the following:
   (a)   A violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.03, 4511.051, 4511.12, 4511.132,
4511.16, 4511.20, 4511.201, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.213, 4511.22, 4511.23,
4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32,
4511.33, 4511.34, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, 4511.39, 4511.40,
4511.41, 4511.42, 4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.432, 4511.44, 4511.441, 4511.451,
4511.452, 4511.46, 4511.47, 4511.48, 4511.481, 4511.49, 4511.50, 4511.511,
4511.53, 4511.54, 4511.55, 4511.56, 4511.57, 4511.58, 4511.59, 4511.60,
4511.61, 4511.64, 4511.66, 4511.661, 4511.68, 4511.70, 4511.701, 4511.71,
4511.711, 4511.712, 4511.713, 4511.72, 4511.73, 4511.763, 4511.771, 4511.78, or
4511.84;
   (b)   A violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.17(A)(2), 4511.51(A) to (D), or 4511.74
(A);
   (c)   A violation of any provision of Ohio R.C. 4511.01 to 4511.76 for which
no penalty otherwise is provided in the section that contains the provision
violated;
   (d)   A violation of R.C. § 4511.214;
   (e)   A violation of a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent
to any section or provision set forth or described in division (a), (b), (c),
(d) of this definition.
(ORC 4511.01(III))
§ 402.277 PRIVATE ROAD OPEN TO PUBLIC TRAVEL.
   “Private road open to public travel” means a private toll road or road,
including any adjacent sidewalks that generally run parallel to the road,
within a shopping center, airport, sports arena, or other similar business or
recreation facility that is privately owned but where the public is allowed to
travel without access restrictions. The term includes a gated toll road but
does not include a road within a private gated property where access is
restricted at all times, a parking area, a driving aisle within a parking area,
or a private grade crossing.
(ORC 4511.01(OOO))
§ 402.28 PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY.
   “Private road or driveway” means every way or place in private ownership
used for vehicular travel by the owner, and those having express or implied
permission from the owner, but not by other persons.
(ORC 4511.01(DD))
§ 402.29 PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE.
   “Public safety vehicle” means any of the following:
   (a)   Ambulances, including private ambulance companies under contract to a
municipality, township, or county, and private ambulances and nontransport
vehicles bearing license plates issued under Ohio R.C. 4503.49;
   (b)   Motor vehicles used by public law enforcement officers or other
persons sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the State;
   (c)   Any motor vehicle when properly identified as required by the Director
of Public Safety, when used in response to fire emergency calls or to provide
emergency medical service to ill or injured persons, and when operated by a
duly qualified person who is a member of a volunteer rescue service or a
volunteer fire department, and who is on duty pursuant to the rules or
directives of that service. The State Fire Marshal shall be designated by the
Director of Public Safety as the certifying agency for all public safety
vehicles described herein;
   (d)   Vehicles used by fire departments, including motor vehicles when used
by volunteer firefighters responding to emergency calls in the fire department
service when identified as required by the Director of Public Safety;
   (e)   Any vehicle used to transport or provide emergency medical service to
an ill or injured person, when certified as a “public safety vehicle,” shall be
considered such a vehicle when transporting an ill or injured person to a
hospital, regardless of whether such vehicle has already passed a hospital;
   (f)   Vehicles used by the Motor Carrier Enforcement Unit for the
enforcement of orders and rules of the Public Utilities Commission as specified
in Ohio R.C. 5503.34.
(ORC 4511.01(E))
§ 402.30 RAILROAD.
   “Railroad” means a carrier of persons or property operating upon rails
placed principally on a private right-of-way.
(ORC 4511.01(P))
§ 402.31 RAILROAD SIGN OR SIGNAL.
   “Railroad sign or signal” means any sign, signal, or device erected by
authority of a public body or official or by a railroad, and intended to give
notice of the presence of railroad tracks or the approach of a railroad train.
(ORC 4511.01(SS))
§ 402.32 RAILROAD TRAIN.
   “Railroad train” means a steam engine or an electric or other motor, with or
without cars coupled thereto, operated by a railroad.
(ORC 4511.01(Q))
§ 402.33 RESIDENCE DISTRICT.
   “Residence district” means the territory, not comprising a business
district, fronting on a street or highway, including the street or highway,
where, for a distance of 300 feet or more, the frontage is improved with
residences or residences and buildings in use for business.
(ORC 4511.01(OO))
§ 402.335 RIDESHARING ARRANGEMENT.
   “Ridesharing arrangement” includes the transportation of persons in a motor
vehicle where the transportation is incidental to another purpose of a
volunteer driver, and includes ridesharing arrangements known as carpools,
vanpools, and buspools.
(ORC 4511.01(DDD))
§ 402.34 RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   “Right-of-way” means either of the following, as the context requires:
   (a)   The right of a vehicle or pedestrian to proceed uninterruptedly in a
lawful manner in the direction in which it, he or she is moving, in preference
to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching from a different direction into
its, his or her path;
   (b)   A general term denoting land, property, or the interest therein,
usually in the configuration of a strip, acquired for or devoted to
transportation purposes. When used in this context, “right-of-way” includes the
roadway, shoulders or berm, ditch, and slopes extending to the right-of-way
limits under the control of the State or local authority.
(ORC 4511.01(UU))
§ 402.345 ROAD SERVICE VEHICLE.
   “Road service vehicle” means wreckers, utility repair vehicles and state,
county and municipal service vehicles equipped with visual signals by means of
flashing, rotating or oscillating lights.
(ORC 4511.01(JJJ))
§ 402.35 ROADWAY.
   “Roadway” means that portion of a highway improved, designed, or ordinarily
used for vehicular travel, except the berm or shoulder. If a highway includes
two or more separate roadways, the term “roadway” means any roadway separately,
but not all the roadways collectively.
(ORC 4511.01(EE))
§ 402.355 RURAL MAIL DELIVERY VEHICLE.
   “Rural mail delivery vehicle” means every vehicle used to deliver United
States mail on a rural mail delivery route.
(ORC 4511.01(VV))
§ 402.36 SAFETY ZONE.
   “Safety zone” means the area or space officially set apart within a roadway
for the exclusive use of pedestrians, and protected or marked or indicated by
adequate signs so as to be plainly visible at all times.
(ORC 4511.01(MM))
§ 402.37 SCHOOL BUS.
   “School bus.” Every bus designed for carrying more than nine passengers
which is owned by a
public, private or governmental agency or institution of learning, and operated
for the transportation of children to or from a school session or a school
function, or owned by a private person and operated for compensation for the
transportation of children to or from a school session or a school function;
provided, “school bus” does not include a bus operated by a municipally owned
transportation system, a mass transit company operating exclusively within the
territorial limits of a municipality, or within those limits and the
territorial limits of municipalities immediately contiguous to the
municipality, nor a common passenger carrier certified by the Public Utilities
Commission unless the bus is devoted exclusively to the transportation of
children to and from a school session or a school function, and “school bus”
does not include a van or bus used by a licensed child care center or type A
family child care home to transport children from the child care center or type
A family child care home to a school if the van or bus does not have more than
15 children in the van or bus at any time.
(R.C. § 4511.01(F))
§ 402.38 SEMITRAILER.
   “Semitrailer” means every vehicle designed or used for carrying persons or
property with another and separate motor vehicle so that in operation a part of
its own weight or that of its load, or both, rests upon and is carried by
another vehicle.
(ORC 4511.01(N))
§ 402.39 SIDEWALK.
   “Sidewalk” means that portion of a street between the curb lines, or the
lateral line of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for the
use of pedestrians.
(ORC 4511.01(FF))
§ 402.393 SHARED-USE PATH.
   “Shared-use path” means a bikeway outside the traveled way and physically
separated from motorized vehicular traffic by an open space or barrier and
either within the highway right-of-way or within an independent alignment. A
shared-use path also may be used by pedestrians, including skaters, joggers,
users of manual and motorized wheelchairs, and other authorized motorized and
non-motorized users. A shared-use path does not include any trail that is
intended to be used primarily for mountain biking, hiking, equestrian use, or
other similar uses, or any other single track or natural surface trial that has
historically been reserved for non- motorized use.
(ORC 4511.01(PPP))
§ 402.395 STATE HIGHWAY.
   “State highway” means a highway under the jurisdiction of the Department of
Transportation, outside the limits of municipalities, provided that the
authority conferred upon the Director of Transportation in Ohio R.C. 5511.01 to
erect State highway route markers and signs directing traffic shall not be
modified by Ohio R.C. 4511.01 through 4511.79 and 4511.99.
(ORC 4511.01(II))
§ 402.40 STATE ROUTE.
   “State route” means every highway which is designated with an official state
route number and so marked.
(ORC 4511.01(JJ))
§ 402.41 STOP.
   “Stop,” when required, means a complete cessation of movement.
§ 402.42 STOP INTERSECTION.
   “Stop intersection” means any intersection at one or more entrances of which
stop signs are erected.
(ORC 4511.01(BBB))
§ 402.43 STOPPING AND STANDING.
   “Stopping” and “standing,” when prohibited, means any halting of a vehicle,
even momentarily, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police
officer or traffic control device.
§ 402.44 STREET OR HIGHWAY.
   “Street” or “highway” means the entire width between the boundary lines of
every way open to the use of the public as a thoroughfare for purposes of
vehicular travel.
(ORC 4511.01(BB))
§ 402.45 THROUGH STREET OR HIGHWAY.
   “Through street or highway” means every street or highway as provided in
Ohio R.C. 4511.65, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(ORC 4511.01(HH))
§ 402.46 THRUWAY.
   “Thruway” means a through street or highway whose entire roadway is reserved
for through traffic and on which roadway parking is prohibited.
(ORC 4511.01(AAA))
§ 402.47 TRAFFIC.
   “Traffic” means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars,
and other devices, either singly or together, while using for purposes of
travel any highway or private road open to public travel.
(ORC 4511.01(TT))
§ 402.48 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE.
   “Traffic control device” means a flagger, sign, signal, marking, or other
device used to regulate, warn, or guide traffic, placed on, over, or adjacent
to a street, highway, private road open to public travel, pedestrian facility,
or shared-use path by authority of a public agency or official having
jurisdiction, or, in the case of a private road open to public travel, by
authority of the private owner or private official having jurisdiction.
(ORC 4511.01(QQ))
§ 402.49 TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL.
   “Traffic control signal” means any highway traffic signal by which traffic
is alternately directed to stop and permitted to proceed.
(ORC 4511.01(RR))
§ 402.50 TRAILER.
   “Trailer” means every vehicle designed or used for carrying persons or
property wholly on its own structure, and for being drawn by a motor vehicle,
including any vehicle when formed by or operated as a combination of a
semitrailer and a vehicle of the dolly type, such as that commonly known as a
trailer dolly, a vehicle used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural
production materials between a local place of storage or supply and the farm
when drawn or towed on a street or highway at a speed greater than 25 miles per
hour and a vehicle designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a
place of storage and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed
on a street or highway for a distance of more than ten miles or at a speed of
more than 25 miles per hour.
(ORC 4511.01(M))
§ 402.51 TRUCK.
   “Truck” means every motor vehicle, except trailers and semitrailers,
designed and used to carry property.
(ORC 4511.01(K))
§ 402.52 URBAN DISTRICT.
   “Urban district” means the territory contiguous to and including any street
or highway which is built up with structures devoted to business, industry, or
dwelling houses situated at intervals of less than 100 feet for a distance of
one-quarter of a mile or more, and the character of the territory is indicated
by official traffic-control devices.
(ORC 4511.01(PP))
§ 402.53 VEHICLE.
   “Vehicle” means every device, including a motorized bicycle and an electric
bicycle, in, upon, or by which any person or property may be transported or
drawn upon a highway, except that “vehicle” does not include any motorized
wheelchair, any electric personal assistive mobility device, any low-speed
micromobility device, any personal delivery device as defined in R.C. §
4511.513, any device that is moved by power collected from overhead electric
trolley wire or that is used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, or
any device, other than a bicycle, that is moved by human power.
(R.C. § 4511.01(A))
§ 402.54 WASTE COLLECTION VEHICLE.
   “Waste collection vehicle” means a vehicle used in the collection of
garbage, refuse, trash, or recyclable materials.
(R.C. § 4511.01(RRR))
 402.55 WILDLIFE OFFICER.
   “Wildlife officer.” An officer designated pursuant to R.C. § 1531.13.
(R.C. § 4511.01(YYY))
CHAPTER 404: ENFORCEMENT; IMPOUNDMENT
404.01   Compliance with lawful order of police officer; fleeing.
404.02   Resisting an enforcing official.
404.03   Road workers, motor vehicles and equipment excepted.
404.035   Emergency, public safety and coroners’ vehicles excepted.
404.04   Application to persons riding, driving animals upon roadway.
404.05   Impounding of vehicles; redemption.
404.06   Traffic direction in emergencies; obedience to school guards.
404.07   Application to drivers of government vehicles.
404.08   Furnishing false information incident to traffic citation.
404.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar State law
   Disposition of unclaimed vehicles - see Ohio R.C. 737.32, 4513.61 et seq.
   Burden of proof - see Ohio R.C. 2901.05
   Arrest without warrant for misdemeanor - see Ohio R.C. 2935.03
   Right of trial by jury - see Ohio R.C. 2945.17
   Time within which hearing or trial must be held - see Ohio R.C. 2945.71
   Extension of time for hearing or trial - see Ohio R.C. 2945.72
   Discharge for delay in trial - see Ohio R.C. 2945.73
   State point system suspension - see Ohio R.C. 4507.021
   Power of trial court of record to suspend license for certain violations -
see Ohio R.C. 4510.05, 4510.15
   Uniform application of Ohio Traffic Law - see Ohio R.C. 4511.06
   Use of private property for vehicular travel - see Ohio R.C. 4511.08
   Authority of arresting officer when radar, electrical or mechanical timing
device used - see Ohio R.C. 4511.091
   Marking motor vehicles used by traffic officers - see Ohio R.C. 4549.13
   Distinctive uniform required for traffic officers - see Ohio R.C. 4549.15
   Exceptions for emergency or public safety vehicles - see TRAF.
432.18,
434.06
   Suspension of riding privileges; impounding of bicycles - see TRAF.
474.12
   Limitation on criminal prosecutions - see GEN. OFF.
606.06
   Failure to aid a law enforcement officer - see GEN. OFF.
606.13
   Obstructing official business - see GEN. OFF.
606.14
   Obstructing justice - see GEN. OFF.
606.15
   Resisting arrest - see GEN. OFF.
606.16
   Soliciting or receiving improper compensation - see GEN. OFF.
606.18
   Dereliction of duty - see GEN. OFF.
606.19
   Disposition of property held by Police Division - see GEN. OFF.
606.24
§ 404.01 COMPLIANCE WITH LAWFUL ORDER OF POLICE OFFICER; FLEEING.
Editor’s note:
   Section 404.01 was recodified as part of the 1994 updating and revision of
these Codified Ordinances. See §
606.165 of the General Offenses Code.)
§ 404.02 RESISTING AN ENFORCING OFFICIAL.
   (a)   No person shall resist, hinder, obstruct, or abuse any sheriff,
constable, or other official while that official is attempting to arrest
offenders under any provision of this Traffic Code. No person shall interfere
with any person charged under any provision of this Traffic Code with the
enforcement of the law relative to public highways.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.36)
   (c)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the hindrance,
obstruction, resistance, or interference alleged consisted of constitutionally
protected speech only.
§ 404.03 ROAD WORKERS, MOTOR VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT EXCEPTED.
   (a)   The provisions of this Traffic Code, except for §
434.01, do not apply to persons, teams, motor vehicles, and other equipment
while actually engaged in work upon the surface of a highway within an area
designated by traffic-control devices, but apply to those persons and vehicles
when traveling to or from such work.
   (b)   The driver of a highway maintenance vehicle owned by this State or any
political subdivision of this State, while the driver is engaged in the
performance of official duties upon a street or highway, provided the highway
maintenance vehicle is equipped with flashing lights and such other markings as
are required by law and such lights are in operation when the driver and
vehicle are so engaged, shall be exempt from criminal prosecution for
violations of Ohio R.C. 4511.22, 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.30,
4511.31, 4511.33, 4511.35, 4511.66, 4513.02, and 5577.01 to 5577.09, and any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (c)   (1)   This section does not exempt a driver of a highway maintenance
vehicle from civil liability arising from a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.22,
4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.33, 4511.35,
4511.66, or 4513.02 or Ohio R.C. 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (2)   This section does not exempt a driver of a vehicle who is not a
state employee and who is engaged in the transport of highway maintenance
equipment from criminal liability for a violation of R.C. §§ 5577.01 through
5577.09, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (d)   As used in this section, “engaged in the performance of official
duties” includes driving a highway maintenance vehicle to and from the
manufacturer or vehicle maintenance provider and transporting a highway
maintenance vehicle, equipment, or materials to and from a work location.
(R.C. § 4511.04)
§ 404.035 EMERGENCY, PUBLIC SAFETY AND CORONERS’ VEHICLES EXCEPTED.
   (a)   The provisions of Ohio R.C. 4511.12, 4511.13, 4511.131, 4511.132,
4511.14, 4511.202, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.22, 4511.23, 4511.25, 4511.26,
4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33, 4511.34,
4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, 4511.39, 4511.40, 4511.41, 4511.42,
4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.432, 4511.44, 4511.441, 4511.57, 4511.58, 4511.59,
4511.60, 4511.61, 4511.62, 4511.66, 4511.68, 4511.681, and 4511.69, and any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, do not apply to the driver of an
emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle if the emergency vehicle or public
safety vehicle is responding to an emergency call, is equipped with and
displaying at least one flashing, rotating, or oscillating light visible under
normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the
vehicle and if the driver of the vehicles is giving an audible signal by siren,
exhaust whistle, or bell. This section does not relieve the driver of an
emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
(ORC 4511.041)
   (b)   The provisions of Ohio R.C. 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28,
4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37,
4511.38, and 4511.66, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, do
not apply to a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s investigator operating a
motor vehicle in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4513.171 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance. This division does not relieve a coroner,
deputy coroner or coroner’s investigator operating a motor vehicle from the
duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons and property upon
the highway.
(ORC 4511.042)
§ 404.04 APPLICATION TO PERSONS RIDING, DRIVING ANIMALS UPON ROADWAY.
   Every person riding, driving, or leading an animal upon a roadway is subject
to the provisions of this Traffic Code, applicable to the driver of a vehicle,
except those provisions of this Traffic Code which by their nature are
inapplicable.
(ORC 4511.05)
§ 404.05 IMPOUNDING OF VEHICLES; REDEMPTION.
   (a)   Police officers are authorized to provide for the removal and
impounding of a vehicle under the following circumstances:
      (1)   When any vehicle is left unattended upon any street, bridge or
causeway and is so illegally parked so as to constitute a hazard or obstruction
to the normal movement of traffic, or so as to unreasonably interfere with
street cleaning or snow removal operations;
      (2)   When any motor vehicle, including an abandoned junk motor vehicle,
as defined in Ohio R.C. 4513.63, is left on private residential property, as
defined in Ohio R.C. 4513.60, or on private agricultural property, for at least
four consecutive hours without the permission of the person having the right to
the possession of the property, or on a public street or other property open to
the public for purposes of vehicular travel, or upon or within the right-of-way
of any road or highway, for 48 consecutive hours or longer, without
notification to the Police Chief of the reasons for leaving such vehicle in
such place, except that when such a motor vehicle constitutes an obstruction to
traffic, it may be ordered into storage immediately;
      (3)   When any vehicle has been stolen or operated without the consent of
the owner;
      (4)   When any vehicle displays illegal license plates or fails to
display the current lawfully required license plates;
      (5)   When any vehicle has been used in or connected with the commission
of a felony;
      (6)   When any vehicle has been damaged or wrecked so as to be inoperable
or violates equipment provisions of this Traffic Code whereby its continued
operation would constitute a condition hazardous to life, limb or property;
      (7)   When any vehicle is left unattended due to the removal of an ill,
injured or arrested operator;
      (8)   When any vehicle has been operated by any person who has failed to
stop in case of an accident or collision;
      (9)   When any vehicle has been operated by any person who is driving
without a lawful license or while his or her license has been suspended or
revoked;
      (10)   When any vehicle is found for which two or more citation tags for
violations of this Traffic Code have been issued and the owner or operator
thereof has failed to respond to such citation tags as lawfully required.
   (b)   Any vehicle removed under authority of division (a)(2) of this section
shall be ordered into storage and/or disposed of as provided under Ohio R.C.
4513.60 et seq. Any other vehicle removed under authority of this section shall
be ordered into storage and the Police Department shall forthwith notify the
registered vehicle owner of the fact of such removal and impounding, reasons
therefor and the place of storage. Any person desiring to redeem an impounded
vehicle shall appear at the Police Department to furnish satisfactory evidence
of identity and ownership or right to possession. Prior to issuance of a
release form, the claimant, owner or operator shall either pay the amount due
for any fines for violations on account of which such vehicle was impounded or,
as the court may require, post a bond in an amount set by the court, to appear
to answer to such violations. The pound operator shall release such vehicle
upon the receipt of the release form and payment of all towage and storage
charges.
   (c)   No owner or operator shall remove an impounded vehicle from the place
of storage without complying with the above procedure. Possession of a vehicle
which has been impounded and unlawfully taken from the place of storage, by the
owner or operator, shall constitute prima facie evidence that it was so removed
by the owner or operator.
§ 404.06 TRAFFIC DIRECTION IN EMERGENCIES; OBEDIENCE TO SCHOOL GUARDS.
   (a)   Police officers shall direct or regulate traffic in accordance with
the provisions of this Traffic Code, provided that in the event of fire or
other emergency or to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, they are
authorized to direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the
provisions of this Traffic Code. Firefighters, when at the scene of a fire, may
direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate
vicinity. The direction of traffic may be by word or audible signal, by gesture
or visible signal or by any combination thereof. No person shall fail to comply
with any lawful order or direction of any police officer or firefighter issued
pursuant to this section.
   (b)   No person shall fail to comply with any lawful order or direction of
any school crossing guard invested with authority to direct, control or
regulate traffic in the vicinity of the school to which such guard may be
assigned.
§ 404.07 APPLICATION TO DRIVERS OF GOVERNMENT VEHICLES.
   The provisions of this Traffic Code applicable to the drivers of vehicles
shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned or operated by the United
States, any state or any political subdivision thereof, including this
Municipality, except as may be otherwise provided by law and subject to such
specific exceptions as are set forth with reference to authorized emergency and
public safety vehicles.
§ 404.08 FURNISHING FALSE INFORMATION INCIDENT TO TRAFFIC CITATION.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly present, display, or orally communicate a
false name, social security number, or date of birth to a law enforcement
officer who is in the process of issuing to the person a traffic ticket or
complaint.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(ORC 4513.361)
§ 404.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 406: TRAFFIC CONTROL
406.01   Authority and considerations for placement of devices.
406.02   Conformity with State Manual.
406.03   Powers of designated person.
406.04   Posting of signs and signals required.
406.05   Designated persons’s powers not limited.
406.06   Records of designated person.
406.07   Reservation of power to Council.
406.08   Violations subject to general Code penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Power to designate highway as a freeway, expressway or thruway - see Ohio
R.C. 4511.011
   Uniform system of traffic control devices - see Ohio R.C. 4511.09, 4511.11
   Placing and maintaining local traffic control devices- see Ohio R.C.
4511.10, 4511.11
   Alteration of prima facie speed limits - see Ohio R.C. 4511.21, 4511.22,
4511.23
   Power to erect stop signs at grade crossings - see Ohio R.C. 4511.61
   Designation of through streets and erection of stop or yield signs - see
Ohio R.C. 4511.65
   Traffic control devices defined - see TRAF.
Ch. 414
§ 406.01 AUTHORITY AND CONSIDERATIONS FOR PLACEMENT OF DEVICES.
   The designated person is hereby authorized to place and maintain traffic
control devices upon any street or highway under his or her jurisdiction as are
necessary to effectuate the provisions of this Traffic Code, or to regulate,
warn or guide traffic, and such other traffic control devices as he or she
shall deem necessary for the proper control of traffic. The designated person
shall determine the location, timing and coordination of such traffic control
devices upon the basis of an applicable engineering or traffic investigation
and shall consider the following:
   (a)   The maximum safety and protection of vehicular and pedestrian traffic
from physical injury or property damage;
   (b)   The existing and potential traffic movement, volume and conditions;
   (c)   The location and frequency of accidents, including studies of remedial
measures;
   (d)   The recommendations of other Village officials;
   (e)   The acceleration of transportation of persons and property by vehicles
so as to expedite travel and promote public safety;
   (f)   The convenience and welfare of the general public in parking,
standing, loading and unloading, and the use of the streets as affecting
business concerns and places of assembly; and
   (g)   Economy in the expenditure of money.
§ 406.02 CONFORMITY WITH STATE MANUAL.
   All traffic control devices placed pursuant to the provisions of this
Traffic Code shall conform to the Ohio Manual and Specifications for a Uniform
System of Traffic-Control Devices, as set forth in Ohio R.C. 4511.09.
§ 406.03 POWERS OF DESIGNATED PERSON.
   The person designated by Council pursuant to §
406.01 is hereby authorized to:
   (a)   Designate any street or highway as a through street or highway and
require that all vehicles stop or yield the right of way as may be required
before entering the same;
   (b)   Designate any intersection as a stop intersection and require all
vehicles to stop at one or more entrances to such intersection;
   (c)   Designate any intersection as a yield intersection and require all
vehicles to yield the right of way as required;
   (d)   Designate any street as a one-way street and require that all vehicles
thereon be moved in one specific direction;
   (e)   Designate and mark lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular
direction regardless of the centerline of the roadway;
   (f)   Erect signs directing slow-moving traffic to use a designated lane or
allocating specified lanes to traffic moving in the same direction;
   (g)   Designate those portions of any street, where overtaking and passing
other traffic or driving to the left of the center or centerline of the roadway
would be especially hazardous, by appropriate signs or markings on the street
to indicate the beginning and end of such zones. Such zones may be marked by an
auxiliary yellow line placed parallel and to the right of the normal centerline
or offset marked lane line;
   (h)   Place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections
and require that a specific course of direction be traveled by vehicles
proceeding in lanes by either permitting, prohibiting or requiring turns at
such intersections;
   (i)   Install traffic control devices, signals and signs at any location to
regulate traffic;
   (j)   Establish safety zones, crosswalks, zones of quiet and play streets;
   (k)   Close any street or portion thereof to vehicular traffic which is in
the process of construction, reconstruction or repair;
   (l)   Determine the location of any necessary bus stops and taxicab stands;
   (m)   Determine the location and limit hours of truck loading zones;
   (n)   Designate dangerous railroad crossings and erect stop signs thereat;
   (o)   Erect “No U Turn” signs at any location to prohibit a vehicle from
being turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction;
   (p)   Regulate or prohibit the stopping, standing and parking of vehicles on
streets, alleys or public property by erecting signs plainly indicating the
prohibitions, restrictions or limitations;
   (q)   Designate individual parking spaces by markings, which may either be
parallel or at a prescribed angle to the curb or edge of the roadway; and
   (r)   Establish parking meter zones on streets, alleys or public property by
installing parking meters, designating parking meter spaces and fixing the time
limitations and rates for legal parking in such zones, which limitations and
rates shall be designated on the parking meters or by appropriate signs posted
in close proximity to the meters in such zones.
§ 406.04 POSTING OF SIGNS AND SIGNALS REQUIRED.
   No provision of this chapter shall be effective until signs, signals,
markings or other devices giving notice of such local traffic regulations are
posted upon or at the entrance to the street or part thereof affected, as may
be most appropriate, so that in a proper position they are sufficiently legible
to be seen by an ordinarily observant person.
§ 406.05 DESIGNATED PERSON’S POWERS NOT LIMITED.
   The powers of the designated person shall not be limited by the specific
enumeration of subjects contained in this chapter.
§ 406.06 RECORDS OF DESIGNATED PERSON.
   The designated person shall keep a record of all rules, regulations and
proceedings promulgated in connection with this chapter.
§ 406.07 RESERVATION OF POWER TO COUNCIL.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, Council may override any
decision of the person designated by Council pursuant to §
406.01 and may assume any of the powers delegated to such person, by a
resolution adopted by a vote of a majority of the members duly elected thereto.
Upon the adoption of any such resolution, the same may be changed only by an
amending or repealing resolution adopted by Council.
§ 406.08 VIOLATIONS SUBJECT TO GENERAL CODE PENALTY.
   Any person violating the rules and regulations promulgated in connection
with this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
thereof shall be subject to the penalties provided for in §§
408.01 and
408.02.
CHAPTER 408: PENALTIES
408.01   Penalties for misdemeanor.
408.02   General Code penalty.
408.03   Suspension of driver’s license.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar State law
   Definition of “imprisoned” - see Ohio R.C. 1.05
   Satisfaction of fine; credit for time served - see Ohio R.C. 2947.14
   Criteria for probation; conditions for probation - see Ohio R.C. 2951.02
   Definition of “dangerous offender” - see GEN. OFF.
698.01
   Definition of “repeat offender” - see GEN. OFF.
698.01
   Imposing sentence for misdemeanor - see GEN. OFF.
698.03
   Organizational penalties - see GEN. OFF.
698.04
   Multiple sentences - see GEN. OFF.
698.05
§ 408.01 PENALTIES FOR MISDEMEANOR.
   Whoever is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor, or minor
misdemeanor shall be sentenced in accordance with §
698.02.
§ 408.02 GENERAL CODE PENALTY.
   (a)   Whoever violates any provision of this traffic code for which no
penalty otherwise is provided in the section violated is guilty of one of the
following:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b) or (c) of this
section, a minor misdemeanor;
      (2)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree;
      (3)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more predicate motor vehicle or
traffic offenses, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.99)
   (b)   Violations committed while distracted.
      (1)   As used in this section and each section referenced in division (b)
(2) of this section, all of the following apply:
         A.   DISTRACTED means doing either of the following while operating a
vehicle:
            1.   Using an electronic wireless communications device, as defined
in R.C. § 4511.204, in violation of that section.
               a.   The device’s speaker-phone function;
               b.   A wireless technology standard for exchanging data over
short distances;
               c.   A “voice-operated or hands-free” device that allows the
person to use the electronic wireless communications device without the use of
either hand except to activate, deactivate, or initiate a feature or function;
               d.   Any device that is physically or electronically integrated
into the motor vehicle.
            2.   Engaging in any activity that is not necessary to the
operation of a vehicle and impairs, or reasonably would be expected to impair,
the ability of the operator to drive the vehicle safely.
         B.   DISTRACTED does not include operating a motor vehicle while
wearing an earphone or earplug over or in both ears at the same time. A person
who so wears earphones or earplugs may be charged with a violation of R.C. §
4511.84, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
         C.   DISTRACTED does not include conducting any activity while
operating a utility service vehicle or a vehicle for or on behalf of a utility,
provided that the driver of the vehicle is acting in response to an emergency,
power outage, or a circumstance affecting the health or safety of individuals.
As used in this division (b)(1)C.:
            1.   UTILITY means an entity specified in R.C. § 4905.03(A), (C),
(D), (E), or (G).
            2.   UTILITY SERVICE VEHICLE means a vehicle owned or operated by a
utility.
      (2)   If an offender violates R.C. § 4511.03, 4511.051, 4511.12,
4511.121, 4511.132, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.213, 4511.22, 4511.23, 4511.25,
4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33,
4511.34, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, 4511.39, 4511.40, 4511.41,
4511.42, 4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.44, 4511.441, 4511.451, 4511.46, 4511.47,
4511.54, 4511.55, 4511.57, 4511.58, 4511.59, 4511.60, 4511.61, 4511.64,
4511.71, 4511.711, 4511.712, 4511.713, 4511.72, or 4511.73, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
violation, the offender is subject to the applicable penalty for the violation
and, notwithstanding R.C. § 2929.28, is subject to an additional fine of not
more than $100 as follows:
         A.   1.   Subject to Traffic Rule 13, if a law enforcement officer
issues an offender a ticket, citation, or summons for a violation of any of the
aforementioned sections of the Ohio Revised Code, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, that indicates that the offender was distracted
while committing the violation and that the distracting activity was a
contributing factor to the commission of the violation, the offender may enter
a written plea of guilty and waive the offender’s right to contest the ticket,
citation, or summons in a trial provided that the offender pays the total
amount of the fine established for the violation and pays the additional fine
of $100.
            2.   In lieu of payment of the additional fine of $100, the
offender instead may elect to attend a distracted driving safety course, the
duration and contents of which shall be established by the Ohio Director of
Public Safety. If the offender attends and successfully completes the course,
the offender shall be issued written evidence that the offender successfully
completed the course. The offender shall be required to pay the total amount of
the fine established for the violation, but shall not be required to pay the
additional fine of $100, so long as the offender submits to the court both the
offender’s payment in full and such written evidence within 90 days of the
underlying violation that resulted in the imposition of the additional fine
under division (b) of this section.
         B.   1.   If the offender appears in person to contest the ticket,
citation, or summons in a trial and the offender pleads guilty to or is
convicted of the violation, the court, in addition to all other penalties
provided by law, may impose the applicable penalty for the violation and may
impose the additional fine of not more than $100.
            2.   If the court imposes upon the offender the applicable penalty
for the violation and an additional fine of not more than $100, the court shall
inform the offender that, in lieu of of payment of the additional fine of not
more than $100, the offender instead may elect to attend the distracted driving
safety course described in division (b)(2)A. of this section. If the offender
elects the course option and attends and successfully completes the course, the
offender shall be issued written evidence that the offender successfully
completed the course. The offender shall be required to pay the total amount of
the fine established for the violation, but shall not be required to pay the
additional fine of not more than $100, so long as the offender submits to the
court the offender’s payment and such written evidence within 90 days of the
underlying violation that resulted in the imposition of the additional fine
under division (b) of this section.
      (3)   If a law enforcement officer issues an offender a ticket, citation,
or summons for a violation of any of the sections of the Revised Code listed in
division (b)(2) of this section that indicates that the offender was distracted
while committing the violation and that the distracting activity was a
contributing factor to the commission of the violation, the officer shall do
both of the following:
         A.   Report the issuance of the ticket, citation, or summons to the
officer’s law enforcement agency;
         B.   Ensure that such report indicates the offender’s race.
(R.C. § 4511.991)
§ 408.03 SUSPENSION OF DRIVER’S LICENSE.
   Except as otherwise provided in Ohio R.C. 4510.07 or in any other provision
of the Revised Code, whenever an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of any provision of this Traffic Code that is substantially
equivalent to a provision of the Revised Code, and a court is permitted or
required to suspend a person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit for a violation of that provision, a court, in addition to any other
penalties authorized by law, may suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege for the period of
time the court determines appropriate, but the period of suspension imposed for
the violation of the provision of this Traffic Code shall not exceed the period
of suspension that is permitted or required to be imposed for the violation of
the provision of the Revised Code to which the provision of this Traffic Code
is substantially equivalent.
(ORC 4510.05)
TITLE FOUR: PUBLIC WAYS AND TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
CHAPTER 412: OBSTRUCTIONS AND SPECIAL USES OF PUBLIC WAYS
412.01   Placing injurious material or obstruction in street.
412.02   Zones of quiet.
412.03   Play streets.
412.04   Toy vehicles on roadway.
412.05   Freeway use prohibited by pedestrians, bicycles and animals.
412.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar State law
   Power to regulate processions or assemblages - see Ohio R.C. 4511.07
   Loads dropping or leaking; tracking mud; removal required - see TRAF.
440.06
   Selling, washing or repairing vehicle upon roadway - see TRAF.
452.08
   Parking in alleys or narrow streets; exceptions - see TRAF.
452.11
   Sidewalk obstructions; damage or injury - see GEN. OFF.
660.10
§ 412.01 PLACING INJURIOUS MATERIAL OR OBSTRUCTION IN STREET.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a
highway, lane, road, street, or alley any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails,
or other articles which may damage or injure any person, vehicle, or animal
traveling along or upon the highway, except such substances that may be placed
upon the roadway by proper authority for the repair or construction thereof.
      (2)   Any person who drops or permits to be dropped or thrown upon any
highway any destructive or injurious material shall immediately remove the
same.
      (3)   Any person authorized to remove a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a
highway shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the
highway from such vehicle.
      (4)   No person shall place any obstruction in or upon a highway without
proper authority.
   (b)   No person, with intent to cause physical harm to a person or a
vehicle, shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a highway, lane, road,
street, or alley any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails, or other articles
which may damage or injure any person, vehicle, or animal traveling along or
upon such highway, except such substances that may be placed upon the roadway
by proper authority for the repair or construction thereof.
   (c)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates
division (a) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 4511.74)
§ 412.02 ZONES OF QUIET.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a zone of quiet, no person
operating a vehicle within any such zone shall sound the horn or other warning
device of such vehicle except in an emergency.
§ 412.03 PLAY STREETS.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that any street or part
thereof is a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street
or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose
residences are within such closed area and then such drivers shall exercise the
greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof.
§ 412.04 TOY VEHICLES ON ROADWAY.
   No person riding upon any coaster, roller skates, sled, toy vehicle or other
similar device shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a
crosswalk and when so crossing such person shall be granted all of the rights
and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. This
section shall not apply to any street set aside as a play street.
§ 412.05 FREEWAY USE PROHIBITED BY PEDESTRIANS, BICYCLES AND ANIMALS.
   (a)   No person, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, shall:
      (1)   As a pedestrian, occupy any space within the limits of the right-
of-way of a freeway, except: in a rest area; on a facility that is separated
from the roadway and shoulders of the freeway and is designed and appropriately
marked for pedestrian use; in the performance of public works or official
duties; as a result of an emergency caused by an accident or breakdown of a
motor vehicle; or to obtain assistance.
      (2)   Occupy any space within the limits of the right-of-way of a
freeway, with: an animal-drawn vehicle; a ridden or led animal; herded animals;
a pushcart; a bicycle, except on a facility that is separated from the roadway
and shoulders of the freeway and is designed and appropriately marked for
bicycle use; an electric bicycle; a bicycle with motor attached; a motor-
driven cycle with a motor which produces not to exceed five brake horsepower;
an agricultural tractor; farm machinery; except in the performance of public
works or official duties.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.051)
§ 412.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 414: TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
414.01   Obedience to traffic control devices.
414.02   Through streets; stop and yield right- of-way signs.
414.03   Traffic control signal terms and lights.
414.04   Signal to control lane direction of travel.
414.05   Pedestrian control signals.
414.06   (Reserved)
414.07   Unauthorized signs and signals, hiding from view, advertising.
414.08   Alteration, injury, removal of traffic control devices.
414.09   Right turns on red.
414.10   Unauthorized possession or sale of devices.
414.11   Signal preemption devices; prohibitions.
414.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar State law
   Designation of through streets or stop intersections - see Ohio R.C.
4511.07, 4511.65
   Uniform system of traffic control devices - see Ohio R.C. 4511.09, 4511.11;
TRAF.
406.02
   Placing and maintaining local traffic control devices - see Ohio R.C.
4511.10, 4511.11
   Traffic control devices defined - see TRAF.
402.48
   Authority and considerations for placing of devices - see TRAF.
406.01
   Posting of signs and signals required - see TRAF.
406.04
   Intersections at which traffic control signals fail or malfunction - see
TRAF.
432.155
   Criminal mischief (tampering) - see GEN. OFF.
642.11
§ 414.01 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.
   (a)   (1)   No pedestrian or driver of a vehicle shall disobey the
instructions of any traffic-control device placed in accordance with the
provisions of this Traffic Code, unless at the time otherwise directed by a
police officer.
      (2)   No provision of this Traffic Code for which signs are required
shall be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the
alleged violation, an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently
legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular
section of this Traffic Code does not state that signs are required, that
section shall be effective even though no signs are erected or in place.
(ORC 4511.12(A))
   (b)   (1)   Except as provided in division (c) of this section, any operator
of a commercial motor vehicle, upon approaching a scale location established
for the purpose of determining the weight of the vehicle and its load, shall
comply with any traffic control device or the order of a peace officer
directing the vehicle to proceed to be weighed or otherwise inspected.
      (2)   Any operator of a commercial motor vehicle, upon bypassing a scale
location in accordance with division (c) of this section, shall comply with an
order of a peace officer to stop the vehicle to verify the use and operation of
an electronic clearance device.
   (c)   Any operator of a commercial motor vehicle that is equipped with an
electronic clearance device authorized by the Superintendent of the State
Highway Patrol under Ohio R.C. 4549.081 may bypass a scale location, regardless
of the instruction of a traffic control device to enter the scale facility, if
either of the following apply:
      (1)   The in-cab transponder displays a green light or other affirmative
visual signal and also sounds an affirmative audible signal;
      (2)   Any other criterion established by the Superintendent of the State
Highway Patrol is met.
   (d)   Any peace officer may order the operator of a commercial motor vehicle
that bypasses a scale location to stop the vehicle to verify the use and
operation of an electronic clearance device.
   (e)   As used in this section, COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE means any
combination of vehicles with a gross vehicle weight rating or an actual gross
vehicle weight of more than 10,000 pounds if the vehicle is used in interstate
or intrastate commerce to transport property and also means any vehicle that is
transporting hazardous materials for which placarding is required pursuant to
Title 49 C.F.R. parts 100 to 180.
(ORC 4511.121(A)-(C), (E))
   (f)   No person shall use an electronic clearance device if the device or
its use is not in compliance with rules of the Superintendent of the State
Highway Patrol.
(ORC 4549.081(B))
   (g)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. If
the offender commits the offense while distracted and the distracting activity
is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense, the offender is
subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.12(B))
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (b) of this
section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of division (b)
of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. If the offender commits the offense while
distracted and the distracting activity is a contributing factor to the
commission of the offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine
established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.121(D))
      (3)   Whoever violates division (f) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the
third degree on each subsequent offense.
(ORC 4549.081(C))
§ 414.02 THROUGH STREETS; STOP AND YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY SIGNS.
   (a)   All state routes are hereby designated as through highways, provided
that stop signs, yield signs, or traffic-control signals shall be erected at
all intersections with such through highways by the Department of
Transportation as to highways under its jurisdiction and by local authorities
as to highways under their jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in this
section. Where two or more state routes that are through highways intersect,
and no traffic-control signal is in operation, stop signs or yield signs shall
be erected at one or more entrances thereto by the Department or by local
authorities having jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in this section.
Whenever the Director of Transportation determines on the basis of an
engineering and traffic investigation that stop signs are necessary to stop
traffic on a through highway for safe and efficient operation, nothing in this
section shall be construed to prevent such installations. When circumstances
warrant, the Director also may omit stop signs on roadways intersecting through
highways under his or her jurisdiction. Before the Director either installs or
removes a stop sign under this division, he or she shall give notice, in
writing, of that proposed action to the affected local authority at least 30
days before installing or removing the stop sign.
   (b)   Other streets or highways, or portions thereof, are hereby designated
as through highways if they are within the Municipality, if they have a
continuous length of more than one mile between the limits of the street or
highway or portion thereof, and if they have stop or yield signs or traffic-
control signals at the entrances of the majority of intersecting streets or
highways. For purposes of this section, the limits of the street or highway, or
portion thereof, shall be the municipal corporation line, the physical terminus
of the street or highway, or any point on the streets or highway at which
vehicular traffic thereon is required by regulatory signs to stop or yield to
traffic on the intersecting street, provided, that in residence districts, the
Municipality may by ordinance designate such street or highway, or portion
thereof, not to be a through highway and thereafter the affected residence
district shall be indicated by official traffic-control devices. Where two or
more through highways designated under this division intersect and no traffic-
control signal is in operation, stop signs or yield signs shall be erected at
one or more entrances thereto by the Department or by local authorities having
jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in this section.
   (c)   The Department or local authorities having jurisdiction need not erect
stop signs at intersections they find to be so constructed as to permit traffic
to safely enter a through highway without coming to a stop. Signs shall be
erected at such intersections indicating that the operator of a vehicle shall
yield the right-of-way to or merge with all traffic proceeding on the through
highway.
   (d)   Local authorities, with reference to highways under their
jurisdiction, may designate additional through highways, and shall erect stop
signs, yield signs, or traffic-control signals at all streets and highways
intersecting such through highways, or may designate any intersection as a stop
or yield intersection, and shall erect like signs at one or more entrances to
the intersection.
(ORC 4511.65)
§ 414.03 TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL TERMS AND LIGHTS.
   Highway traffic signal indications for vehicles and pedestrians shall have
the following meanings:
   (a)   Steady green signal indication.
      (1)   A.   Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal indication
are permitted to proceed straight through or turn right or left or make a u-
turn movement except as such movement is modified by a lane-use sign, turn
prohibition sign, lane marking, roadway design, separate turn signal
indication, or other traffic control device. Such vehicular traffic, including
vehicles turning right or left or making a u- turn movement, shall yield the
right-of-way to both of the following:
            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
         B.   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a u-turn
movement to the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching
from the opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard
during the time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the
intersection.
      (2)   Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal indication, displayed
alone or in combination with another signal indication, are permitted to
cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such
arrow, or such other movement as is permitted by other indications displayed at
the same time. Such vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left
or making a u- turn movement, shall yield the right-of-way to both of the
following:
         A.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
         B.   Other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
      (3)   A.   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication,
as provided in R.C. § 4511.14, pedestrians facing a circular green signal
indication are permitted to proceed across the roadway within any marked or
unmarked associated crosswalk. The pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to
vehicles lawfully within the intersection or so close as to create an immediate
hazard at the time that the green signal indication is first displayed.
         B.   Pedestrians facing a green arrow signal indication, unless
otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or other traffic control
device, shall not cross the roadway.
   (b)   Steady yellow signal indication.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular yellow signal indication
are thereby warned that the related green movement or the related flashing
arrow movement is being terminated or that a steady red signal indication will
be exhibited immediately thereafter when vehicular traffic shall not enter the
intersection. The provisions governing vehicular operation under the movement
being terminated shall continue to apply while the steady circular yellow
signal indication is displayed.
      (2)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow arrow signal indication is
thereby warned that the related green arrow movement or the related flashing
arrow movement is being terminated. The provisions governing vehicular
operation under the movement being terminated shall continue to apply while the
steady yellow arrow signal indication is displayed.
      (3)   Pedestrians facing a steady circular yellow or yellow arrow signal
indication, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication as
provided in R.C. § 4511.14 or other traffic control device, shall not start to
cross the roadway.
   (c)   Steady red signal indication.
      (1)   A.   Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red signal
indication, unless entering the intersection to make another movement permitted
by another signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; but if
there is no stop line, traffic shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the
near side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, then before
entering the intersection; and shall remain stopped until a signal indication
to proceed is displayed except as provided in divisions (c)(1), (c)(2), and (c)
(3) of this section.
         B.   Except when a traffic control device is in place prohibiting a
turn on red or a steady red arrow signal indication is displayed, vehicular
traffic facing a steady circular red signal indication is permitted, after
stopping, to enter the intersection to turn right, or to turn left from a one-
way street into a one-way street. The right to proceed with the turn shall be
subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a stop at a stop
sign.
      (2)   A.   Vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow signal indication
shall not enter the intersection to make the movement indicated by the arrow
and, unless entering the intersection to make another movement permitted by
another signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; but if
there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, then before entering the
intersection; and shall remain stopped until a signal indication or other
traffic control device permitting the movement indicated by such red arrow is
displayed.
         B.   When a traffic control device is in place permitting a turn on a
steady red arrow signal indication, vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow
indication is permitted, after stopping, to enter the intersection to turn
right, or to turn left from a one- way street into a one-way street. The right
to proceed with the turn shall be limited to the direction indicated by the
arrow and shall be subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a
stop at a stop sign.
      (3)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication as
provided in R.C. § 4511.14 or other traffic control device, pedestrians facing
a steady circular red or steady red arrow signal indication shall not enter the
roadway.
      (4)   Local authorities by ordinance, or the Director of Transportation
on state highways, may prohibit a right or a left turn against a steady red
signal at any intersection, which shall be effective when signs giving notice
thereof are posted at the intersection.
   (d)   Flashing green signal indication. A flashing green signal indication
has no meaning and shall not be used.
   (e)   Flashing yellow signal indication.
      (1)   A.   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing a
flashing circular yellow signal indication, is permitted to cautiously enter
the intersection to proceed straight through or turn right or left or make a u-
turn movement except as such movement is modified by lane-use signs, turn
prohibition signs, lane markings, roadway design, separate turn signal
indications, or other traffic control devices. Such vehicular traffic,
including vehicles turning right or left or making a u-turn movement, shall
yield the right-of-way to both of the following:
            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
         B.   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a u-turn to
the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching from the
opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the
time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the intersection.
      (2)   A.   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing a
flashing yellow arrow signal indication, displayed alone or in combination with
another signal indication, is permitted to cautiously enter the intersection
only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, or other such movement as is
permitted by other signal indications displayed at the same time. Such
vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left or making a u-
turn, shall yield the right-of-way to both of the following:
            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
         B.   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a u-turn to
the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching from the
opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the
time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the intersection.
      (3)   Pedestrians facing any flashing yellow signal indication at an
intersection, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or
other traffic control device, are permitted to proceed across the roadway
within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk. Pedestrians shall yield the
right- of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the
flashing yellow signal indication is first displayed.
      (4)   When a flashing circular yellow signal indication is displayed as a
beacon to supplement another traffic control device, road users are notified
that there is a need to pay additional attention to the message contained
thereon or that the regulatory or warning requirements of the other traffic
control device, which might not be applicable at all times, are currently
applicable.
   (f)   Flashing red signal indication.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing a
flashing circular red signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop
line; but if there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near
side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, at the point nearest the
intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. The right to proceed
shall be subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a stop at a
stop sign.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing any flashing red signal indication at an
intersection, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or
other traffic control device, are permitted to proceed across the roadway
within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk. Pedestrians shall yield the
right- of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the
flashing red signal indication is first displayed.
      (3)   When a flashing circular red signal indication is displayed as a
beacon to supplement another traffic control device, road users are notified
that there is a need to pay additional attention to the message contained
thereon or that the regulatory requirements of the other traffic control
device, which might not be applicable at all times, are currently applicable.
Use of this signal indication shall be limited to supplementing stop, do not
enter, or wrong way signs, and to applications where compliance with the
supplemented traffic control device requires a stop at a designated point.
   (g)   In the event an official traffic-control signal is erected and
maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this
section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature
can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking
on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of
any such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal.
   (h)   This section does not apply at railroad grade crossings. Conduct of
drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade crossings shall be governed by
R.C. §§ 4511.61 and 4511.62.
(ORC 4511.13)
§ 414.04 SIGNAL TO CONTROL LANE DIRECTION OF TRAVEL.
   The meanings of lane-use control signal indications are as follows:
   (a)   A steady downward green arrow. A road user is permitted to drive in
the lane over which the arrow signal indication is located.
   (b)   A steady yellow “X”. A road user is to prepare to vacate the lane over
which the signal indication is located because a lane control change is being
made to a steady red “X” signal indication.
   (c)   A steady white two-way left-turn arrow. A road user is permitted to
use a lane over which the signal indication is located for a left turn, but not
for through travel, with the understanding that common use of the lane by
oncoming road users for left turns also is permitted.
   (d)   A steady white one-way left-turn arrow. A road user is permitted to
use a lane over which the signal indication is located for a left turn, without
opposing turns in the same lane, but not for through travel.
   (e)   A steady red “X”. A road user is not permitted to use the lane over
which the signal indication is located and that this signal indication shall
modify accordingly the meaning of other traffic controls present.
(ORC 4511.131)
§ 414.05 PEDESTRIAN CONTROL SIGNALS.
   Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the words “walk” or
“don’t walk”, or the symbol of a walking person or an upraised palm are in
place, these signals shall indicate the following instructions:
   (a)   A steady walking person signal indication, which symbolizes “walk”,
means that a pedestrian facing the signal indication is permitted to start to
cross the roadway in the direction of the signal indication, possibly in
conflict with turning vehicles. The pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to
vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the walking person
signal indication is first shown.
   (b)   A flashing upraised hand signal indication, which symbolizes “don't
walk”, means that a pedestrian shall not start to cross the roadway in the
direction of the signal indication, but that any pedestrian who has already
started to cross on a steady walking person signal indication shall proceed to
the far side of the traveled way of the street or highway, unless otherwise
directed by a traffic control device to proceed only to the median of a divided
highway or only to some other island or pedestrian refuge area.
   (c)   A steady upraised hand signal indication means that a pedestrian shall
not enter the roadway in the direction of the signal indication.
   (d)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to invalidate the continued
use of pedestrian control signals utilizing the word “wait” if those signals
were installed prior to March 28, 1985.
   (e)   A flashing walking person signal indication has no meaning and shall
not be used.
(ORC 4511.14)
§ 414.06 (RESERVED)
§ 414.07 UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS AND SIGNALS, HIDING FROM VIEW, ADVERTISING.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of
any highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device which purports to
be, is an imitation of, or resembles a traffic-control device or railroad sign
or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or hides from
view or interferes with the effectiveness of any traffic-control device or any
railroad sign or signal, and no person shall place or maintain, nor shall any
public authority permit, upon any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing
thereon any commercial advertising. This section does not prohibit either the
erection upon private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful
directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for traffic-
control devices, or the erection upon private property of traffic-control
devices by the owner of real property in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4511.211 and
4511.432.
      (2)   Every prohibited sign, signal, marking, or device is a public
nuisance, and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway may remove the
same or cause it to be removed.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.16)
§ 414.08 ALTERATION, INJURY, REMOVAL OF TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.
   (a)   No person, without lawful authority, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy, or otherwise improperly
tamper with any traffic-control device, any railroad sign or signal, or any
inscription, shield, or insignia on the device, sign, or signal, or any part of
the device, sign, or signal;
      (2)   Knowingly drive upon or over any freshly applied pavement marking
material on the surface of a roadway while the marking material is in an
undried condition, and is marked by flags, markers, signs, or other devices
intended to protect it;
      (3)   Knowingly move, damage, destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper
with a manhole cover.
   (b)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a)(1) or (3) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree. If a violation of division (a)(1) or (3) of this section creates a risk
of physical harm to any person, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If a violation of division (a)(1) or (3) of this section causes
serious physical harm to property that is owned, leased, or controlled by a
State or local authority, the offender is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate State law.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a)(2) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within
one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever
violates division (a)(2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses,
whoever violates division (a)(2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the third degree.
(ORC 4511.17)
§ 414.09 RIGHT TURNS ON RED.
   (a)   No person operating a vehicle shall make a right turn on a red light
at the following intersections in the Village:
      (1)   The southbound intersection at State Route 4 and Grove Road;
      (2)   The eastbound intersection of Grove Road at State Route 4;
      (3)   The southbound intersection at State Route 4 and Riddle Road;
      (4)   The northbound intersection at State Route 4 and State Route 126;
      (5)   The westbound intersection at State Route 126 and State Route 4; or
(Ord. 10-1976, passed 4-13-1976)
      (6)   The northbound intersection of Chester Road at State Route 126.
(Ord. 14-1979, passed 4-10-1979)
   (b)   The Village Administrator is hereby authorized and directed to post
“No Turn on Red Light” signs at the intersections indicated in division (a) of
this section.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(Ord. 10-1976, passed 4-13-1976)
§ 414.10 UNAUTHORIZED POSSESSION OR SALE OF DEVICES.
   (a)   As used in this section, TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE means any sign,
traffic control signal or other device conforming to and placed or erected in
accordance with the manual adopted under Ohio R.C. 4511.09 by authority of a
public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating,
warning or guiding traffic, including signs denoting the names of streets and
highways, but does not mean any pavement marking.
   (b)   No individual shall buy or otherwise possess, or sell, a traffic
control device, except when one of the following applies:
      (1)   In the course of the individual’s employment by the State or a
local authority for the express or implied purpose of manufacturing, providing,
erecting, moving or removing such a traffic control device;
      (2)   In the course of the individual’s employment by any manufacturer of
traffic control devices other than a State or local authority;
      (3)   For the purpose of demonstrating the design and function of a
traffic control device to State or local officials;
      (4)   When the traffic control device has been purchased from the State
or a local authority at a sale of property that is no longer needed or is unfit
for use; or
      (5)   When the traffic control device has been properly purchased from a
manufacturer for use on private property and the person possessing the device
has a sales receipt for the device or other acknowledgment of sale issued by
the manufacturer.
   (c)   This section does not preclude, and shall not be construed as
precluding, prosecution for theft in violation of Ohio R.C. 2913.02, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or for receiving stolen property
in violation of Ohio R.C. 2913.51, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(ORC 4511.18)
§ 414.11 SIGNAL PREEMPTION DEVICES; PROHIBITIONS.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall possess a portable signal preemption device.
      (2)   No person shall use a portable signal preemption device to affect
the operation of a traffic- control device.
   (b)   Division (a)(1) of this section does not apply to any of the following
persons and division (a)(2) of this section does not apply to any of the
following persons when responding to an emergency call:
      (1)   A peace officer, as defined in R.C. § 109.71(A)(1), (A)(12), (A)
(14), or (A)(19);
      (2)   A State highway patrol officer;
      (3)   A person while occupying a public safety vehicle as defined in Ohio
R.C. 4511.01(E)(1), (E)(3), or (E)(4).
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a)(1) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Whoever violates division (a)(2) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (d)   As used in this section, PORTABLE SIGNAL PREEMPTION DEVICE means a
device that, if activated by a person, is capable of changing a traffic-control
signal to green out of sequence.
(ORC 4511.031)
§ 414.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 416: PEDESTRIANS
416.01   Duties of pedestrians and drivers at crosswalks.
416.02   Right-of-way of blind person.
416.03   Right-of-way yielded by pedestrian; crossing roadways.
416.04   Moving in crosswalks.
416.05   Walking on sidewalks and streets.
416.06   Soliciting rides or business; riding on outside of vehicle or in cargo
storage area.
416.07   Passing through bridge signals or railroad barriers.
416.08   Right-of-way of public safety vehicles.
416.09   Right-of-way on sidewalks.
416.10   Intoxication.
416.11   Motorized wheelchair operators.
416.12   Operation of electric personal assistive mobility devices.
416.13   Operation of personal delivery device on sidewalks and crosswalks.
416.14   Low-speed micromobility devices.
416.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar State law
   Pedestrians prohibited on freeways - see TRAF.
412.05
   Obedience to traffic control devices - see TRAF.
414.01
   Pedestrian control signals - see TRAF.
414.05
   Opening doors on side available to traffic - see TRAF.
452.07
§ 416.01 DUTIES OF PEDESTRIANS AND DRIVERS AT CROSSWALKS.
   (a)   When traffic-control signals are not in place, not in operation, or
are not clearly assigning the right-of-way, the driver of a vehicle shall yield
the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, or if
required by Ohio R.C. 4511.132 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the
pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling,
or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the
roadway as to be in danger.
   (b)   No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and
walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close as to constitute an
immediate hazard.
   (c)   Division (a) of this section does not apply under the conditions
stated in Ohio R.C. 4511.48(B), or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (d)   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass the stopped vehicle.
   (e)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (f)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.46)
§ 416.02 RIGHT-OF-WAY OF BLIND PERSON.
   (a)   (1)   As used in this section, BLIND PERSON or BLIND PEDESTRIAN means
a person having not more than 20/200 visual acuity in the better eye with
correcting lenses, or visual acuity greater than 20/200, but with a limitation
in the fields of vision such that the widest diameter of the visual field
subtends an angle no greater than 20 degrees.
      (2)   The driver of every vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to every
blind pedestrian guided by a guide dog, or carrying a cane which is
predominantly white or metallic in color, with or without a red tip.
   (b)   No person, other than a blind person, while on any public highway,
street, alley, or other public thoroughfare, shall carry a white or metallic
cane, with or without a red tip.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.47)
§ 416.03 RIGHT-OF-WAY YIELDED BY PEDESTRIAN; CROSSING ROADWAYS.
   (a)   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield
the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (b)   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel
or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way
to all traffic upon the roadway.
   (c)   Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in
operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a marked
crosswalk.
   (d)   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally unless
authorized by official traffic-control devices; and when authorized to cross
diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with the official
traffic-control devices pertaining to such crossing movements.
   (e)   This section does not relieve the operator of a vehicle from
exercising due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway.
   (f)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.48)
§ 416.04 MOVING IN CROSSWALKS.
   (a)   Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of
crosswalks.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.49)
§ 416.05 WALKING ON SIDEWALKS AND STREETS.
   (a)   Where a sidewalk is provided and its use is practicable, it shall be
unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
   (b)   Where a sidewalk is not available, any pedestrian walking along and
upon a highway shall walk only on a shoulder, as far as practicable from the
edge of the roadway.
   (c)   Where neither a sidewalk nor a shoulder is available, any pedestrian
walking along and upon a highway shall walk as near as practicable to an
outside edge of the roadway, and, if on a two-way roadway, shall walk only on
the left side of the roadway.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in Ohio R.C. 4511.13 and 4511.46, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, any pedestrian upon a roadway
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (e)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.50)
§ 416.06 SOLICITING RIDES OR BUSINESS; RIDING ON OUTSIDE OF VEHICLE OR IN CARGO
STORAGE AREA.
   (a)   No person while on a roadway outside a safety zone shall solicit a
ride from the driver of any vehicle.
   (b)   (1)   Except as provided in division (b)(2) of this section, no person
shall stand on a highway for the purpose of soliciting employment, business, or
contributions from the occupant of any vehicle.
      (2)   The Council, by ordinance, may authorize the issuance of a permit
to a charitable organization to allow a person acting on behalf of the
organization to solicit charitable contributions from the occupant of a vehicle
by standing on a highway, other than a freeway as provided in Ohio R.C.
4511.051(A), that is under the jurisdiction of the Municipality. The permit
shall be valid for only one period of time, which shall be specified in the
permit, in any calendar year. The Council also may specify the locations where
contributions may be solicited and may impose any other restrictions on or
requirements regarding the manner in which the solicitations are to be
conducted that the Council considers advisable.
      (3)   As used in divisions (b)(2) of this section, CHARITABLE
ORGANIZATION means an organization that has received from the Internal Revenue
Service a currently valid ruling or determination letter recognizing the tax-
exempt status of the organization pursuant to IRC 501(c)(3).
   (c)   No person shall hang onto or ride on the outside of any motor vehicle
while it is moving upon a roadway, except mechanics or test engineers making
repairs or adjustments, or workers performing specialized highway or street
maintenance or construction under authority of a public agency.
   (d)   No operator shall knowingly permit any person to hang onto or ride on
the outside of any motor vehicle while it is moving upon a roadway, except
mechanics or test engineers making repairs or adjustments, or workers
performing specialized highway or street maintenance or construction under
authority of a public agency.
   (e)   No driver of a truck, trailer, or semitrailer shall knowingly permit
any person who has not attained the age of 16 years to ride in the unenclosed
or unroofed cargo storage area of the driver’s vehicle if the vehicle is
traveling faster than 25 miles per hour, unless either of the following
applies:
      (1)   The cargo storage area of the vehicle is equipped with a properly
secured seat to which is attached a seat safety belt that is in compliance with
Federal standards for an occupant restraining device as defined in Ohio R.C.
4513.263(A)(2), the seat and seat safety belt were installed at the time the
vehicle was originally assembled, and the person riding in the cargo storage
area is in the seat and is wearing the seat safety belt; or
      (2)   An emergency exists that threatens the life of the driver or the
person being transported in the cargo storage area of the truck, trailer, or
semitrailer.
   (f)   No driver of a truck, trailer, or semitrailer shall permit any person,
except for those workers performing specialized highway or street maintenance
or construction under authority of a public agency, to ride in the cargo
storage area or on a tailgate of the driver’s vehicle while the tailgate is
unlatched.
   (g)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
any provision of divisions (a) to (d) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates any provision of divisions (a) to (d) of this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates any provision of divisions
(a) to (d) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (e) or (f) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4511.51)
§ 416.07 PASSING THROUGH BRIDGE SIGNALS OR RAILROAD BARRIERS.
   (a)   No pedestrian shall enter or remain upon any bridge or approach
thereto beyond the bridge signal, gate, or barrier after a bridge operation
signal indication has been given.
   (b)   No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over, or under any crossing
gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing or bridge while the gate or
barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.511)
§ 416.08 RIGHT-OF-WAY OF PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLES.
   (a)   Upon the immediate approach of a public safety vehicle, as stated in
Ohio R.C. 4511.45 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, every
pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to the public safety vehicle.
   (b)   This section shall not relieve the driver of a public safety vehicle
from the duty to exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.452)
§ 416.09 RIGHT-OF-WAY ON SIDEWALKS.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right- of-way to any
pedestrian on a sidewalk.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.441)
§ 416.10 INTOXICATION.
   (a)   A pedestrian who is under the influence of alcohol, any drug of abuse,
or any combination of them, to a degree that renders the pedestrian a hazard
shall not walk or be upon a highway.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.481)
§ 416.11 MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIR OPERATORS.
   Every person operating a motorized wheelchair shall have all of the rights
and duties applicable to a pedestrian that are contained in this chapter,
except those provisions which by their nature can have no application.
(ORC 4511.491)
§ 416.12 OPERATION OF ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICES.
   (a)   (1)   Electric personal assistive mobility devices may be operated on
the public streets, highways, sidewalks, and paths and portions of roadways set
aside for the exclusive use of bicycles in accordance with this section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, those sections of
this Traffic Code that by their nature are applicable to an electric personal
assistive mobility device apply to the device and the person operating it
whenever it is operated upon any public street, highway, sidewalk, or path or
upon any portion of a roadway set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
      (3)   The Municipality may regulate or prohibit the operation of electric
personal assistive mobility devices on public streets, highways, sidewalks, and
paths, or portions of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles,
under its jurisdiction.
   (b)   No operator of an electric personal assistive mobility device shall do
any of the following:
      (1)   Fail to yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians and human-powered
vehicles at all times;
      (2)   Fail to give an audible signal before overtaking and passing a
pedestrian;
      (3)   Operate the device at night unless the device or its operator is
equipped with or wearing both of the following:
         A.   A lamp pointing to the front that emits a white light visible
from a distance of not less than 500 feet;
         B.   A red reflector facing the rear that is visible from all
distances from 100 feet to 600
feet when directly in front of lawful lower beams of head lamps on a motor
vehicle;
      (4)   Operate the device on any portion of a street or highway that has
an established speed limit of 55 miles per hour or more;
      (5)   Operate the device upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of
pedestrians or other specialized use when an appropriate sign giving notice of
the specialized use is posted on the path;
      (6)   If under 18 years of age, operate the device unless wearing a
protective helmet on the person’s head with the chin strap properly fastened;
      (7)   If under 16 years of age, operate the device unless, during the
operation, the person is under the direct visual and audible supervision of
another person who is 18 years of age or older and is responsible for the
immediate care of the person under 16 years of age.
   (c)   No person who is under 14 years of age shall operate an electric
personal assistive mobility device.
   (d)   No person shall distribute or sell an electric personal assistive
mobility device unless the device is accompanied by a written statement that is
substantially equivalent to the following: “WARNING: TO REDUCE THE RISK OF
SERIOUS INJURY, USE ONLY WHILE WEARING FULL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT – HELMET,
WRIST GUARDS, ELBOW PADS, AND KNEE PADS.”
   (e)   Nothing in this section affects or shall be construed to affect any
rule of the Director of Natural Resources or a board of park district
commissioners governing the operation of vehicles on lands under the control of
the Director or board, as applicable.
   (f)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates division (b) or (c) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor and shall be punished as follows:
         A.   The offender shall be fined ten dollars ($10.00);
         B.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (b) or (c) of this section, or any
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, the court, in
addition to imposing the fine required under division (f)(1)A. of this section,
shall do one of the following:
            1.   Order the impoundment for not less than one day but no more
than 30 days of the electric personal assistive mobility device that was
involved in the current violation of that division. The court shall order the
device to be impounded at a safe indoor location designated by the court and
may assess storage fees of not more than five dollars ($5.00) per day; provided
the total storage, processing, and release fees assessed against the offender
or the device in connection with the device’s impoundment or subsequent release
shall not exceed fifty dollars ($50.00).
            2.   If the court does not issue an impoundment order pursuant to
division (f)(1)B.1. of this section, issue an order prohibiting the offender
from operating any electric personal assistive mobility device on the public
streets, highways, sidewalks, and paths and portions of roadways set aside for
the exclusive use of bicycles for not less than one day but not more than 30
days.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (d) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(ORC 4511.512)
   (g)   As used in this Code, “electric personal assistive mobility device”
means a self-balancing two non-tandem wheeled device that is designed to
transport only one person, has an electric propulsion system of an average of
750 watts, and when ridden on a paved level surface by an operator who weighs
170 pounds has a maximum speed of less than 20 miles per hour.
(ORC 4501.01(TT))
§ 416.13 OPERATION OF PERSONAL DELIVERY DEVICE ON SIDEWALKS AND CROSSWALKS.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   ELIGIBLE ENTITY. A corporation, partnership, association, firm,
sole proprietorship, or other entity engaged in business.
      (2)   PERSONAL DELIVERY DEVICE. An electrically powered device to which
all of the following apply:
         A.   The device is intended primarily to transport property and cargo
on sidewalks and crosswalks.
         B.   The device weighs less than 250 pounds excluding any property or
cargo being carried in the device.
         C.   The device has a maximum speed of ten miles per hour.
         D.   The device is equipped with technology that enables the operation
of the device with active control or monitoring by a person, without active
control or monitoring by a person, or both with or without active control or
monitoring by a person.
      (3)   PERSONAL DELIVERY DEVICE OPERATOR. An agent of an eligible entity
who exercises direct physical control over, or monitoring of, the navigation
and operation of a personal delivery device. The phrase does not include, with
respect to a delivery or other service rendered by a personal delivery device,
the person who requests the delivery or service. The phrase also does not
include a person who only arranges for and dispatches a personal delivery
device for a delivery or other service.
   (b)   An eligible entity may operate a personal delivery device on sidewalks
and crosswalks so long as all of the following requirements are met:
      (1)   The personal delivery device is operated in accordance with all
regulations, if any, established by each local authority within which the
personal delivery device is operated.
      (2)   A personal delivery device operator is actively controlling or
monitoring the navigation and operation of the personal delivery device.
      (3)   The eligible entity maintains an insurance policy that includes
general liability coverage of not less than $100,000 for damages arising from
the operation of the personal delivery device by the eligible entity and any
agent of the eligible entity.
      (4)   The device is equipped with all of the following:
         A.   A marker that clearly identifies the name and contact information
of the eligible entity operating the personal delivery device and a unique
identification number;
         B.   A braking system that enables the personal delivery device to
come to a controlled stop;
         C.   If the personal delivery device is being operated between sunset
and sunrise, a light on both the front and rear of the personal delivery device
that is visible in clear weather from a distance of at least 500 feet to the
front and rear of the personal delivery device when directly in front of low
beams of headlights on a motor vehicle.
   (c)   No personal delivery device operator shall allow a personal delivery
device to do any of the following:
      (1)   Fail to comply with traffic or pedestrian control devices and
signals;
      (2)   Unreasonably interfere with pedestrians or traffic;
      (3)   Transport any hazardous material that would require a permit issued
by the Public Utilities Commission;
      (4)   Operate on a street or highway, except when crossing the street or
highway within a crosswalk.
   (d)   A personal delivery device has all of the rights and obligations
applicable to a pedestrian under the same circumstances, except that a personal
delivery device shall yield the right-of-way to human pedestrians on sidewalks
and crosswalks.
   (e)   (1)   No person shall operate a personal delivery device unless the
person is authorized to do so under this section and complies with the
requirements of this section.
      (2)   An eligible entity is responsible for both of the following:
         A.   Any violation of this section that is committed by a personal
delivery device operator; and
         B.   Any other circumstance, including a technological malfunction, in
which a personal delivery device operates in a manner prohibited by divisions
(c)(1) to (c)(4) of this section.
(R.C. § 4511.513)
§ 416.14 LOW-SPEED MICROMOBILITY DEVICES.
   (a)   (1)   A low-speed micromobility device may be operated on the public
streets, highways, sidewalks, and shared-use paths, and may be operated on any
portions of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles in accordance
with this section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, those sections of
this title that by their nature could apply to a low-speed micromobility device
do apply to the device and the person operating it whenever it is operated upon
any public street, highway, sidewalk, or shared-use path, or upon any portion
of a roadway set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
   (b)   No operator of a low-speed micromobility device shall do any of the
following:
      (1)   Fail to yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians at all times;
      (2)   Fail to give an audible signal before overtaking and passing a
pedestrian;
      (3)   Operate the device at night unless the device or its operator is
equipped with or wearing both of the following:
         A.   A lamp pointing to the front that emits a white light visible
from a distance of not less than 500 feet;
         B.   A red reflector facing the rear that is visible from all
distances from 100 feet to 600 feet when directly in front of lawful lower
beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle.
   (c)   (1)   No person who is under 16 years of age shall rent a low-speed
micromobility device.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly rent a low-speed micromobility device to
a person who is under 16 years of age.
      (3)   No person shall knowingly rent a low-speed micromobility device on
behalf of a person who is under 16 years of age.
   (d)   No person shall operate a low-speed micromobility device at a speed
greater than 20 miles per hour.
   (e)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   Unless a mens rea is otherwise specified in this section, an
offense established under this section is a strict liability offense and R.C. §
2901.20 does not apply. The designation of that offense as a strict liability
offense shall not be construed to imply that any other offense, for which there
is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict liability offense.
   (f)   Notwithstanding division (a)(1) of this section, the municipality,
county, township, metropolitan park district, township park district,
recreation district, or any division of the Ohio Department of Natural
Resources if the division has the approval of the Ohio Director of Natural
Resources may do any of the following:
      (1)   Regulate or prohibit the operation of low-speed micromobility
devices on public streets, highways, sidewalks, and shared-use paths, and
portions of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, under its
jurisdiction;
      (2)   Include low-speed micromobility devices that are adapted to expand
access for people with various physical limitations into a shared bicycle,
shared electric bicycle, or similar vehicle sharing program, under its
jurisdiction;
      (3)   Require the owner or operator of a low-speed micromobility device
rental service or low-speed micromobility device sharing program to maintain
commercial general liability insurance related to the operation of the devices,
with limits of up to $1,000,000 per occurrence and $2,000,000 per aggregate.
(R.C. § 4511.514)
§ 416.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
TITLE SIX: OPERATION AND VEHICLES
CHAPTER 432: OPERATION GENERALLY
432.01   Driving upon right side of roadway; exceptions.
432.02   Passing to right when proceeding in opposite directions.
432.03   Overtaking, passing to left; driver’s duties.
432.04   Overtaking, passing to right of vehicle.
432.05   Overtaking, passing to left of centerline.
432.06   Driving upon left side of roadway.
432.07   Hazardous or no passing zones.
432.08   Driving within lanes or continuous lines of traffic.
432.09   Following too closely.
432.10   Turning at intersections.
432.11   “U” turns restricted.
432.12   Starting and backing vehicles.
432.13   Signals before changing course, turning or stopping.
432.14   Hand and arm signals.
432.15   Right-of-way at intersections.
432.155   Intersections at which traffic control signals fail or malfunction.
432.16   Right-of-way when turning left.
432.17   Operation of vehicle at stop and yield signs.
432.18   Emergency or public safety vehicles at stop signals or signs.
432.19   Right-of-way of public safety or coroner’s vehicle.
432.195   Driving while approaching stationary public safety vehicle and
certain other vehicles with flashing lights.
432.20   Right-of-way at private driveway, alley or building.
432.205   Stop signs on private roads and driveways.
432.21   Right-of-way of funeral procession.
432.22   Driving upon sidewalks, tree lawns or curbs.
432.23   Driver’s view and control to be unobstructed by load or persons.
432.24   Driving upon street posted as closed for repair.
432.25   Following and parking near emergency or safety vehicles.
432.26   Driving over fire hose.
432.27   Driving through safety zone.
432.28   One-way streets and rotary traffic islands.
432.29   Driving upon divided roadways.
432.30   Stopping for school bus; actuating visual signals; discharging
children.
432.31   Driving across grade crossings.
432.32   Stopping at grade crossings.
432.33   Slow-moving vehicles or equipment at grade crossings.
432.34   Obstructing intersections, crosswalks or grade crossings.
432.35   “Peeling”; cracking exhaust noises.
432.36   Shortcutting across private property.
432.37   Entering and exiting controlled-access highway.
432.38   Weaving; full time and attention.
432.39   Operation on paths set aside for bicycles.
432.40   Littering from motor vehicles.
432.41   Use of earphones while driving.
432.42   Texting while driving prohibited.
432.43   Use of electronic wireless communication devices by minors or
probationary drivers while driving prohibited.
432.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar State law
   Obedience to traffic control devices - see TRAF.
414.01
   Yielding right-of-way to pedestrians on sidewalks - see TRAF.
416.09
   Operation of bicycles and motorcycles generally - see TRAF.
474.01 et seq.
   Operation of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles and all-purpose vehicles -
see TRAF.
476.03,
476.04
§ 432.01 DRIVING UPON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY; EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven upon
the right half of the roadway, except as follows:
      (1)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction, or when making a left turn under the rules governing such movements;
      (2)   When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive to the left
of the center of the highway; provided, any person so doing shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon the
unobstructed portion of the highway within such distance as to constitute an
immediate hazard;
      (3)   When driving upon a roadway divided into three or more marked lanes
for traffic under the rules applicable thereon;
      (4)   When driving upon a roadway designated and posted with signs for
one-way traffic;
      (5)   When otherwise directed by a police officer or traffic-control
device.
   (b)   (1)   Upon all roadways any vehicle proceeding at less than the
prevailing and lawful speed of traffic at the time and place and under the
conditions then existing shall be driven in the right- hand lane then available
for traffic, and far enough to the right to allow passing by faster vehicles if
such passing is safe and reasonable, except under any of the following
circumstances:
         A.   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction;
         B.   When preparing for a left turn;
         C.   When the driver must necessarily drive in a lane other than the
right-hand lane to continue on the driver’s intended route.
      (2)   Nothing in division (b)(1) of this section requires a driver of a
slower vehicle to compromise the driver’s safety to allow overtaking by a
faster vehicle.
   (c)   Upon any roadway having four or more lanes for moving traffic and
providing for two-way movement of traffic, no vehicle shall be driven to the
left of the center line of the roadway, except when authorized by official
traffic-control devices designating certain lanes to the left of the center of
the roadway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to use the lanes, or
except as permitted under division (a)(2) of this section. This division shall
not be construed as prohibiting the crossing of the center line in making a
left turn into or from an alley, private road, or driveway.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (e)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.25)
§ 432.02 PASSING TO RIGHT WHEN PROCEEDING IN OPPOSITE DIRECTIONS.
   (a)   Operators of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass
each other to the right, and upon roadways having width for not more than one
line of traffic in each direction, each operator shall give to the other one-
half of the main traveled portion of the roadway or as nearly one-half as is
reasonably possible.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.26)
§ 432.03 OVERTAKING, PASSING TO LEFT; DRIVER’S DUTIES.
   (a)   The following rules govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles
proceeding in the same direction:
      (1)   The operator of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in
the same direction shall, except as provided in division (a)(3) of this
section, signal to the vehicle to be overtaken, shall pass to the left thereof
at a safe distance, and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway
until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle. When a motor vehicle over-takes
and passes a bicycle or electric bicycle, three feet or greater is considered a
safe passing distance.
      (2)   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
operator of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle at the latter’s audible signal, and the operator shall not
increase the speed of the operator’s vehicle until completely passed by the
overtaking vehicle.
      (3)   The operator of a vehicle overtaking and passing another vehicle
proceeding in the same direction on a divided highway as defined in Ohio R.C.
4511.35, a limited access highway as defined in Ohio R.C. 5511.02, or a highway
with four or more traffic lanes is not required to signal audibly to the
vehicle being overtaken and passed.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.27)
§ 432.04 OVERTAKING, PASSING TO RIGHT OF VEHICLE.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass on the right of another
vehicle only under the following conditions:
      (1)   When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn;
or
      (2)   Upon a roadway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for
two or more lines of vehicles moving lawfully in the direction being traveled
by the overtaking vehicle.
   (b)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle only
under conditions permitting the movement in safety. The movement shall not be
made by driving off the roadway.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.28)
§ 432.05 OVERTAKING, PASSING TO LEFT OF CENTERLINE.
   (a)   No vehicle shall be driven to the left of the center of the roadway in
overtaking and passing traffic proceeding in the same direction, unless the
left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient
distance ahead to permit the overtaking and passing to be completely made
without interfering with the safe operation of any traffic approaching from the
opposite direction or any traffic overtaken. In every event, the overtaking
vehicle must return to an authorized lane of travel as soon as practicable, and
in the event the passing movement involves the use of a lane authorized for the
traffic approaching from the opposite direction, before coming within 200 feet
of any approaching vehicle.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.29)
§ 432.06 DRIVING UPON LEFT SIDE OF ROADWAY.
   (a)   No vehicle shall be driven upon the left side of the roadway under the
following conditions:
      (1)   When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the
highway, where the operator’s view is obstructed within such a distance as to
create a hazard in the event traffic might approach from the opposite
direction;
      (2)   When the view is obstructed upon approaching within 100 feet of any
bridge, viaduct, or tunnel; or
      (3)   When approaching within 100 feet of or traversing any intersection
or railroad grade crossing.
   (b)   This section does not apply to vehicles upon a one-way roadway, upon a
roadway where traffic is lawfully directed to be driven to the left side, or
under the conditions described in Ohio R.C. 4511.25(A)(2) or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.30)
§ 432.07 HAZARDOUS OR NO PASSING ZONES.
   (a)   The Department of Transportation may determine those portions of any
State highway where overtaking and passing other traffic or driving to the left
of the center or center line of the roadway would be especially hazardous, and
may, by appropriate signs or markings on the highway, indicate the beginning
and end of such zones. When signs or markings are in place and clearly visible,
every operator of a vehicle shall obey the directions of the signs or markings,
notwithstanding the distances set out in Ohio R.C. 4511.30.
   (b)   Division (a) of this section does not apply when all of the following
apply:
      (1)   The slower vehicle is proceeding at less than half the speed of the
speed limit applicable to that location.
      (2)   The faster vehicle is capable of overtaking and passing the slower
vehicle without exceeding the speed limit.
      (3)   There is sufficient clear sight distance to the left of the center
or center line of the roadway to meet the overtaking and passing provisions of
Ohio R.C. 4511.29, considering the speed of the slower vehicle.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.31)
§ 432.08 DRIVING WITHIN LANES OR CONTINUOUS LINES OF TRAFFIC.
   (a)   Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked
lanes for traffic, or wherever within the Municipality traffic is lawfully
moving in two or more substantially continuous lines in the same direction, the
following rules apply:
      (1)   A vehicle shall be driven, as nearly as is practicable, entirely
within a single lane or line of traffic and shall not be moved from the lane or
line until the driver has first ascertained that the movement can be made with
safety.
      (2)   Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes and provides for
the two-way movement of traffic, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center
lane, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle where the roadway is
clearly visible and the center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance,
or when preparing for a left turn, or where the center lane is at the time
allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction the vehicle is
proceeding, and is posted with signs to give notice of such allocation.
      (3)   Official signs may be erected directing specified traffic to use a
designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a
particular direction, regardless of the center of the roadway, or restricting
the use of a particular lane to only buses during certain hours or during all
hours, and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of such signs.
      (4)   Official traffic-control devices may be installed prohibiting the
changing of lanes on sections of roadway, and drivers of vehicles shall obey
the directions of every such device.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.33)
§ 432.09 FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY.
   (a)   (1)   The operator of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle
more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of
the vehicle and the traffic upon and the condition of the highway.
      (2)   The driver of any truck, or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle,
when traveling upon a roadway outside a business or residence district, shall
maintain a sufficient space, whenever conditions permit, between the vehicle
and another vehicle ahead so an overtaking motor vehicle may enter and occupy
the space without danger. This division (a) does not prevent overtaking and
passing nor does it apply to any lane specially designated for use by trucks.
      (3)   Motor vehicles being driven upon any roadway outside of a business
or residence district in a caravan or motorcade shall maintain a sufficient
space between the vehicles so an overtaking vehicle may enter and occupy the
space without danger. This division shall not apply to funeral processions.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.34)
§ 432.10 TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall be
governed by the following rules:
      (1)   Approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close
as practicable to the right- hand curb or edge of the roadway.
      (2)   At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both
directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left
turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the
center line thereof and by passing to the right of the center line where it
enters the intersection, and, after entering the intersection, the left turn
shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the center line
of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable, the left turn shall be made
in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the
intersection.
      (3)   At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on
one or more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at
any such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand
lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of the
vehicle, and, after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so
as to leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the left hand lane
of the roadway being entered lawfully available to traffic moving in that lane.
   (b)   The Department of Transportation and local authorities may cause
markers, buttons, or signs to be placed within or adjacent to intersections,
and thereby require and direct that a different course from that specified in
this section be traveled by vehicles turning at an intersection, and when
markers, buttons, or signs are so placed, no operator of a vehicle shall turn
the vehicle at an intersection other than as directed and required by the
markers, buttons, or signs.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.36)
§ 432.11 “U” TURNS RESTRICTED.
   (a)   Except as provided in R.C. § 4511.13 and division (b) of this section,
no vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any
curve, or upon the approach to or near the crest of a grade, if such vehicle
cannot be seen within 500 feet by the driver of any other vehicle approaching
from either direction.
   (b)   The driver of an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle, when
responding to an emergency call, may turn the vehicle so as to proceed in the
opposite direction. This division applies only when the emergency vehicle or
public safety vehicle is responding to an emergency call, is equipped with and
displaying at least one flashing, rotating, or oscillating light visible under
normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the
vehicle, and when the driver of the vehicle is giving an audible signal by
siren, exhaust whistle, or bell. This division does not relieve the driver of
an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.37)
   (e)   Except as provided in division (b) of this section, no vehicle shall
be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction within an intersection, or
upon any street in a business district, or upon a freeway, expressway or
controlled-access highway, or where authorized signs are erected to prohibit
such movement, or at any other location unless such movement can be made with
reasonable safety to other users of the public way and without interfering with
the safe operation of any traffic that may be affected by such movement.
§ 432.12 STARTING AND BACKING VEHICLES.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing, or
parked until the movement can be made with reasonable safety.
      (2)   Before backing, operators of vehicles shall give ample warning, and
while backing they shall exercise vigilance not to injure person or property on
the street or highway.
      (3)   No person shall back a motor vehicle on a freeway, except:
         A.   In a rest area;
         B.   In the performance of public works or official duties; and
         C.   As a result of an emergency caused by an accident or breakdown of
a motor vehicle.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.38)
§ 432.13 SIGNALS BEFORE CHANGING COURSE, TURNING OR STOPPING.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall turn a vehicle or move right or left upon a
highway unless and until the person has exercised due care to ascertain that
the movement can be made with reasonable safety, nor without giving an
appropriate signal in the manner hereinafter provided.
      (2)   When required, a signal of intention to turn or move right or left
shall be given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by
the vehicle before turning, except that in the case of a person operating a
bicycle or electric bicycle, the signal shall be made not less than one time
but is not required to be continuous. A bicycle or electric bicycle operator is
not required to make a signal if the bicycle is in a designated turn lane, and
a signal shall not be given when the operator’s hands are needed for the safe
operation of the bicycle or electric bicycle.
      (3)   No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle
without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein to the
driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear, when there is opportunity to
give a signal.
      (4)   Any stop or turn signal required by this section shall be given
either by means of the hand and arm, or by signal lights that clearly indicate
to both approaching and following traffic the intention to turn or move right
or left, except that any motor vehicle in use on a highway shall be equipped
with, and the required signal shall be given by, signal lights when the
distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the left outside
limit of the body, cab or load of such motor vehicle exceeds 24 inches, or when
the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the rear limit
of the body or load thereof exceeds 14 feet, whether a single vehicle or a
combination of vehicles.
      (5)   The signal lights required by this section shall not be flashed on
one side only on a disabled vehicle, flashed as a courtesy or “do pass” signal
to operators of other vehicles approaching from the rear, nor be flashed on one
side only of a parked vehicle except as may be necessary for compliance with
this section.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.39)
§ 432.14 HAND AND ARM SIGNALS.
   (a)   Except as provided in division (b) of this section, all signals
required by the provisions of this Traffic Code, when given by hand and arm,
shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner, and
the signals shall indicate as follows:
      (1)   Left turn, hand and arm extended horizontally;
      (2)   Right turn, hand and arm extended upward;
      (3)   Stop or decrease speed, hand and arm extended downward.
   (b)   As an alternative to division (a)(2) of this section, a person
operating a bicycle or electric bicycle may give a right turn signal by
extending the right hand and arm horizontally and to the right side of the
bicycle or electric bicycle.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.40)
§ 432.15 RIGHT-OF-WAY AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (a)   When two vehicles approach or enter an intersection from different
streets or highways at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle
on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right.
   (b)   The right-of-way rule declared in division (a) of this section is
modified at through highways and otherwise as stated in this Traffic Code or
Ohio R.C. Chapter 4511.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.41)
§ 432.155 INTERSECTIONS AT WHICH TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNALS FAIL OR MALFUNCTION.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle who approaches an intersection where traffic
is controlled by traffic control signals shall do all of the following if the
signal facing the driver exhibits no colored lights or colored lighted arrows,
exhibits a combination of such lights or arrows that fails to clearly indicate
the assignment of right-of- way, or, if the vehicle is a bicycle or an electric
bicycle, the signals are otherwise malfunctioning due to the failure of a
vehicle detector to detect the presence of the bicycle or electric bicycle:
      (1)   Stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, stop before
entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, if none, stop
before entering the intersection;
      (2)   Yield the right-of-way to all vehicles in the intersection or
approaching on an intersecting road, if the vehicles will constitute an
immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the
intersection or junction of roadways;
      (3)   Exercise ordinary care while proceeding through the intersection.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.132)
§ 432.16 RIGHT-OF-WAY WHEN TURNING LEFT.
   (a)   The operator of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within an
intersection or into an alley, private road, or driveway shall yield the right-
of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within
the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.42)
§ 432.17 OPERATION OF VEHICLE AT STOP AND YIELD SIGNS.
   (a)   Except when directed to proceed by a law enforcement officer, every
driver of a vehicle approaching a stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked stop
line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection, or, if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway
where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway
before entering it. After having stopped, the driver shall yield the right-of-
way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another roadway so
closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time the driver is
moving across or within the intersection or junction of roadways.
   (b)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall slow down to a
speed reasonable for the existing conditions, and if required for safety to
stop, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering
the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none, then at the
point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering it. After
slowing, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the
intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute an
immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the
intersection or junction of roadways. Whenever a driver is involved in a
collision with a vehicle in the intersection or junction of roadways, after
driving past a yield sign without stopping, the collision shall be prima facie
evidence of the driver’s failure to yield the right-of- way.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.43)
§ 432.18 EMERGENCY OR PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLES AT STOP SIGNALS OR SIGNS.
   (a)   The driver of any emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle, when
responding to an emergency call, upon approaching a red or stop signal or any
stop sign, shall slow down as necessary for safety to traffic, but may proceed
cautiously past the red or stop sign or signal with due regard for the safety
of all persons using the street or highway.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.03)
§ 432.19 RIGHT-OF-WAY OF PUBLIC SAFETY OR CORONER’S VEHICLE.
   (a)   Upon the approach of a public safety vehicle or coroner’s vehicle,
equipped with at least one flashing, rotating, or oscillating light visible
under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of
the vehicle, and the driver is giving an audible signal by siren, exhaust
whistle, or bell, no driver of any other vehicle shall fail to yield the right-
of-way, immediately drive, if practical, to a position parallel to, and as
close as possible to, the right edge or curb of the highway clear of any
intersection, and stop and remain in that position until the public safety
vehicle or coroner’s vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a
police officer.
   (b)   This section does not relieve the driver of a public safety vehicle or
coroner’s vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons and property upon the highway.
   (c)   This section applies to a coroner’s vehicle only when the vehicle is
operated in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4513.171, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance. As used in this section, “coroner’s vehicle” means a
vehicle used by a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s investigator that is
equipped with a flashing, oscillating or rotating red or blue light and a
siren, exhaust whistle or bell capable of giving an audible signal.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division or division (e), whoever
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a
first offense. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been
convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(R.C. § 4511.45)
   (e)   (1)   When the failure of a motor vehicle operator to yield the right-
of-way to a public safety vehicle as required by division (a) of this section
impedes the ability of the public safety vehicle to respond to an emergency,
any emergency personnel in the public safety vehicle may report the license
plate number and a general description of the vehicle and the operator of the
vehicle to the law enforcement agency exercising jurisdiction over the area
where the alleged violation occurred.
      (2)   A.   Upon receipt of a report under division (e)(1) of this
section, the law enforcement agency may conduct an investigation to attempt to
determine or confirm the identity of the operator of the vehicle at the time of
the alleged violation.
         B.   If the identity of the operator at the time of an alleged
violation of division (a) of this section is established, the law enforcement
agency has probable cause to issue either a written warning or a citation for
that violation, and the agency shall issue a written warning or a citation to
the operator.
         C.   If the identity of the operator of the vehicle at the time of the
alleged violation cannot be established, the law enforcement agency may issue a
written warning to the person who owned the vehicle at the time of the alleged
violation. However, in the case of a leased or rented vehicle, the law
enforcement agency shall issue the written warning to the person who leased or
rented the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation.
      (3)   A.   Whoever violates division (a) of this section based on a
report filed under division (e)(1) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined $150.
         B.   If a person who is issued a citation for a violation of division
(a) of this section based on a report filed under division (e)(1) of this
section does not enter a written plea of guilty and does not waive the person’s
right to contest the citation but instead appears in person in the proper court
to answer the charge, the trier of fact cannot find beyond a reasonable doubt
that the person committed that violation unless the emergency personnel who
filed the report appears in person in the court and testifies.
      (4)   As used in this division (e):
         A.   “License plate.” Includes any temporary motor vehicle license
registration issued under R.C. § 4503.182 or similar law of another
jurisdiction.
         B.   “Public safety vehicle.” Does not include an unmarked public
safety vehicle or a vehicle used by a public law enforcement officer or other
person sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state or a vehicle
used by the motor carrier enforcement unit for the enforcement of orders and
rules of the public utilities commission.
(R.C. § 4511.454)
§ 432.195 DRIVING WHILE APPROACHING STATIONARY PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE AND
CERTAIN OTHER VEHICLES WITH FLASHING LIGHTS.
   (a)   The driver of a motor vehicle, upon approaching a stationary public
safety vehicle, emergency vehicle, road service vehicle, waste collection
vehicle, vehicle used by the Public Utilities Commission to conduct motor
vehicle inspections in accordance with R.C. §§ 4923.04 and 4923.06, or a
highway maintenance vehicle that is displaying the appropriate visual signals
by means of flashing, oscillating, or rotating lights, as prescribed in R.C. §
4513.17, shall do either of the following:
      (1)   If the driver of the motor vehicle is traveling on a highway that
consists of at least two lanes that carry traffic in the same direction of
travel as that of the driver’s motor vehicle, the driver shall proceed with due
caution and, if possible and with due regard to the road, weather and traffic
conditions, shall change lanes into a lane this is not adjacent to that of the
stationary public safety vehicle, emergency vehicle, road service vehicle,
waste collection vehicle, vehicle used by the Public Utilities Commission to
conduct motor vehicle inspections in accordance with R.C. §§ 4923.04 and
4923.06, or a highway maintenance vehicle.
      (2)   If the driver is not traveling on a highway of a type described in
division (a)(1) of this section, or if the driver is traveling on a highway of
that type but it is not possible to change lanes or if to do so would be
unsafe, the driver shall proceed with due caution, reduce the speed of the
motor vehicle, and maintain a safe speed for the road, weather and traffic
conditions.
   (b)   This section does not relieve the driver of a public safety vehicle,
emergency vehicle, road service vehicle, waste collection vehicle, vehicle used
by the Public Utilities Commission to conduct motor vehicle inspections in
accordance with R.C. §§ 4923.04 and 4923.06, or a highway maintenance vehicle
from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons and
property upon the highway.
   (c)   No person shall fail to drive a motor vehicle in compliance with
divisions (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section when so required by division (a) of
this section.
   (d)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Notwithstanding §
698.02 or R.C. § 2929.28, upon a finding that a person operated a motor vehicle
in violation of division (c) of this section, the court, in addition to all
other penalties provided by law, shall impose a fine of two times the usual
amount imposed for the violation.
      (3)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
   (e)   The offense established under this section is a strict liability
offense and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of this offense as a
strict liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other
offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict
liability offense.
(R.C. § 4511.213)
§ 432.20 RIGHT-OF-WAY AT PRIVATE DRIVEWAY, ALLEY OR BUILDING.
   (a)   (1)   The operator of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from
any place other than another roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all
traffic approaching on the roadway to be entered or crossed.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (3)   If the offender violates division (a) of this section while
distracted and the distracting activity is a contributing factor to the
commission of the offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine
established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.44)
   (b)   (1)   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, building,
private road, or driveway within a business or residence district shall stop
the vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk
area extending across the alley, building entrance, road, or driveway, or in
the event there is no sidewalk area, shall stop at the point nearest the street
to be entered where the driver has a view of approaching traffic thereon.
(R.C. § 4511.431(A))
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (b) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
division (b) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates
division (b) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender violates division (b) of this section while distracted
and the distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.431(B))
   (d)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn into a private road or
driveway, alley or building from a public street or highway shall be governed
by the following rules:
      (1)   Approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close
as practicable to the right- hand curb or edge of the roadway.
      (2)   Upon a roadway where traffic is proceeding in opposite directions,
approach for a left turn and a left turn shall be made from that portion of the
right half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof.
      (3)   Upon a roadway where traffic is restricted to one direction,
approach for a left turn and a left turn shall be made as close as practicable
to the left-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
   (e)   It shall be the duty of the driver of any vehicle entering a private
road or driveway, alley or building to yield the right-of-way to pedestrians
lawfully using the sidewalk or sidewalk area extending across the private road
or driveway, alley or building.
§ 432.205 STOP SIGNS ON PRIVATE ROADS AND DRIVEWAYS.
   (a)   The owner of a private road or driveway located in a private
residential area containing 20 or more dwelling units may erect stop signs at
places where the road or driveway intersects with another private road or
driveway in the residential area, in compliance with all of the following
requirements:
      (1)   The stop sign is sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily
observant person and meets the specifications of and is placed in accordance
with the manual adopted by the Department of Transportation pursuant to Ohio
R.C. 4511.09.
      (2)   The owner has posted a sign at the entrance of the private road or
driveway that is in plain view and clearly informs persons entering the road or
driveway that they are entering private property, stop signs have been posted
and must be obeyed, and the signs are enforceable by law enforcement officers
under State law. The sign required by this division, where appropriate, may be
incorporated with the sign required by Ohio R.C. 4511.211(A)(2), or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (b)   Ohio R.C. 4511.43(A) and Ohio R.C. 4511.46, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, shall be deemed to apply to the driver of a
vehicle on a private road or driveway where a stop sign is placed in accordance
with division (a) of this section and to a pedestrian crossing such a road or
driveway at an intersection where a stop sign is in place.
   (c)   When a stop sign is placed in accordance with division (a) of this
section, any law enforcement officer may apprehend a person found violating the
stop sign and may stop and charge the person with violating the stop sign.
   (d)   As used in this section, and for the purpose of applying Ohio R.C.
4511.43(A) and Ohio R.C. 4511.46, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, to conduct under this section:
      (1)   INTERSECTION.
         A.   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the
roadways of two private roads or driveways which join one another at, or
approximately at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling
upon different private roads or driveways joining at any other angle may come
in conflict.
         B.   Where a private road or driveway includes two roadways 30 feet or
more apart, then every crossing of two roadways of such private roads or
driveways shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
      (2)   OWNER AND PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL AREA CONTAINING 20 OR MORE DWELLING
UNITS. The same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 4511.211.
      (3)   ROADWAY. The portion of a private road or driveway improved,
designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, except the berm or shoulder.
If a private road or driveway includes two or more separate roadways, the term
ROADWAY means any such roadway separately but not all such roadways
collectively.
   (e)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.432)
§ 432.21 RIGHT-OF-WAY OF FUNERAL PROCESSION.
   (a)   As used in this section, FUNERAL PROCESSION means two or more vehicles
accompanying the cremated remains or the body of a deceased person in the
daytime when each of the vehicles has its headlights lighted and is displaying
a purple and white or an orange and white pennant attached to each vehicle in
such a manner as to be clearly visible to traffic approaching from any
direction.
   (b)   Excepting public safety vehicles proceeding in accordance with Ohio
R.C. 4511.45 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or when
directed otherwise by a police officer, pedestrians and the operators of all
vehicles shall yield the right-of- way to each vehicle that is a part of a
funeral procession. Whenever the lead vehicle in a funeral procession lawfully
enters an intersection, the remainder of the vehicles in the procession may
continue to follow the lead vehicle through the intersection, notwithstanding
any traffic-control devices or right-of-way provisions of the Revised Code,
provided that the operator of each vehicle exercises due care to avoid
colliding with any other vehicle or pedestrian.
   (c)   No person shall operate any vehicle as a part of a funeral procession
without having the headlights of the vehicle lighted and without displaying a
purple and white or an orange and white pennant in such a manner as to be
clearly visible to traffic approaching from any direction.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (e)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.451)
§ 432.22 DRIVING UPON SIDEWALKS, TREE LAWNS OR CURBS.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall drive any vehicle, other than a bicycle or an
electric bicycle if the motor is not engaged, upon a sidewalk or sidewalk area,
except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary driveway.
      (2)   This prohibition does not apply to a law enforcement officer, or
other person sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state, using
an electric bicycle with the motor engaged while in the performance of the
officer’s duties.
      (3)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting local
authorities from regulating the operation of bicycles or electric bicycles,
except that no local authority may require that bicycles or electric bicycles
be operated on sidewalks.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.171)
   (d)   No person shall drive a vehicle on a tree lawn area or the curb of a
street, except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary driveway or when
otherwise lawfully authorized.
§ 432.23 DRIVER’S VIEW AND CONTROL TO BE UNOBSTRUCTED BY LOAD OR PERSONS.
   (a)   No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there
are in the front seat such number of persons, as to obstruct the view of the
driver to the front or sides of the vehicle, or to interfere with the driver’s
control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (b)   No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in a position as to interfere
with the driver’s view ahead or to the sides, or to interfere with the driver’s
control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (c)   No person shall open the door of a vehicle on the side available to
moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, and can be done
without interfering with the movement of other traffic, nor shall any person
leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic for a
period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.70)
§ 432.24 DRIVING UPON STREET POSTED AS CLOSED FOR REPAIR.
   (a)   No person shall drive upon, along or across a street or highway, or
any part of a street or highway that has been closed in the process of its
construction, reconstruction or repair, and posted with appropriate signs by
the authority having jurisdiction to close the highway.
(R.C. § 4511.71(A))
   (b)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle on or onto a public street or
highway that is temporarily covered by a rise in water level, including
groundwater or an overflow of water, and that is clearly marked by a sign that
specifies that the road is closed due to the rise in water level and that any
person who uses the closed portion of the road may be fined up to $2,000.
      (2)   A person who is issued a citation for a violation of division (B)
(1) of this section is not permitted to enter a written plea of guilty and
waive the person’s right to contest the citation in court, but instead must
appear in person in the proper court to answer the charge.
(R.C. § 4511.714(A), (B))
   (c)   (1)   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If,
within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever
violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been
convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever
violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
         B.   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.71(B))
      (2)   A.   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
         B.   In addition to the financial sanctions authorized or required
under R.C. § 2929.28 and to any costs otherwise authorized or required under
any provision of law, the court imposing the sentence upon an offender who is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of division (b) of this section
shall order the offender to reimburse one or more rescuers for the cost any
such rescuer incurred in rescuing the person, excluding any cost of
transporting the rescued person to a hospital or other facility for treatment
of injuries, up to a cumulative maximum of $2,000. If more than one rescuer was
involved in the emergency response, the court shall allocate the reimbursement
proportionately, according to the cost each rescuer incurred. A financial
sanction imposed under this section is a judgment in favor of the rescuer and,
subject to a determination of indigency under R.C. § 2929.28(B), a rescuer may
collect the financial sanction in the same manner as provided in R.C. §
2929.28.
(R.C. § 4511.714(C))
   (d)   As used in this section:
      (1)   EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE ORGANIZATION. Has the same meanings as in
R.C. § 9.60.
      (2)   FIREFIGHTING AGENCY. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 9.60.
      (3)   PRIVATE FIRE COMPANY. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 9.60.
      (4)   RESCUER. Means a state agency, political subdivision, firefighting
agency, private fire company, or emergency medical service organization.
(R.C. § 4511.714(D))
§ 432.25 FOLLOWING AND PARKING NEAR EMERGENCY OR SAFETY VEHICLES.
   (a)   The driver of any vehicle, other than an emergency vehicle or public
safety vehicle on official business, shall not follow any emergency vehicle or
public safety vehicle traveling in response to an alarm closer than 500 feet,
or drive into or park the vehicle within the block where the fire apparatus has
stopped in answer to a fire alarm, unless directed to do so by a police officer
or a firefighter.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.72)
§ 432.26 DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE.
   (a)   No vehicle shall, without the consent of the fire department official
in command, be driven over any unprotected hose of a fire department that is
laid down on any street or private driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of
fire.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.73)
§ 432.27 DRIVING THROUGH SAFETY ZONE.
   (a)   No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety
zone.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.60)
§ 432.28 ONE-WAY STREETS AND ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS.
   (a)   (1)   Upon a roadway designated and posted with signs for one-way
traffic, a vehicle shall be driven only in the direction designated.
      (2)   A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven
only to the right of the rotary traffic island.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.32)
§ 432.29 DRIVING UPON DIVIDED ROADWAYS.
   (a)   Whenever any highway has been divided into two roadways by an
intervening space, or by a physical barrier, or a clearly indicated dividing
section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle shall be
driven only upon the right-hand roadway, and no vehicle shall be driven over,
across, or within any dividing space, barrier, or section, except through an
opening, crossover, or intersection established by public authority. This
section does not prohibit the occupancy of the dividing space, barrier, or
section for the purpose of an emergency stop, or in compliance with an order of
a police officer.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.35)
§ 432.30 STOPPING FOR SCHOOL BUS; ACTUATING VISUAL SIGNALS; DISCHARGING
CHILDREN.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle, upon meeting or overtaking from either
direction any school bus stopped for the purpose of receiving or discharging
any school child, person attending programs offered by community boards of
mental health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or child
attending a program offered by a head start agency, shall stop at least ten
feet from the front or rear of the school bus and shall not proceed until such
school bus resumes motion, or until signaled by the school bus driver to
proceed. It is no defense to a charge under this division that the school bus
involved failed to display or be equipped with an automatically extended stop
warning sign as required by division (b) of this section.
   (b)   Every school bus shall be equipped with amber and red visual signals
meeting the requirements of R.C. § 4511.771 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, and an automatically extended stop warning sign of a type
approved by the Ohio Department of Education and Workforce, which shall be
actuated by the driver of the bus whenever but only whenever the bus is stopped
or stopping on the roadway for the purpose of receiving or discharging school
children, persons attending programs offered by community boards of mental
health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or children attending
programs offered by head start agencies. A school bus driver shall not actuate
the visual signals or the stop warning sign in designated school bus loading
areas where the bus is entirely off the roadway or at school buildings when
children or persons attending programs offered by community boards of mental
health and county boards of developmental disabilities are loading or unloading
at curbside or at buildings when children attending programs offered by head
start agencies are loading or unloading at curbside. The visual signals and
stop warning sign shall be synchronized or otherwise operated as required by
the Ohio Administrative Code.
   (c)   Where a highway has been divided into four or more traffic lanes, a
driver of a vehicle need not stop for a school bus approaching from the
opposite direction which has stopped for the purpose of receiving or
discharging any school child, persons attending programs offered by community
boards of mental health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or
children attending programs offered by head start agencies. The driver of any
vehicle overtaking the school bus shall comply with division (a) above.
   (d)   School buses operating on divided highways or on highways with four or
more traffic lanes shall receive and discharge all school children, persons
attending programs offered by community boards of mental health and county
boards of developmental disabilities, and children attending programs offered
by head start agencies on their residence side of the highway.
   (e)   No school bus driver shall start the driver’s bus until after any
child, person attending programs offered by community boards of mental health
and county boards of developmental disabilities, or child attending a program
offered by a head start agency who may have alighted therefrom has reached a
place of safety on the child’s or person’s residence side of the road.
   (f)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section may be fined an
amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). A person who is issued a
citation for a violation of division (a) of this section is not permitted to
enter a written plea of guilty and waive the person’s right to contest the
citation in a trial but instead must appear in person in the proper court to
answer the charge.
      (2)   In addition to and independent of any other penalty provided by
law, the court or Mayor may impose upon an offender who violates this section a
class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(7). When a
license is suspended under this section, the court or Mayor shall cause the
offender to deliver the license to the court, and the court or Clerk of the
Court immediately shall forward the license to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles,
together with notice of the court’s action.
   (g)   As used in this section:
      (1)   HEAD START AGENCY. The same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 3301.32.
      (2)   SCHOOL BUS. As used in relation to children who attend a program
offered by a head start agency, means a bus that is owned and operated by a
head start agency, is equipped with an automatically extended stop warning sign
of a type approved by the Ohio Department of Education and Workforce, is
painted the color and displays the markings described in R.C. § 4511.77, and is
equipped with amber and red visual signals meeting the requirements of R.C. §
4511.771, irrespective of whether or not the bus has 15 or more children aboard
at any time. The term does not include a van owned and operated by a head start
agency, irrespective of its color, lights or markings.
(R.C. § 4511.75)
§ 432.31 DRIVING ACROSS GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (a)   (1)   Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad
grade crossing, the person shall stop within 50 feet, but not less than 15 feet
from the nearest rail of the railroad if any of the following circumstances
exist at the crossing:
         A.   A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives
warning of the immediate approach of a train or other on- track equipment.
         B.   A crossing gate is lowered.
         C.   A flagperson gives or continues to give a signal of the approach
or passage of a train or other on-track equipment.
         D.   There is insufficient space on the other side of the railroad
grade crossing to accommodate the vehicle the person is operating without
obstructing the passage of other vehicles, pedestrians, or railroad trains,
notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed.
         E.   An approaching train is emitting an audible signal or is plainly
visible and is in hazardous proximity to the crossing.
         F.   There is insufficient undercarriage clearance to safely negotiate
the crossing.
         G.   There is insufficient space on the other side of the railroad
grade crossing to accommodate the vehicle the person is operating without
obstructing the passage of other on-track equipment.
         H.   Approaching on- track equipment is emitting an audible signal or
is plainly visible and is in hazardous proximity to the crossing.
      (2)   A.   A person who is driving a vehicle and who approaches a
railroad grade crossing shall not proceed as long as any of the circumstances
described in divisions (a)(1)A. to (a)(1)F. of this section exist at the
crossing.
         B.   A person who is driving a vehicle and who approaches a railroad
grade crossing shall not recklessly proceed as long as any of the circumstances
described in division (a)(1)G. or (a)(1)H. of this section exist at the
crossing.
   (b)   No person shall drive any vehicle through, around, or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while the gate or barrier is
closed or is being opened or closed unless the person is signaled by a law
enforcement officer or flagperson that it is permissible to do so.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
      (2)   In lieu of a fine or jail term for a violation of this section, a
court may instead order the offender to attend and successfully complete a
remedial safety training or presentation regarding rail safety that is offered
by an authorized and qualified organization that is selected by the court. The
offender shall complete the presentation within a time frame determined by the
court, not to exceed 180 days after the court issues the order. The offender
shall notify the court of the successful completion of the presentation. When
the offender notifies the court of the successful completion of the
presentation, the court shall waive any fine or jail term that it otherwise
would have imposed for a violation of this section.
(R.C. § 4511.62)
§ 432.32 STOPPING AT GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (a)   (1)   Except as provided in division (a)(2) of this section, the
operator of any bus, any school vehicle, or any vehicle transporting a material
or materials required to be placarded under 49 C.F.R. Parts 100 through 185,
before crossing at grade any track of a railroad, shall stop the vehicle and,
while so stopped, shall listen through an open door or open window and look in
both directions along the track for any approaching train or other on-track
equipment, and for signals indicating the approach of a train or other on-track
equipment, and shall proceed only upon exercising due care after stopping,
looking, and listening as required by this section. Upon proceeding, the
operator of such a vehicle shall cross only in a gear that will ensure there
will be no necessity for changing gears while traversing the crossing and shall
not shift gears while crossing the tracks.
      (2)   Division (a) of this section does not apply at grade crossings when
any local authority has filed an application with the Public Utilities
Commission requesting the approval of an exempt crossing, and the Public
Utilities Commission has authorized and approved an exempt crossing as provided
Ohio R.C. 4511.63(B).
      (3)   As used in division (a) of this section:
         A.   BUS. Any vehicle originally designed by its manufacturer to
transport 16 or more passengers, including the driver, or carries 16 or more
passengers, including the driver.
         B.   EXEMPT CROSSING. A highway rail grade crossing authorized and
approved by the Public Utilities Commission under Ohio R.C. 4511.63(B) at which
vehicles may cross without making the stop otherwise required by this section.
         C.   SCHOOL VEHICLE. Any vehicle used for the transportation of pupils
to and from a school or school-related function if the vehicle is owned or
operated by, or operated under contract with, a public or nonpublic school.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of
division (a) of this section or Ohio R.C. 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.762,
4511.764, 4511.77, or 4511.79, or a municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent to any of those sections, whoever violates division (a) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4511.63)
   (b)   (1)   As used in this section, ACTIVE GRADE CROSSING WARNING DEVICE
means signs, signals, gates, or other protective devices erected or installed
at a public highway- railway crossing at common grade and activated by an
electrical circuit.
      (2)   The Department of Transportation and local authorities, with the
approval of the Department, may designate dangerous highway crossings over
railroad tracks and erect stop signs thereat.
      (3)   A.   The Department and local authorities shall erect stop signs at
a railroad highway grade crossing in either of the following circumstances:
            1.   New warning devices that are not active grade crossing warning
devices are being installed at the grade crossing, and railroad crossbucks were
the only warning devices at the grade crossing prior to the installation of the
new warning devices.
            2.   The grade crossing is constructed after July 1, 2013 and only
warning devices that are not active grade crossing warning devices are
installed at the grade crossing.
         B.   Division (b)(3)A. of this section does not apply to a railroad
highway grade crossing that the Director of Transportation has exempted from
that division because of traffic flow or other considerations or factors.
      (4)   When stop signs are erected pursuant to division (b)(2) or (b)(3)
of this section, the operator of any vehicle shall stop within 50, but not less
than 15, feet from the nearest rail of the railroad tracks and shall exercise
due care before proceeding across such grade crossing.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (b)(4) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within
one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If,
within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (6)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.61)
§ 432.33 SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES OR EQUIPMENT AT GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (a)   No person shall operate or move any crawler-type tractor, steam
shovel, derrick, roller, or any equipment or structure having a normal
operating speed of six or less miles per hour or a vertical body or load
clearance of less than nine inches above the level surface of a roadway, upon
or across any tracks at a railroad grade crossing without first complying with
divisions (a)(1) and (2) of this section.
      (1)   Before making any such crossing, the person operating or moving any
such vehicle or equipment shall first stop the same, and while stopped the
person shall listen and look in both directions along such track for any
approaching train or other on-track equipment and for signals indicating the
approach of a train or other on-track equipment, and shall proceed only upon
exercising due care.
      (2)   No such crossing shall be made when warning is given by automatic
signal or crossing gates or a flagperson or otherwise of the immediate approach
of a railroad train or car or other on-track equipment.
   (b)   If the normal sustained speed of the vehicle, equipment, or structure
is not more than three miles per hour, the person owning, operating, or moving
the same shall also give notice of the intended crossing to a station agent or
superintendent of the railroad, and a reasonable time shall be given to the
railroad to provide proper protection for the crossing. Where the vehicles or
equipment are being used in constructing or repairing a section of highway
lying on both sides of a railroad grade crossing, and in this construction or
repair it is necessary to repeatedly move the vehicles or equipment over the
crossing, one daily notice specifying when the work will start and stating the
hours during which it will be prosecuted is sufficient.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.64)
§ 432.34 OBSTRUCTING INTERSECTIONS, CROSSWALKS OR GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (a)   No driver shall enter an intersection or marked crosswalk, or drive
onto any railroad grade crossing, unless there is sufficient space on the other
side of the intersection, crosswalk, or grade crossing to accommodate the
vehicle the driver is operating without obstructing the passage of other
vehicles, pedestrians, or railroad trains, notwithstanding any traffic-control
signal indication to proceed.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.712)
§ 432.35 “PEELING”; CRACKING EXHAUST NOISES.
   No person shall operate any motor vehicle, except when necessary for safe
operation, or in compliance with law, in such a manner that the vehicle is so
rapidly accelerated or started from a stopped position, or in the shifting of
gears while in motion, that the exhaust system emits a loud, cracking or
chattering noise unusual to its normal operation, or that the rubber tires of
such vehicle squeal or leave tire marks on the roadway, commonly known as
“peeling”.
§ 432.36 SHORTCUTTING ACROSS PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   No operator of a motor vehicle shall enter upon private property for the
sole purpose of driving across such property, between abutting streets or other
public ways thereof. The failure to stop on such property in connection with or
in furtherance of the enterprise or activities being conducted on the property
shall constitute prima facie evidence of the violation.
§ 432.37 ENTERING AND EXITING CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY.
   No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled-access highway
except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority.
§ 432.38 WEAVING; FULL TIME AND ATTENTION.
   (a)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle or motorcycle upon any street
or highway in a weaving or zigzag course unless such irregular course is
necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law.
   (b)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle or motorcycle without giving
his or her full time and attention to the operation of such vehicle.
§ 432.39 OPERATION ON PATHS SET ASIDE FOR BICYCLES.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle, snowmobile, or all-
purpose vehicle upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, when
an appropriate sign giving notice of such use is posted on the path.
      (2)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect any rule of
the Director of Natural Resources governing the operation of motor vehicles,
snowmobiles, all-purpose vehicles, and bicycles on lands under the Director’s
jurisdiction.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.713(A), (B))
§ 432.40 LITTERING FROM MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (a)   No operator or occupant of a motor vehicle shall, regardless of
intent, throw, drop, discard, or deposit litter from any motor vehicle in
operation upon any street, road, or highway, except into a litter receptacle in
a manner that prevents its being carried away or deposited by the elements.
   (b)   No operator of a motor vehicle in operation upon any street, road, or
highway shall allow litter to be thrown, dropped, discarded, or deposited from
the motor vehicle, except into a litter receptacle in a manner that prevents
its being carried away or deposited by the elements.
   (c)   As used in this section, LITTER means garbage, trash, waste, rubbish,
ashes, cans, bottles, wire, paper, cartons, boxes, automobile parts, furniture,
glass, or anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature.
   (d)   Whoever violates division (a) or (b) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4511.82)
§ 432.41 USE OF EARPHONES WHILE DRIVING.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   EARPHONES. Any device that covers all or a portion of both ears and
that does either of the following:
         A.   Through either a physical connection to another device or a
wireless connection, provides the listener with radio programs, music, or other
information;
         B.   Provides hearing protection.
         EARPHONES does not include speakers or other listening devices that
are built into protective headgear.
      (2)   EARPLUGS. Any device that can be inserted into one or both ears and
that does either of the following:
         A.   Through either a physical connection to another device or a
wireless connection, provides the listener with radio programs, music, or other
information;
         B.   Provides hearing protection.
   (b)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle while wearing earphones over,
or earplugs in, both ears.
   (c)   This section does not apply to:
      (1)   Any person wearing a hearing aid;
      (2)   Law enforcement personnel while on duty;
      (3)   Fire Department personnel and emergency medical service personnel
while on duty;
      (4)   Any person engaged in the operation of equipment for use in the
maintenance or repair of any highway;
      (5)   Any person engaged in the operation of refuse collection equipment;
      (6)   Any person wearing earphones or earplugs for hearing protection
while operating a motorcycle.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.84)
§ 432.42 TEXTING WHILE DRIVING PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle on any street, highway, or
property open to the public for vehicular traffic while using, holding, or
physically supporting with any part of the person's body an electronic wireless
communications device.
   (b)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device to make
contact, for emergency purposes, with a law enforcement agency, hospital or
health care provider, fire department, or other similar emergency agency or
entity;
      (2)   A person driving a public safety vehicle while using an electronic
wireless communications device in the course of the person's duties;
      (3)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device when
the person's motor vehicle is in a stationary position and is outside a lane of
travel, at a traffic control signal that is currently directing traffic to
stop, or parked on a road or highway due to an emergency or road closure;
      (4)   A person using and holding an electronic wireless communications
device directly near the person's ear for the purpose of making, receiving, or
conducting a telephone call, provided that the person does not manually enter
letters, numbers, or symbols into the device;
      (5)   A person receiving wireless messages on an electronic wireless
communications device regarding the operation or navigation of a motor vehicle;
safety-related information, including emergency, traffic, or weather alerts; or
data used primarily by the motor vehicle, provided that the person does not
hold or support the device with any part of the person's body;
      (6)   A person using the speaker phone function of the electronic
wireless communications device, provided that the person does not hold or
support the device with any part of the person's body;
      (7)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device for
navigation purposes, provided that the person does not do either of the
following during the use:
         A.   Manually enter letters, numbers, or symbols into the device;
         B.   Hold or support the device with any part of the person's body;
      (8)   A person using a feature or function of the electronic wireless
communications device with a single touch or single swipe, provided that the
person does not do either of the following during the use:
         A.   Manually enter letters, numbers, or symbols into the device;
         B.   Hold or support the device with any part of the person's body;
      (9)   A person operating a commercial truck while using a mobile data
terminal that transmits and receives data;
      (10)   A person operating a utility service vehicle or a vehicle for or
on behalf of a utility, if the person is acting in response to an emergency,
power outage, or circumstance that affects the health or safety of individuals;
      (11)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device in
conjunction with a voice-operated or hands-free feature or function of the
vehicle or of the device without the use of either hand except to activate,
deactivate, or initiate the feature or function with a single touch or swipe,
provided the person does not hold or support the device with any part of the
person's body;
      (12)   A person using technology that physically or electronically
integrates the device into the motor vehicle, provided that the person does not
do either of the following during the use:
         A.   Manually enter letters, numbers, or symbols into the device;
         B.   Hold or support the device with any part of the person's body.
      (13)   A person storing an electronic wireless communications device in a
holster, harness, or article of clothing on the person's body.
   (c)   If a law enforcement officer issues an offender a ticket, citation, or
summons for a violation of division (a) of this section, the officer shall do
both of the following:
      (1)   Report the issuance of the ticket, citation, or summons to the
officer's law enforcement agency;
      (2)   Ensure that such report indicates the offender's race.
   (d)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of operating a
motor vehicle while using an electronic wireless communication device, an
unclassified misdemeanor, and shall be punished as provided in divisions (d)(1)
to (d)(5) of this section.
      (1)   The offender shall be fined, and is subject to a suspension of the
offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege, as follows:
         A.   Except as provided in divisions (d)(1)B., (d)(1)C., (d)(1)D., and
(d)(2) of this section, the court shall impose upon the offender a fine of not
more than $150.
         B.   If, within two years of the violation, the offender has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one prior violation of this section, R.C. §
4511.204, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court shall
impose upon the offender a fine of not more than $250.
         C.   If, within two years of the violation, the offender has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more prior violations of this section,
R.C. § 4511.204, or a substantially equivalent or municipal ordinance, the
court shall impose upon the offender a fine of not more than $500. The court
also may impose a suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial
driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or
nonresident operating privilege for 90 days.
         D.   Notwithstanding divisions (d)(1)A. to (d)(1)C. of this section,
if the offender was operating the motor vehicle at the time of the violation in
a construction zone where a sign was posted in accordance with R.C. § 4511.98,
the court, in addition to all other penalties provided by law, shall impose
upon the offender a fine of two times the amount imposed for the violation
under division (d)(1)A., (d)(1)B., or (d)(1)C. of this section, as applicable.
      (2)   If the offender is in the category of offenders to whom division
(d)(1)A. of this section applies, in lieu of payment of the fine of $150 under
division (d)(1)A. of this section and the assessment of points under division
(d)(4) of this section, the offender instead may elect to attend the distracted
driving safety course, as described in R.C. § 4511.991. If the offender attends
and successfully completes the course, the offender shall be issued written
evidence that the offender successfully completed the course. The offender
shall not be required to pay the fine and shall not have the points assessed
against that offender’s driver’s license if the offender submits the written
evidence to the court within 90 days of the violation of division (a) of this
section. However, successful completion of the course does not result in a
dismissal of the charges for the violation, and the violation is a prior
offense under divisions (d)(1)B. and (d)(1)C. of this section if the offender
commits a subsequent violation or violations of division (a) of this section
within two years of the offense for which the course was completed. This
division does not apply with respect to any offender in the category of
offenders to whom division (d)(1)B., (d)(1)C., or (d)(1)D. of this section
applies.
      (3)   The court may impose any other penalty authorized under R.C. §§
2929.21 to 2929.28. However, the court shall not impose a fine or a suspension
not otherwise specified in division (d)(1) of this section. The court also
shall not impose a jail term or community residential sanction.
      (4)   Except as provided in division (d)(2) of this section, points shall
be assessed for a violation of division (a) of this section in accordance with
R.C. § 4510.036.
      (5)   The offense established under this section is a strict liability
offense and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of this offense as a
strict liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other
offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict
liability offense.
   (e)   A prosecution for an offense in violation of this section does not
preclude a prosecution for an offense in violation of R.C. § 4511.204 based on
the same conduct. However, the two offenses are allied offenses of similar
import under R.C. § 2941.25.
   (f)   (1)   A law enforcement officer does not have probable cause and shall
not stop the operator of a motor vehicle for purposes of enforcing this section
unless the officer visually observes the operator using, holding, or physically
supporting with any part of the person's body the electronic wireless
communications device.
      (2)   A law enforcement officer who stops the operator of a motor vehicle
for a violation of division (a) of this section shall inform the operator that
the operator may decline a search of the operator's electronic wireless
communications device. The officer shall not do any of the following:
         A.   Access the device without a warrant, unless the operator
voluntarily and unequivocally gives consent for the officer to access the
device;
         B.   Confiscate the device while awaiting the issuance of a warrant to
access the device;
         C.   Obtain consent from the operator to access the device through
coercion or any other improper means. Any consent by the operator to access the
device shall be voluntary and unequivocal before the officer may access the
device without a warrant.
   (g)   As used in this section:
      (1)   ELECTRONIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS DEVICE.
         A.   Includes any of the following:
            1.   A wireless telephone;
            2.   A text-messaging device;
            3.   A personal digital assistant;
            4.   A computer, including a laptop computer and a computer tablet;
            5.   Any device capable of displaying a video, movie, broadcast
television image, or visual image;
            6.   Any other substantially similar wireless device that is
designed or used to communicate text, initiate or receive communication, or
exchange information or data.
         B.   An ELECTRONIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS DEVICE does not include a
two-way radio transmitter or receiver used by a person who is licensed by the
federal communications commission to participate in the amateur radio service.
      (2)   UTILITY. An entity specified in R.C. § 4905.03(A), (C), (D), (E),
or (G).
      (3)   UTILITY SERVICE VEHICLE. A vehicle owned or operated by a utility.
      (4)   VOICE-OPERATED OR HANDS-FREE FEATURE OR FUNCTION. A feature or
function that allows a person to use an electronic wireless communications
device without the use of either hand, except to activate, deactivate, or
initiate the feature or function with a single touch or single swipe.
(R.C. § 4511.204)
Statutory reference:
   No preemption for local regulations imposing greater penalties, see R.C. §
4511.204(E)
§ 432.43 USE OF ELECTRONIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATION DEVICES BY MINORS OR
PROBATIONARY DRIVERS WHILE DRIVING PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No holder of a temporary instruction permit who has not attained the
age of 18 years and no holder of a probationary driver's license shall drive a
motor vehicle on any street, highway, or property used by the public for
purposes of vehicular traffic or parking while using in any manner an
electronic wireless communications device.
   (b)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to either of the
following:
      (1)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device for
emergency purposes, including an emergency contact with a law enforcement
agency, hospital or health care provider, fire department, or other similar
emergency agency or entity;
      (2)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device whose
motor vehicle is in a stationary position and the motor vehicle is outside a
lane of travel;
      (3)   A person using a navigation device in a voice-operated or hands-
free manner who does not manipulate the device while driving.
   (c)   (1)   Except as provided in division (c)(2) of this section, whoever
violates division (a) of this section shall be fined $150. In addition, the
court shall impose a class seven suspension of the offender's driver's license
or permit for a definite period of 60 days.
      (2)   If the person previously has been adjudicated a delinquent child or
a juvenile traffic offender for a violation of this section, whoever violates
this section shall be fined $300. In addition, the court shall impose a class
seven suspension of the person’s driver’s license or permit for a definite
period of one year.
   (d)   The filing of a sworn complaint against a person for a violation of
this section does not preclude the filing of a sworn complaint for a violation
of R.C. § 4511.205 for the same conduct. However, if a person is adjudicated a
delinquent child or a juvenile traffic offender for a violation of this section
and is also adjudicated a delinquent child or a juvenile traffic offender for a
violation of R.C. § 4511.205 for the same conduct, the two offenses are allied
offenses of similar import under R.C. § 2941.25.
   (e)   As used in this section, ELECTRONIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS DEVICE
includes any of the following:
      (1)   A wireless telephone;
      (2)   A personal digital assistant;
      (3)   A computer, including a laptop computer and a computer tablet;
      (4)   A text-messaging device;
      (5)   Any other substantially similar electronic wireless device that is
designed or used to communicate via voice, image, or written word.
(R.C. § 4511.205)
§ 432.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 434: O.V.I.; RECKLESS OPERATION; SPEED
434.01   Operating a vehicle while intoxicated.
434.011   Having physical control of a vehicle while intoxicated.
434.012   Implied consent.
434.013   Immobilizing or disabling device violation.
434.02   Reckless operation on streets, public or private property.
434.025   Reasonable control.
434.03   Maximum speed limits; assured clear distance ahead.
434.04   Slow speed; posted minimum speeds.
434.05   Speed limitations over bridges.
434.06   Speed exceptions for emergency or safety vehicles.
434.07   Street racing prohibited.
434.08   Vehicular homicide; vehicular manslaughter.
434.09   Operation restricted for mini-trucks and low-speed, under-speed, or
utility vehicles.
434.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar State law
   Drug of abuse defined - see Ohio R.C. 3719.011
   Alcohol defined - see Ohio R.C. 4301.01
   Alteration of prima facie speed limits - see Ohio R.C. 4511.21, 4511.22,
4511.23
   Intoxicated pedestrians - see TRAF.
416.10
   Driving upon sidewalks, tree lawns or curbs - see TRAF.
432.22
   “Peeling” - see TRAF.
432.35
   Weaving; full time and attention - see TRAF.
432.38
   Criminal offenses by drivers of commercial vehicles - see TRAF.
442.05,
442.08
   Liquor consumption in motor vehicle - see GEN. OFF.
612.04
§ 434.01 OPERATING A VEHICLE WHILE INTOXICATED.
   (a)   (1)   Operation Generally. No person shall operate any vehicle within
this municipality, if, at the time of the operation, any of the following
apply:
         A.   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or
a combination of them.
         B.   The person has a concentration of eight-hundredths of one percent
or more but less than seventeen-hundredths of one percent by weight per unit
volume of alcohol in the person's whole blood.
         C.   The person has a concentration of ninety-six-thousandths of one
percent or more but less than two hundred four-thousandths of one percent by
weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person's blood serum or plasma.
         D.   The person has a concentration of eight-hundredths of one gram or
more but less than seventeen-hundredths of one gram by weight of alcohol per
two hundred ten liters of the person's breath.
         E.   The person has a concentration of eleven-hundredths of one gram
or more but less than two hundred thirty-eight-thousandths of one gram by
weight of alcohol per one hundred milliliters of the person's urine.
         F.   The person has a concentration of seventeen-hundredths of one
percent or more by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person's whole
blood.
         G.   The person has a concentration of two hundred four-thousandths of
one percent or more by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person's blood
serum or plasma.
         H.   The person has a concentration of seventeen-hundredths of one
gram or more by weight of alcohol per two hundred ten liters of the person's
breath.
         I.   The person has a concentration of two hundred thirty-eight-
thousandths of one gram or more by weight of alcohol per one hundred
milliliters of the person's urine.
         J. Except as provided in division (k) of this section, the person has
a concentration of any of the following controlled substances or metabolites of
a controlled substance in the person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or
urine that equals or exceeds any of the following:
            1.   The person has a concentration of amphetamine in the person's
urine of at least five hundred nanograms of amphetamine per milliliter of the
person's urine or has a concentration of amphetamine in the person's whole
blood or blood serum or plasma of at least one hundred nanograms of amphetamine
per milliliter of the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
            2.   The person has a concentration of cocaine in the person's
urine of at least one hundred fifty nanograms of cocaine per milliliter of the
person's urine or has a concentration of cocaine in the person's whole blood or
blood serum or plasma of at least fifty nanograms of cocaine per milliliter of
the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
            3.   The person has a concentration of cocaine metabolite in the
person's urine of at least one hundred fifty nanograms of cocaine metabolite
per milliliter of the person's urine or has a concentration of cocaine
metabolite in the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least
fifty nanograms of cocaine metabolite per milliliter of the person's whole
blood or blood serum or plasma.
            4.   The person has a concentration of heroin in the person's urine
of at least two thousand nanograms of heroin per milliliter of the person's
urine or has a concentration of heroin in the person's whole blood or blood
serum or plasma of at least fifty nanograms of heroin per milliliter of the
person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
            5.   The person has a concentration of heroin metabolite (6-
monoacetyl morphine) in the person's urine of at least ten nanograms of heroin
metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of the person's urine or has
a concentration of heroin metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) in the person's
whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least ten nanograms of heroin
metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of the person's whole blood
or blood serum or plasma.
            6.   The person has a concentration of L.S.D. in the person's urine
of at least twenty-five nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of the person's
urine or a concentration of L.S.D. in the person's whole blood or blood serum
or plasma of at least ten nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of the person's
whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
            7.   The person has a concentration of marihuana in the person's
urine of at least ten nanograms of marihuana per milliliter of the person's
urine or has a concentration of marihuana in the person's whole blood or blood
serum or plasma of at least two nanograms of marihuana per milliliter of the
person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
            8.   Either of the following applies:
               a.   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of
abuse, or a combination of them, and, as measured by gas chromatography mass
spectrometry, the person has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in the
person's urine of at least fifteen nanograms of marihuana metabolite per
milliliter of the person's urine or has a concentration of marihuana metabolite
in the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least five nanograms
of marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person's whole blood or blood
serum or plasma.
               b.   As measured by gas chromatography mass spectrometry, the
person has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in the person's urine of at
least thirty-five nanograms of marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the
person's urine or has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in the person's
whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least fifty nanograms of marihuana
metabolite per milliliter of the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
            9.   The person has a concentration of methamphetamine in the
person's urine of at least five hundred nanograms of methamphetamine per
milliliter of the person's urine or has a concentration of methamphetamine in
the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least one hundred
nanograms of methamphetamine per milliliter of the person's whole blood or
blood serum or plasma.
            10.   The person has a concentration of phencyclidine in the
person's urine of at least twenty-five nanograms of phencyclidine per
milliliter of the person's urine or has a concentration of phencyclidine in the
person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least ten nanograms of
phencyclidine per milliliter of the person's whole blood or blood serum or
plasma.
            11.   The State Board of Pharmacy has adopted a rule pursuant to
R.C. § 4729.041 that specifies the amount of salvia divinorum and the amount of
salvinorin A that constitute concentrations of salvia divinorum and salvinorin
A in a person's urine, in a person's whole blood, or in a person's blood serum
or plasma at or above which the person is impaired for purposes of operating
any vehicle within this state, the rule is in effect, and the person has a
concentration of salvia divinorum or salvinorin A of at least that amount so
specified by rule in the person's urine, in the person's whole blood, or in the
person's blood serum or plasma.
      (2)   No person who, within twenty years of the conduct described in
division (a)(2)A. of this section, previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of this division or a substantially equivalent State law
or municipal ordinance, a violation of division (a)(1) or (b) of this section
or a substantially equivalent State law or municipal ordinance, or any other
equivalent offense shall do both of the following;
         A.   Operate any vehicle within this municipality while under the
influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them;
         B.   Subsequent to being arrested for operating the vehicle as
described in division (a)(2)A. of this section, being asked by a law
enforcement officer to submit to a chemical test or tests under Ohio R.C. §
4511.191 or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and being advised
by the officer in accordance with Ohio R.C. § 4511.192 or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance of the consequences of the person's refusal or
submission to the test or tests, refuse to submit to the test or tests.
   (b)   Operation After Under-Age Consumption. No person under twenty-one
years of age shall operate
any vehicle within this municipality, if, at the time of the operation, any of
the following apply:
      (1)   The person has a concentration of at least two-hundredths of one
percent but less than eight-hundredths of one percent by weight per unit volume
of alcohol in the person's whole blood.
      (2)   The person has a concentration of at least three-hundredths of one
percent but less than ninety-six-thousandths of one percent by weight per unit
volume of alcohol in the person's blood serum or plasma.
      (3)   The person has a concentration of at least two-hundredths of one
gram but less than eight- hundredths of one gram by weight of alcohol per two
hundred ten liters of the person's breath.
      (4)   The person has a concentration of at least twenty-eight one-
thousandths of one gram but less than eleven-hundredths of one gram by weight
of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person's urine.
   (c)   One Conviction Limitation. In any proceeding arising out of one
incident, a person may be charged with a violation of division (a)(1)A. or (a)
(2) and a violation of division (b)(1), (b)(2), or (b)(3) of this section, but
the person may not be convicted of more than one violation of these divisions.
   (d)   Evidence; Tests.
      (1)   A.   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of division (a)(1)A. of this section or for an equivalent offense
that is vehicle-related, the result of any test of any blood or urine withdrawn
and analyzed at any health care provider, as defined in Ohio R.C. § 2317.02,
may be admitted with expert testimony to be considered with any other relevant
and competent evidence in determining the guilt or innocence of the defendant.
         B.   In any criminal prosecution for a violation of division (a) or
(b) of this section or for an equivalent offense that is vehicle-related, the
court may admit evidence on the concentration of alcohol, drugs of abuse,
controlled substances, metabolites of a controlled substance, or a combination
of them in the defendant's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, urine,
or other bodily substance at the time of the alleged violation as shown by
chemical analysis of the substance withdrawn within three hours of the time of
the alleged violation. The three-hour time limit specified in this division
regarding the admission of evidence does not extend or affect the two-hour time
limit specified in Ohio R.C. § 4511.192(A) as the maximum period of time during
which a person may consent to a chemical test or tests as described in that
section. The court may admit evidence on the concentration of alcohol, drugs of
abuse, or a combination of them as described in this division when a person
submits to a blood, breath, urine, or other bodily substance test at the
request of a law enforcement officer under Ohio R.C. § 4511.191 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or a blood or urine sample is
obtained pursuant to a search warrant. Only a physician, a registered nurse, an
emergency medical technician-intermediate, an emergency medical technician-
paramedic, or a qualified technician, chemist, or phlebotomist shall withdraw a
blood sample for the purpose of determining the alcohol, drug, controlled
substance, metabolite of a controlled substance, or combination content of the
whole blood, blood serum, or blood plasma. This limitation does not apply to
the taking of breath or urine specimens. A person authorized to withdraw blood
under this division may refuse to withdraw blood under this division, if in
that person's opinion, the physical welfare of the person would be endangered
by the withdrawing of blood.
            The bodily substance withdrawn under division (d)(1)B. shall be
analyzed in accordance with methods approved by the Director of Health by an
individual possessing a valid permit issued by the Director pursuant to Ohio
R.C. § 3701.143.
         C.   As used in division (d)(1)B. of this section, EMERGENCY MEDICAL
TECHNICIAN- INTERMEDIATE and EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN-PARAMEDIC have the
same meanings as in Ohio R.C. § 4765.01.
      (2)   In a criminal prosecution for a violation of division (a) of this
section or for an equivalent offense that is vehicle-related, if there was at
the time the bodily substance was withdrawn a concentration of less than the
applicable concentration of alcohol specified in divisions (a)(1)B., (a)(1)C,
(a)(1)D. and (a)(1)E. of this section or less than the applicable concentration
of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled
substance specified for a violation of division (a)(1)J. of this section, that
fact may be considered with other competent evidence in determining the guilt
or innocence of the defendant. This division does not limit or affect a
criminal prosecution for a violation of division (b) of this section.
      (3)   Upon the request of the person who was tested, the results of the
chemical test shall be made available to the person or the person's attorney,
immediately upon the completion of the chemical test analysis.
         If the chemical test was obtained pursuant to division (d)(1)B. of
this section, the person tested may have a physician, a registered nurse, or a
qualified technician, chemist, or phlebotomist of the person's own choosing
administer a chemical test or tests, at the person's expense, in addition to
any administered at the request of a law enforcement officer. If the person was
under arrest as described in R.C. § 4511.191(A)(5), the arresting officer shall
advise the person at the time of the arrest that the person may have an
independent chemical test taken at the person's own expense. If the person was
under arrest other than described in R.C. § 4511.191(A)(5), the form to be read
to the person to be tested, as required under § 434.012, shall state that the
person may have an independent test performed at the person's expense. The
failure or inability to obtain an additional chemical test by a person shall
not preclude the admission of evidence relating to the chemical test or tests
taken at the request of a law enforcement officer.
      (4)   A.   As used in division (d)(4)B. and (d)(4)C. of this section,
NATIONAL HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SAFETY ADMINISTRATION means the National Highway
Traffic Safety Administration established as an administration of the United
States Department of Transportation under 96 Stat. 2415 (1983), 49 U.S.C. §
105.
         B.   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of division (a) or (b) of this section, of a municipal ordinance
relating to operating a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of
abuse, or alcohol and a drug of abuse, or of a municipal ordinance relating to
operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled
substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole blood, blood
serum or plasma, breath, or urine, if a law enforcement officer has
administered a field sobriety test to the operator of the vehicle involved in
the violation and if it is shown by clear and convincing evidence that the
officer administered the test in substantial compliance with the testing
standards for any reliable, credible, and generally accepted field sobriety
tests that were in effect at the time the tests were administered, including,
but not limited to, any testing standards then in effect that were set by the
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, all of the following apply:
            1.   The officer may testify concerning the results of the field
sobriety test so administered.
            2.   The prosecution may introduce the results of the field
sobriety test so administered as evidence in any proceedings in the criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding.
            3.   If testimony is presented or evidence is introduced under
division (d)(4)B.1. or (d)(4)B.2. of this section and if the testimony or
evidence is admissible under the Rules of Evidence, the court shall admit the
testimony or evidence and the trier of fact shall give it whatever weight the
trier of fact considers to be appropriate.
         C.   Division (d)(4)B. of this section does not limit or preclude a
court, in its determination of whether the arrest of a person was supported by
probable cause or its determination of any other matter in a criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding of a type described in that division,
from considering evidence or testimony that is not otherwise disallowed by
division (d)(4)B. of this section.
   (e)   Forensic Laboratory Reports.
      (1)   Subject to division (e)(3) of this section, in any criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a violation of division (a)(1)B.,
(a)(1)C., (a)(1)D., (a)(1)E., (a)(1)F., (a)(1)G., (a)(1)H., (a)(1)I., or (a)
(1)J. or (b)(1), (b)(2), (b)(3), or (b)(4) of this section or for an equivalent
offense that is substantially equivalent to any of those divisions, a
laboratory report from any laboratory personnel issued a permit by the
Department of Health authorizing an analysis as described in this division that
contains an analysis of the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, urine,
or other bodily substance tested and that contains all of the information
specified in this division shall be admitted as prima facie evidence of the
information and statements that the report contains. The laboratory report
shall contain all of the following:
         A.   The signature, under oath, of any person who performed the
analysis;
         B.   Any findings as to the identity and quantity of alcohol, a drug
of abuse, a controlled substance, a metabolite of a controlled substance, or a
combination of them that was found;
         C.   A copy of a notarized statement by the laboratory director or a
designee of the director that contains the name of each certified analyst or
test performer involved with the report, the analyst's or test performer's
employment relationship with the laboratory that issued the report, and a
notation that performing an analysis of the type involved is part of the
analyst's or test performer's regular duties;
         D.   An outline of the analyst's or test performer's education,
training, and experience in performing the type of analysis involved and a
certification that the laboratory satisfies appropriate quality control
standards in general and, in this particular analysis, under rules of the
Department of Health.
      (2)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law regarding the admission
of evidence, a report of the type described in division (e)(1) of this section
is not admissible against the defendant to whom it pertains in any proceeding,
other than a preliminary hearing or a grand jury proceeding, unless the
prosecutor has served a copy of the report on the defendant's attorney or, if
the defendant has no attorney, on the defendant.
      (3)   A report of the type described in division (e)(1) of this section
shall not be prima facie evidence of the contents, identity, or amount of any
substance if, within seven days after the defendant to whom the report pertains
or the defendant's attorney receives a copy of the report, the defendant or the
defendant's attorney demands the testimony of the person who signed the report.
The judge in the case may extend the seven-day time limit in the interest of
justice.
   (f)   Immunity From Liability for Withdrawing Blood.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, any physician,
registered nurse, emergency medical technician-intermediate, emergency medical
technician-paramedic, or qualified technician, chemist, or phlebotomist who
withdraws blood from a person pursuant to this section or Ohio R.C. §§ 4511.19,
4511.191 or 4511.192, and any hospital, first-aid station, or clinic at which
blood is withdrawn from a person pursuant to this section or Ohio R.C. §§
4511.19, 4511.191 or 4511.192, is immune from criminal liability and civil
liability based upon a claim of assault and battery or any other claim that is
not a claim of malpractice, for any act performed in withdrawing blood from the
person. The immunity provided in this division also extends to an emergency
medical service organization that employs an emergency medical technician-
intermediate or emergency medical technician-paramedic who withdraws blood
under this section. The immunity provided in this division is not available to
a person who withdraws blood if the person engages in willful or wanton
misconduct.
      (2)   As used in division (f)(1), EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN-
INTERMEDIATE and EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN-PARAMEDIC have the same meanings
as in Ohio R.C. § 4765.01.
   (g)   General OVI Penalty.
      (1) Whoever violates any provisions of divisions (a)(1)A. through (a)
(1)I. or (a)(2) of this section is guilty of operating a vehicle under the
influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them. Whoever
violates division (a)(1)J. of this section is guilty of operating a vehicle
while under the influence of a listed controlled substance or a listed
metabolite of a controlled substance. The court shall sentence the offender for
either offense under Ohio R.C. Chapter 2929 and this section, except as
otherwise authorized or required by divisions (g)(1)A. through (g)(1)E. of this
section:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (g)(1)B., (g)(1)C., (g)
(1)D., or (g)(1)E. of this section, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree, and the court shall sentence the offender to all of the
penalties and sanctions provided in Ohio R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(a)(i) through (G)
(1)(a)(iv).
         B.   Except as otherwise provided in division (g)(1)E. of this
section, an offender who, within six years of the offense, previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of division (a) or (b) of this
section or one other equivalent offense is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the penalties and
sanctions provided in Ohio R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(b)(i) through (G)(1)(b)(v).
         C.   Except as otherwise provided in division (g)(1)E. of this
section, an offender who, within six years of the offense, previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of division (a) or (b) of this
section or other equivalent offenses is guilty of a misdemeanor. The court
shall sentence the offender to all of the penalties and sanctions provided in
Ohio R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(c)(i) through (G)(1)(c)(vi).
         D.   Except as otherwise provided in division (g)(1)E. of this
section, an offender who, within six years of the offense, previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of division (a) or
(b) of this section or other equivalent offenses or an offender who, within
twenty years of the offense, previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to five or more violations of that nature is guilty of a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         E.   An offender who previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of Ohio R.C. § 4511.19(A) that was a felony, regardless
of when the violation and the conviction or guilty plea occurred, is guilty of
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   An offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (a) of this section and who subsequently seeks reinstatement of the
driver's or occupational driver's license or permit or nonresident operating
privilege suspended under this section or Ohio R.C. § 4511.19 as a result of
the conviction or guilty plea shall pay a reinstatement fee as provided in Ohio
R.C. § 4511.191(F)(2).
      (3)   A.   If an offender is sentenced to a jail term under Ohio R.C. §
4511.19(G)(1)(b)(i) or (G)(1)(b)(ii) or (G)(1)(c)(i) or (G)(1)(c)(ii) and if,
within 60 days of sentencing of the offender, the court issues a written
finding on the record that, due to the unavailability of space at the jail
where the offender is required to serve the term, the offender will not be able
to begin serving that term within the sixty-day period following the date of
sentencing, the court may impose an alternative sentence as specified in Ohio
R.C. § 4511.19(G)(3) that includes a term of house arrest with electronic
monitoring, with continuous alcohol monitoring, or with both electronic
monitoring and continuous alcohol monitoring.
         B.   As an alternative to the mandatory jail terms as required by Ohio
R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1), the court may sentence the offender as provided in Ohio
R.C. § 4511.19(G)(3).
      (4)   If an offender's driver's or occupational driver's license or
permit or nonresident operating privilege is suspended under division (g) of
this section or Ohio R.C. § 4511.19(G) and if Ohio R.C. § 4510.13 permits the
court to grant limited driving privileges, the court may grant the limited
driving privileges in accordance with that section. If division (a)(7) of that
section requires the court impose as a condition of the privileges that the
offender must display on the vehicle that is driven subject to the privileges
restricted license plates that are issued under Ohio R.C. § 4503.231, except as
provided in division (b) of that section, the court shall impose that condition
as one of the conditions of the limited driving privileges granted to the
offender, except as provided in Ohio R.C. § 4503.231(B).
      (5)   Fines imposed under this section for a violation of division (a) of
this section shall be distributed as provided in Ohio R.C. § 4511.19(G)(5).
      (6)   If title to a motor vehicle that is subject to an order of criminal
forfeiture under division (g)(1)C., (g)(1)D., or (g)(1)E. of this section is
assigned or transferred and Ohio R.C. § 4503.234(B)(2) or (B)(3) applies, in
addition to or independent of any other penalty established by law, the court
may fine the offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications of
the National Automobile Dealers Association. The proceeds of any fine so
imposed shall be distributed in accordance with division (c)(2) of that
section.
      (7)   In all cases in which an offender is sentenced under division (g)
of this section, the offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in Ohio R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to
provide that proof of financial responsibility, the court, in addition to any
other penalties provided by law, may order restitution pursuant to § 698.02(f)
or Ohio R.C. 2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00) for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision
that was the direct and proximate result of the offender's operation of the
vehicle before, during, or after committing the offense for which the offender
is sentenced under division (g) of this section.
      (8)   As used in division (g) of this section, ELECTRONIC MONITORING has
the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. § 2929.01
   (h)   Vehicle Operation After Underage Alcohol Consumption Penalty. Whoever
violates division (b) of this section is guilty of operating a motor vehicle
after underage alcohol consumption and shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (h)(2) of this section,
the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. In addition to
any other sanction imposed for the offense, the court shall impose a class six
suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating
privilege from the range specified in Ohio R.C. § 4510.02(A)(6).
      (2)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of division (a)
or (b) of this section or other equivalent offense or offenses, the offender is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. In addition to any other sanction
imposed for the offense, the court shall impose a class four suspension of the
offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in Ohio R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4).
      (3)   If the offender also is convicted of or also pleads guilty to a
specification of the type described in Ohio R.C. § 2941.1416 and if the court
imposes a jail term for the violation of division (b) of this section, the
court shall impose upon the offender an additional definite jail term pursuant
to Ohio R.C. § 2929.24(E).
      (4)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in Ohio R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to
provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to §
698.02(f) or Ohio R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00) for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision
that was the direct and proximate result of the offender's operation of the
vehicle before, during, or after committing the violation of division (b) of
this section.
   (i)   Compliance With Ohio R.C. Chapter 3793 Standards.
      (1)   No court shall sentence an offender to an alcohol treatment program
under this section unless the treatment program complies with the minimum
standards for alcohol treatment programs adopted under Ohio R.C. Chapter 3793
by the Director of Alcohol and Drug Addiction Services.
      (2)   An offender who stays in a drivers' intervention program or in an
alcohol treatment program under an order issued under this section shall pay
the cost of the stay in the program. However, if the court determines that an
offender who stays in an alcohol treatment program under an order issued under
this section is unable to pay the cost of the stay in the program, the court
may order that the cost be paid from the court's indigent drivers' alcohol
treatment fund.
   (j)   Appeal Does Not Stay Operation of License Suspension. If a person
whose driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident
operating privilege is suspended under this section or Ohio R.C. § 4511.19
files an appeal regarding any aspect of the person's trial or sentence, the
appeal itself does not stay the operation of the suspension.
   (k)   Division (a)(1)J. of this section does not apply to a person who
operates a vehicle while the person has a concentration of a listed controlled
substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance in the person's
whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine that equals or exceeds the amount
specified in that division, if both of the following apply:
      (1)   The person obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs.
      (2)   The person injected, ingested, or inhaled the controlled substance
in accordance with the health professional's directions.
   (l)   The prohibited concentrations of a controlled substance or a
metabolite of a controlled substance listed in division (a)(1)(j) of this
section also apply in a prosecution of a violation of Ohio R.C. § 2923.16(D) in
the same manner as if the offender is being prosecuted for a prohibited
concentration of alcohol.
   (m)   Conflict of Terms. All terms defined in Ohio R.C. § 4510.01 apply to
this section. If the meaning of a term defined in Ohio R.C. § 4510.01 conflicts
with the meaning of the same term as defined in this section, the term as
defined in Ohio R.C. § 4510.01 applies to this section.
   (n)   Indigent Drivers Alcohol Treatment Fund. Twenty-five dollars ($25.00)
of any fine imposed for a violation of subsection (a) hereof shall be deposited
into the municipal or county indigent drivers alcohol treatment fund pursuant
to Ohio R.C. § 4511.193.
   (o)   Definitions. As used in this section, § 434.011 and § 434.012:
      COMMUNITY RESIDENTIAL SANCTION, CONTINUOUS ALCOHOL MONITORING JAIL,
MANDATORY PRISON TERM, MANDATORY TERM OF LOCAL INCARCERATION, PRISON TERM, and
SANCTION have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. § 2929.01.
      DRUG OF ABUSE has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. § 4506.01.
      EQUIVALENT OFFENSE means any of the following:
         A.   A violation of Ohio R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B);
         B.   A violation of a municipal OVI ordinance;
         C.   A violation of Ohio R.C. § 2903.04 in a case in which the
offender was subject to the sanctions described in division (d) of that
section;
         D.   A violation of Ohio R.C. § 2903.06(A)(1) or Ohio R.C. § 2903.08
or a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to either of those
divisions;
         E.   A violation of Ohio R.C. § 2903.06(A)(2), (A)(3), or (A)(4), Ohio
R.C. § 2903.08(A)(2), or former Ohio R.C. § 2903.07, or a municipal ordinance
that is substantially equivalent to any of those divisions or that former
section, in a case in which a judge or jury as the trier of fact found that the
offender was under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination
of them;
         F.   A violation of Ohio R.C. § 1547.11(A) or (B);
         G.   A violation of a municipal ordinance prohibiting a person from
operating or being in physical control of any vessel underway or from
manipulating any water skis, aquaplane, or similar device on the waters of this
state while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination
of them or prohibiting a person from operating or being in physical control of
any vessel underway or from manipulating any water skis, aquaplane, or similar
device on the waters of this state with a prohibited concentration of alcohol,
a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine;
         H.   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance, law of
another state, or law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to
Ohio R.C. § 4511.19(A) or(B);
         I.   A violation of a former law of this state that was substantially
equivalent to Ohio R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B) or Ohio R.C. § 1547.11(A) or (B).
      EQUIVALENT OFFENSE THAT IS VEHICLE-RELATED means an equivalent offense
that is any of the following:
         A.   A violation described in division A., B., C., D., or E. of the
definition for EQUIVALENT OFFENSE provided in this division (o);
         B.   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance, law of
another state, or law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to
Ohio R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B);
         C.   A violation of a former law of this State that was substantially
equivalent to Ohio R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B).
      MANDATORY JAIL TERM means the mandatory term in jail of 3, 6, 10, 20, 30,
or 60 days that must be imposed under Ohio R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(a), (G)(1)(b),
or (G)(1)(c) upon an offender convicted of a violation of division (a) of that
section and in relation to which all of the following apply:
         A.   Except as specifically authorized under Ohio R.C. § 4511.19, the
term must be served in a jail.
         B.   Except as specifically authorized under Ohio R.C. § 4511.19, the
term cannot be suspended, reduced, or otherwise modified pursuant to Ohio R.C.
§§ 2929.21 through 2929.28 or any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code.
      MUNICIPAL OVI ORDINANCE and MUNICIPAL OVI OFFENSE mean any municipal
ordinance prohibiting a person from operating a vehicle while under the
influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them or prohibiting
a person from operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a
controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine.
(Ord. 30-2012, passed 12-18-12)
Statutory reference:
   Disposition of fines, immobilization of vehicle and impoundment of license
plates, criminal forfeiture for municipal ordinance conviction, see Ohio R.C.
4511.193
   Effect of refusal to submit to test, seizure of license, suspension periods,
appeal procedures, occupational driving privileges, and indigent drivers
alcohol treatment funds, see Ohio R.C. 4511.191
   Judicial pretrial suspension, initial appearance, see Ohio R.C. 4511.196
   Mayor’s Court to suspend driver’s license, see Ohio R.C. 1905.201
   Operating vehicle under the influence of alcohol or drugs - OVI, see Ohio
R.C. § 4511.19
   OVI definitions, see Ohio R.C. § 4511.181
   Seizure of vehicles upon arrest, see Ohio R.C. 4511.195
   Trial judge to suspend driver’s license, see Ohio R.C. 4510.05
§ 434.011 HAVING PHYSICAL CONTROL OF A VEHICLE WHILE INTOXICATED.
   (a)   As used in this section, PHYSICAL CONTROL means being in the driver's
position of the front seat of a vehicle and having possession of the vehicle's
ignition key or other ignition device.
   (b)   No person shall be in physical control of a vehicle if, at the time of
the physical control, any of the following apply:
      (1)   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a
combination of them.
      (2)   The person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine
contains at least the concentration of alcohol specified in §
434.01(a)(1)B., (a)(1)C., (a)(1)D., or(a)(1)E.
      (3)   Except as provided in division (e) of this section, the person has
a concentration of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a
controlled substance in the person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or
urine that equals or exceeds the concentration specified in §
434.01(a)(1)J.
   (c)   (1)   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of this section, if a law enforcement officer has administered a
field sobriety test to the person in physical control of the vehicle involved
in the violation and if it is shown by clear and convincing evidence that the
officer administered the test in substantial compliance with the testing
standards for any reliable, credible, and generally accepted field sobriety
tests that were in effect at the time the tests were administered, including
but not limited to any testing standards then in effect that were set by the
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, all of the following apply:
         A.   The officer may testify concerning the results of the field
sobriety test so administered.
         B.   The prosecution may introduce the results of the field sobriety
test so administered as evidence in any proceedings in the criminal prosecution
or juvenile court proceeding.
         C.   If testimony is presented or evidence is introduced under
division (c)(1)A. or (c)(1)B. of this section and if the testimony or evidence
is admissible under the Rules of Evidence, the court shall admit the testimony
or evidence, and the trier of fact shall give it whatever weight the trier of
fact considers to be appropriate.
      (2)   Division (c)(1) of this section does not limit or preclude a court,
in its determination of whether the arrest of a person was supported by
probable cause or its determination of any other matter in a criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding of a type described in that division,
from considering evidence or testimony that is not otherwise disallowed by
division (c)(1) of this section.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of having physical control of
a vehicle while under the influence, a misdemeanor of the first degree. In
addition to other sanctions imposed, the court may impose on the offender a
class seven suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in Ohio R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).
   (e)   Division (b)(3) of this section does not apply to a person who is in
physical control of a vehicle while the person has a concentration of a listed
controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance in the
person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine that equals or exceeds
the amount specified in §
434.01(a)(1)J. if both of the following apply:
      (1)   The person obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs.
      (2)   The person injected, ingested, or inhaled the controlled substance
in accordance with the health professional's directions.
(Ord. 30-2012, passed 12-18-12)
Statutory reference:
   Physical control of vehicle while under the influence, see Ohio R.C.
4511.194
§ 434.012 IMPLIED CONSENT.
   (a)   (1)   As used in this section:
         PHYSICAL CONTROL has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. § 4511.194.
      (2)   Any person who operates a vehicle upon a highway or any public or
private property used by the public for vehicular travel or parking within this
municipality or who is in physical control of a vehicle shall be deemed to have
given consent to a chemical test or tests of the person's whole blood, blood
serum or plasma, breath, or urine to determine the alcohol, drug of abuse,
controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled substance, or combination
content of the person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine if
arrested for a violation of §
434.01(a) or (b), §
434.011, Ohio R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), Ohio R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, or any other municipal OVI ordinance.
      (3)   The chemical test ortests under division (a)(2) of this section
shall be administered at the request of a law enforcement officer having
reasonable grounds to believe the person was operating or in physical control
of a vehicle in violation of a division, section, or ordinance identified in
division (a)(2) of this section. The law enforcement agency by which the
officer is employed shall designate which of the tests shall be administered.
      (4)   Any person who is dead or unconscious, or who otherwise is in a
condition rendering the person incapable of refusal, shall be deemed to have
consented as provided in division (a)(2) of this section, and the test or tests
may be administered, subject to Ohio R.C. §§ 313.12 through 313.16.
      (5)   A.   If a law enforcement officer arrests a person for a violation
of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, or a municipal OVI ordinance and if the person if
convicted would be required to be sentenced under R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(c), (d),
or (e), the law enforcement officer shall request the person to submit, and the
person shall submit, to a chemical test or tests of the person's whole blood,
blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine for the purpose of determining the
alcohol, drug of abuse, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled
substance, or combination content of the person's whole blood, blood serum or
plasma, breath, or urine. A law enforcement officer who makes a request
pursuant to this division that a person submit to a chemical test or tests is
not required to advise the person of the consequences of submitting to, or
refusing to submit to, the test or tests and is not required to give the person
the form described in division (c) of this section, but the officer shall
advise the person at the time of the arrest that if the person refuses to take
a chemical test the officer may employ whatever reasonable means are necessary
to ensure that the person submits to a chemical test of the person's whole
blood or blood serum or plasma. The officer shall also advise the person at the
time of the arrest that the person may have an independent chemical test taken
at the person's own expense. Divisions (a)(3) and (a)(4) of this section apply
to the administration of a chemical test or tests pursuant to this division.
         B.   If a person refuses to submit to a chemical test upon a request
made pursuant to division (a)(5)A. of this section, the law enforcement officer
who made the request may employ whatever reasonable means are necessary to
ensure that the person submits to a chemical test of the person's whole blood
or blood serum or plasma. A law enforcement officer who acts pursuant to this
division to ensure that a person submits to a chemical test of the person's
whole blood or blood serum or plasma is immune from criminal and civil
liability based upon a claim for assault and battery or any other claim for the
acts, unless the officer so acted with malicious purpose, in bad faith, or in a
wanton or reckless manner.
   (b)   Except as provided in division (a)(5) of this section, the arresting
law enforcement officer shall give advice in accordance with this section to
any person under arrest for a violation of §
434.01(a) or (b), §
434.011, Ohio R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), Ohio R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, or any other municipal OVI ordinance. The
officer shall give that advice in a written form that contains the information
described in division (c) of this section and shall read the advice to the
person. The form shall contain a statement that the form was shown to the
person under arrest and read to the person by the arresting officer. One or
more persons shall witness the arresting officer's reading of the form, and the
witnesses shall certify to this fact by signing the form. The person must
submit to the chemical test or tests, subsequent to the request of the
arresting officer, within two hours of the time of the alleged violation and,
if the person does not submit to the test or tests within that two-hour time
limit, the failure to submit automatically constitutes a refusal to submit to
the test or tests.
   (c)   Except as provided in division (a)(5) of this section, if a person is
under arrest as described in division (b) of this section, before the person
may be requested to submit to a chemical test or tests to determine the
alcohol, drug of abuse, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled
substance, or combination content of the person's whole blood, blood serum or
plasma, breath, or urine, the arresting officer shall read the following form
to the person:
“You now are under arrest for (specifically state the offense under state law
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance for which the person was
arrested - operating a vehicle under the influence of alcohol, a drug, or a
combination of them; operating a vehicle while under the influence of a listed
controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance;
operating a vehicle after underage alcohol consumption; or having physical
control of a vehicle while under the influence).
“If you refuse to take any chemical test required by law, your Ohio driving
privileges will be suspended immediately, and you will have to pay a fee to
have the privileges reinstated. If you have a prior conviction of OVI, OVUAC,
or operating a vehicle while under the influence of a listed controlled
substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance under state or
municipal law within the preceding 20 years, you are now under arrest for state
OVI, and, if you refuse to take a chemical test, you will face increased
penalties if you subsequently are convicted of the state OVI.
“(Read this part unless the person is under arrest for solely having physical
control of a vehicle while under the influence.) If you take any chemical test
required by law and are found to be at or over the prohibited amount of
alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in
your whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine as set by law, your
Ohio driving privileges will be suspended immediately, and you will have to pay
a fee to have the privileges reinstated.
“If you take a chemical test, you may have an independent chemical test taken
at your own expense.”
   (d)   If the arresting law enforcement officer does not ask a person under
arrest as described in division (b) of this section or division (a)(5) of this
section to submit to a chemical test or tests under Ohio R.C. § 4511.191 or
this section, the arresting officer shall seize the Ohio or out-of-state
driver's or commercial driver's license or permit of the person and immediately
forward it to the court in which the arrested person is to appear on the
charge. If the arrested person is not in possession of the person's license or
permit or it is not in the person's vehicle, the officer shall order the person
to surrender it to the law enforcement agency that employs the officer within
24 hours after the arrest, and, upon the surrender, the agency immediately
shall forward the license or permit to the court in which the person is to
appear on the charge. Upon receipt of the license or permit, the court shall
retain it pending the arrested person's initial appearance and any action taken
under Ohio R.C. §
   (e)   (1)   If a law enforcement officer asks a person under arrest as
described in division (a)(5) of this section to submit to a chemical test or
tests under that division and the test results indicate a prohibited
concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a
controlled substance in the person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma,
breath, or urine at the time of the alleged offense, or if a law enforcement
officer asks a person under arrest as described in division (b) of this section
to submit to a chemical test or tests under Ohio R.C. § 4511.191 or this
section, if the officer advises the person in accordance with this section of
the consequences of the person's refusal or submission, and if either the
person refuses to submit to the test or tests or, unless the arrest was for a
violation of § 434.011, Ohio R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, the person submits to the test or tests and the test
results indicate a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance,
or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the person's whole blood, blood
serum or plasma, breath, or urine at the time of the alleged offense, the
arresting officer shall do all of the following:
         A.   On behalf of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, notify the person
that, independent of any penalties or sanctions imposed upon the person, the
person's Ohio driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident
operating privilege is suspended immediately, that the suspension will last at
least until the person's initial appearance on the charge, which will be held
within five days after the date of the person's arrest or the issuance of a
citation to the person, and that the person may appeal the suspension at the
initial appearance or during the period of time ending 30 days after that
initial appearance;
         B.   Seize the driver's or commercial driver's license or permit of
the person and immediately forward it to the Registrar. If the arrested person
is not in possession of the person's license or permit or it is not in the
person's vehicle, the officer shall order the person to surrender it to the law
enforcement agency that employs the officer within 24 hours after the person is
given notice of the suspension, and, upon the surrender, the officer's
employing agency immediately shall forward the license or permit to the
Registrar;
         C.   Verify the person's current residence and, if it differs from
that on the person's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit, notify
the Registrar of the change;
         D.   Send to the Registrar, within 48 hours after the arrest of the
person, a sworn report that includes all of the following statements:
            1.   That the officer had reasonable grounds to believe that, at
the time of the arrest, the arrested person was operating a vehicle in
violation of Ohio R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B) or a municipal OVI ordinance or for
being in physical control of a stationary vehicle in violation of Ohio R.C. §
4511.194 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
            2.   That the person was arrested and charged with a violation of
Ohio R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), Ohio R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, or a municipal OVI ordinance;
            3.   Unless division (e)(1)D.5. of this section applies, that the
officer asked the person to take the designated chemical test or tests, advised
the person in accordance with this section of the consequences of submitting
to, or refusing to take, the test or tests, and gave the person the form
described in division (c) of this section;
            4.   Unless division (e)(1)D.5. of this section applies, that
either the person refused to submit to the chemical test or tests or, unless
the arrest was for a violation of Ohio R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the person submitted to the chemical test or
tests and the test results indicate a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a
controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the person's
whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine at the time of the alleged
offense.
            5.   If the person was under arrest as described in division (a)(5)
of this section and the chemical test or tests were performed in accordance
with that division, that the person was under arrest as described in that
division, that the chemical test or tests were performed in accordance with
that division, and that test results indicated a prohibited concentration of
alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in
the person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine at the time
of the alleged offense.
      (2)   Division (e)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is
arrested for a violation of § 434.011, Ohio R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, who is asked by a law enforcement officer to
submit to a chemical test or tests under this section, and who submits to the
test or tests, regardless of the amount of alcohol, a controlled substance, or
a metabolite of a controlled substance that the test results indicate is
present in the person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine.
   (f)   The arresting officer shall give the officer's sworn report that is
completed under this section to the arrested person at the time of the arrest,
or the
Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall send the report to the person by regular
first class mail as soon as possible after receipt of the report, but not later
than 14 days after receipt of it. An arresting officer may give an unsworn
report to the arrested person at the time of the arrest provided the report is
complete when given to the arrested person and subsequently is sworn to by the
arresting officer. As soon as possible, but not later than 48 hours after the
arrest of the person, the arresting officer shall send a copy of the sworn
report to the court in which the arrested person is to appear on the charge for
which the person was arrested.
   (g)   The sworn report of an arresting officer completed under this section
is prima facie proof of the information and statements that it contains. It
shall be admitted and considered as prima facie proof of the information and
statements that it contains in any appeal under Ohio R.C. § 4511.197 relative
to any suspension of a person's driver's or commercial driver's license or
permit or nonresident operating privilege that results from the arrest covered
by the report.
   (h)   (1)   A suspension of a person's driver's or commercial driver's
license or permit or nonresident operating privilege under this section for the
time described in Ohio R.C. § 4511.191(B) or (C) is effective
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
immediately from the time at which the arresting officer serves the notice of
suspension upon the arrested person. Any subsequent finding that the person is
not guilty of the charge that resulted in the person's being requested to take
the chemical test or tests under division (a) of this section does not affect
the suspension.
      (2)   If a person arrested for operating a vehicle in violation of §
434.01(a) or (b), Ohio R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), or any other municipal OVI
ordinance, or for being in physical control of a vehicle in violation of §
434.011 or Ohio R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, regardless of whether the person's driver's or commercial driver's
license or permit or nonresident operating privilege is or is not suspended
under Ohio R.C. § 4511.191(B) or (C) or Ohio R.C. Chapter 4510, the person's
initial appearance on the charge resulting from the arrest shall be held within
five days of the persons' arrest or the issuance of the citation to him or her,
subject to any continuance granted by the court pursuant to Ohio R.C. §
4511.197 regarding the issues specified in that section.
(Ord. 30-2012, passed 12-18-12)
Statutory reference:
   Implied consent - see Ohio R.C. § 4511.191
   Advice to OVI arrestee - see Ohio R.C. § 4511.192
   Continuous alcohol monitoring, see R.C. § 4511.198
   Disposition of fines, immobilization of vehicle and impoundment of license
plates, criminal forfeiture for municipal ordinance conviction, see R.C. §
4511.193
   Effect of refusal to submit to test, seizure of license, suspension periods,
appeal procedures, occupational driving privileges, and Indigent Drivers
Alcohol Treatment Funds, see R.C. § 4511.191
   Judicial pretrial suspension, initial appearance, see R.C. § 4511.196
   Mandatory suspension periods; immobilizing or disabling device; restricted
license, see R.C. § 4510.13
   Seizure of vehicles upon arrest, see R.C. § 4511.195
§ 434.013 IMMOBILIZING OR DISABLING DEVICE VIOLATION.
   (a)   (1)   No offender with limited driving privileges, during any period
that the offender is required to operate only a motor vehicle equipped with an
immobilizing or disabling device, shall request or permit any other person to
breathe into the device if it is an ignition interlock device or another type
of device that monitors the concentration of alcohol in a person's breath or to
otherwise start the motor vehicle equipped with the device, for the purpose of
providing the offender with an operable motor vehicle.
      (2)   A.   Except as provided in division (a)(2)B. of this section, no
person shall breathe into an
immobilizing or disabling device that is an ignition interlock device or
another type of device that monitors the concentration of alcohol in a person's
breath or otherwise start a motor vehicle equipped with an immobilizing or
disabling device, for the purpose of providing an operable motor vehicle to an
offender with limited driving privileges who is permitted to operate only a
motor vehicle equipped with an immobilizing or disabling device.
         B.   Division (a)(2)A. of this section does not apply to a person in
the following circumstances:
            1.   The person is an offender with limited driving privileges.
            2.   The person breathes into an immobilizing or disabling device
that is an ignition interlock device or another type of device that monitors
the concentration of alcohol in a person's breath or otherwise starts a motor
vehicle equipped with an immobilizing or disabling device.
            3.   The person breathes into the device or starts the vehicle for
the purpose of providing the person with an operable motor vehicle.
      (3)   No unauthorized person shall tamper with or circumvent the
operation of an immobilizing or disabling device.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of an immobilizing or
disabling device violation, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Ord. 30-2012, passed 12-18-2012)
Statutory reference:
   Immobilizing or disabling device violation - see Ohio R.C. § 4510.44
§ 434.02 RECKLESS OPERATION ON STREETS, PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (a)   No person shall operate a vehicle on any street or highway in willful
or wanton disregard of the safety of persons or property.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle on any public or private
property other than streets or highways in willful or wanton disregard of the
safety of persons or property.
      (2)   Division (b)(1) of this section does not apply to the competitive
operation of vehicles on public or private property when the owner of such
property knowingly permits such operation thereon.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates any
provision of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates any
provision of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If,
within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates any
provision of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(Ord. 30-2012, passed 12-18-2012)
Statutory reference:
   Operation in willful or wanton disregard of the safety of persons or
property - see Ohio R.C. § 4511.20
§ 434.025 REASONABLE CONTROL.
   (a)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle, agricultural tractor, or
agricultural tractor that is towing, pulling, or otherwise drawing a unit of
farm machinery on any street, highway, or property open to the public for
vehicular traffic without being in reasonable control of the vehicle,
agricultural tractor, or unit of farm machinery.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of operating a motor vehicle
or agricultural trailer without being in control of it, a minor misdemeanor.
(Ord. 30-2012, passed 12-18-2012)
Statutory reference:
   Reasonable control of vehicle - see Ohio R.C. § 4511.202
§ 434.03 MAXIMUM SPEED LIMITS; ASSURED CLEAR DISTANCE AHEAD.
   (a)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a speed greater or less
than is reasonable or proper, having due regard for the traffic, surface, and
width of the street or highway and any other conditions, and no person shall
drive any motor vehicle in and upon any street or highway at a greater speed
than will permit him or her to bring it to a stop within the assured clear
distance ahead.
   (b)   It is prima facie lawful, in the absence of a lower limit declared or
established pursuant to this section by the Director of Transportation or local
authorities, for the operator of a motor vehicle to operate the same at a speed
not exceeding the following:
      (1)   A.   Twenty miles per hour in school zones during school recess and
while children are going to or leaving school during the opening or closing
hours, and when 20 miles per hour school speed limit signs are erected, except
that on controlled-access highways and expressways, if the right-of-way line
fence has been erected without pedestrian opening, the speed shall be governed
by division (b)(4) of this section, and on freeways, if the right-of-way line
fence has been erected without pedestrian opening, the speed shall be governed
by divisions (b)(9) and (b)(10) of this section. The end of every school zone
may be marked by a sign indicating the end of the zone. Nothing in this section
or in the Manual and Specifications for a Uniform System of Traffic-Control
Devices shall be construed to require school zones to be indicated by signs
equipped with flashing or other lights, or giving other special notice of the
hours in which the school zone speed limit is in effect.
         B.   As used in this section, SCHOOL means any school chartered under
Ohio R.C. 3301.16 and any nonchartered school that during the preceding year
filed with the Department of Education in compliance with O.A.C. 3301-35-08, a
copy of the school's report for the parents of the school's pupils  certifying
that the school meets State minimum standards for non-chartered, nontax-
supported schools and presents evidence of this filing to the jurisdiction from
which it is requesting the establishment of a school zone. SCHOOL also includes
a special elementary school that in writing requests the County Engineer to
create a school zone at the location of the school. Upon receipt of such
written request, the County Engineer shall create a school zone at that
location by erecting appropriate signs.
         C.   As used in this section, SCHOOL ZONE means that portion of a
street or highway passing a school fronting upon the street or highway that is
encompassed by projecting the school property lines to the fronting street or
highway, and also includes that portion of a State highway. Upon request from
local authorities for streets and highways under their jurisdiction and that
portion of a State highway under the jurisdiction of the Director of
Transportation or a request from a County Engineer in the case of a school zone
for a special elementary school, the Director may extend the traditional school
zone boundaries. The distances in divisions (b)(1)C.1. through 3. below shall
not exceed 300 feet per approach per direction, and are bounded by whichever of
the following distances or combination thereof the Director approves as most
appropriate:
            1.   The distance encompassed by projecting the school building
lines normal to the fronting highway and extending a distance of 300 feet on
each approach direction;
            2.   The distance encompassed by projecting the school property
lines intersecting the fronting highway and extending a distance of 300 feet on
each approach direction;
            3.   The distance encompassed by the special marking of the
pavement for a principal school pupil crosswalk plus a distance of 300 feet on
each approach direction of the highway.
         D.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to invalidate the
Director's initial action on
August 9,1976, establishing all school zones at the traditional school zone
boundaries defined by projecting school property lines, except when those
boundaries are extended as provided in divisions (b)(1)A. and (b)(1)C. of this
section.
         E.   As used in this division, CROSSWALK has the meaning given that
term in Ohio R.C. 4511.01(LL)(2).
         F.   The Director may, upon request by resolution of the Legislative
Authority and upon submission by the Municipality of such engineering, traffic,
and other information as the Director considers necessary, designate a school
zone on any portion of a State route lying within the Municipality that
includes a crosswalk customarily used by children going to or leaving a school
during recess and opening and closing hours, whenever the distance, as measured
in a straight line, from the school property line nearest the crosswalk to the
nearest point of a crosswalk is no more than 1,320 feet. Such a school zone
shall include the distance encompassed by the crosswalk and extending 300 feet
in each appropriate direction of the State route.
         G.   As used in this section, SPECIAL ELEMENTARY SCHOOL means a school
that meets all of the following:
            1.   It is not chartered and does not receive tax revenue from any
source.
            2.   It does not educate children beyond the eighth grade.
            3.   It is located outside the limits of a municipal corporation.
            4.   A majority of the total number of students enrolled at the
school are not related by blood.
            5.   The principal or other person in charge of the special
elementary school annually sends a report to the superintendent of the school
district in which the special elementary school is located indicating the total
number of students enrolled at the school, but otherwise the principal or other
person in charge does not report any other information or data to the
superintendent.
      (2)   Twenty-five miles per hour in all other portions of the
Municipality, except on state routes outside business districts, through
highways outside business districts, and alleys;
      (3)   Thirty-five miles per hour on all state routes or through highways
within the Municipality outside business districts, except as provided in
divisions (b)(4) and (B)(6) of this section;
      (4)   Fifty miles per hour on controlled- access highways and expressways
within the Municipality;
      (5)   Fifty-five miles per hour on highways outside the Municipality,
other than highways within island jurisdictions as provided in division (b)(8)
of this section and freeways as provided in divisions (b)(13) and (b)(14) of
this section;
      (6)   Fifty miles per hour on state routes within the Municipality
outside urban districts unless a lower prima facie speed is established as
further provided in this section;
      (7)   Fifteen miles per hour on all alleys within the Municipality;
      (8)   Thirty-five miles per hour on highways outside the Municipality
that are within an island jurisdiction;
      (9)   Fifty-five miles per hour at all times on freeways with paved
shoulders inside the Municipality, other than freeways as provided in divisions
(b)(13) and (b)(14);
      (10)   Fifty-five miles per hour at all times on freeways outside the
Municipality, other than freeways as provided in divisions (b)(13) and (b)(14);
      (11)   Fifty-five miles per hour at all times on all portions of freeways
that are part of the interstate system and on all portions of freeways not part
of the interstate system, but are built to the standards and specifications
that are applicable to freeways that are part of the interstate system for
operators of any motor vehicle weighing in excess of 8,000 pounds empty weight
and any noncommercial bus, except as provided in division (b)(14) of this
section;
      (12)   Fifty-five miles per hour for operators of any motor vehicle
weighing 8,000 pounds or less empty weight and any commercial bus at all times
on all portions of freeways that are part of the interstate system and that had
such a speed limit established prior to October 1, 1995, and freeways that are
not part of the interstate system but are built to the standards and
specifications that are applicable to freeways that are part of the interstate
system and that had such a speed limit established prior to October 1, 1995,
unless a higher speed limit is established under Ohio R.C. § 4511.21(L);
      (13)   Sixty-five miles per hour for operators of any motor vehicle
weighing 8,000 pounds or less empty weight and any commercial bus at all times
on all portions of the following:
         A.   Freeways that are part of the interstate system and that had such
a speed limit established prior to October 1, 1995, and freeways that are not
part of the interstate system but are built to the standards and specifications
that are applicable to freeways that are part of the interstate system and that
had such a speed limit established prior to October 1, 1995;
         B.   Freeways that are part of the interstate system and freeways that
are not part of the interstate system but are built to the standards and
specifications that are applicable to freeways that are part of the interstate
system, and that had such a speed limit established under Ohio R.C. 4511.21(L);
         C.   Rural, divided, multi-lane highways that are designated as part
of the national highway system under the National Highway System Designation
Act of 1995, 109 Stat. 568, 23 U.S.C. 103, and that had such a speed limit
established under Ohio R.C. § 4511.21(M).
      (14)   Sixty-five miles per hour at all times on all portions of freeways
that are part of the interstate system and that had such a speed limit on July
1, 2009 for operators of any motor vehicle weighing in excess of 8,000 pounds
empty weight and any noncommercial bus.
   (c)   It is prima facie unlawful for any person to exceed any of the speed
limitations in divisions (b)(1)A., (b)(2), (b)(3), (b)(4), (b)(6), (b)(7) and
(b)(8) of this section or any declared or established pursuant to this section
by the Director or local authorities and it is unlawful for any person to
exceed any of the speed limitations in division (d) of this section. No person
shall be convicted of more than one violation of this section for the same
conduct, although violations of more than one provision of this section may be
charged in the alternative in a single affidavit.
   (d)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon a street or highway as
follows:
      (1)   At a speed exceeding 55 miles per hour, except upon a freeway as
provided in divisions (b)(13) and (b)(14)of this section;
      (2)   At a speed exceeding 65 miles per hour upon a freeway as provided
in divisions (b)(13) and (b)(14) of this section;
      (3)   If operating a motor vehicle weighing in excess of 8,000 pounds
empty weight or a noncommercial bus as prescribed in division (b)(11) of this
section, at a speed exceeding 55 miles per hour upon a freeway as provided in
that division;
      (4)   At a speed exceeding the posted speed limit upon a freeway for
which the Director has determined and declared a speed limit of not more than
65 miles per hour pursuant to Ohio R.C. § 4511.21(L)(2) or (M);
      (5)   At a speed exceeding 65 miles per hour upon a freeway for which
such a speed limit has been established through the operation of Ohio R.C. §
4511.21(L)(3);
      (6) At a speed exceeding the posted speed limit upon a freeway for which
the Director had determined and declared a speed limit pursuant to Ohio R.C. §
4511.21(f)(2).
   (e)   Pursuant to Ohio R.C. § 4511.21(E), in every charge of violating this
section, the affidavit and warrant shall specify the time, place and speed at
which the defendant is alleged to have driven, and in charges made in reliance
upon division (c) of this section also the speed which division (b)(1)A., (b)
(2), (b)(3), (b)(4), (b)(6), (b)(7) or (b)(8) of, or a limit declared or
established pursuant to, this section or Ohio R.C. § 4511.21 declares is prima
facie lawful at the time and place of such alleged violation, except that in
affidavits where a person is alleged to have driven at a greater speed than
will permit the person to bring the vehicle to stop within the assured clear
distance ahead, the affidavit and warrant need not specify the speed at which
the defendant is alleged to have driven.
   (f)   Pursuant to Ohio R.C. § 4511.21(F), when a speed in excess of both a
prima facie limitation and a limitation in division (d)(1), (d)(2), (d)(3), (d)
(4), (d)(5) or (d)(6) of this section is alleged, the defendant shall be
charged in a single affidavit, alleging a single act, with a violation
indicated of both division (b)(1)A., (b)(2), (b)(3), (b)(4), (b)(6), (b)(7) or
(b)(8) of this section, or of a limit declared or established pursuant to this
section or Ohio R.C. § 4511.21 by the Director or local authorities, and of the
limitation in division (d)(1), (d)(2), (d)(3), (d)(4), (d)(5) or (d)(6) of this
section, if the court finds a violation of division (b)(l)A., (b)(2), (b)(3),
(b)(4), (b)(6), (b)(7) or (b)(8), or a limit declared or established pursuant
to this section or Ohio R.C. § 4511.21 has occurred, it shall enter judgment of
conviction under such division and dismiss the charge under division (d)(1),
(d)(2), (d)(3), (d)(4), (d)(5) or (d)(6) of this section. If it finds no
violation of division (b)(1)A., (b)(2), (b)(3), (b)(4), (b)(6), (b)(7) or (b)
(8) of, or a limit declared or established pursuant to, this section or Ohio
R.C. § 4511.21, it shall then consider whether the evidence supports a
conviction under division (d)(2), (d)(3), (d)(4), (d)(5) or (d)(6) of this
section.
   (g)   Pursuant to Ohio R.C. § 4511.21(G), points shall be assessed for a
violation of a limitation under division (d) of this section in accordance with
Ohio R.C. § 4510.036.
   (h)   Whenever, in accordance with Ohio R.C. § 4511.21(H) through (N), the
maximum prima facie speed limitations as established herein have been altered,
either higher or lower, and the appropriate signs giving notice have been
erected as required, operators of motor vehicles shall be governed by the speed
limitations set forth on such signs. It is prima facie unlawful for any person
to exceed the speed limits posted upon such signs.
   (i)   As used in this section:
      (1)   COMMERCIAL BUS means a motor vehicle designed for carrying more
than nine passengers and used for the transportation of persons for
compensation.
      (2)   INTERSTATE SYSTEM has the same meaning as in 23 U.S.C. 101.
      (3)   NONCOMMERCIAL BUS includes but is not limited to a school bus, or a
motor vehicle operated solely for the transportation of persons associated with
a charitable or nonprofit organization.
   (j)   Penalty.
      (1)   A violation of any provision of this section is one of the
following:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (j)(1)B., (j)(1)C., and
(j)(2) and (j)(3) of this section, a minor misdemeanor;
         B.   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of any provision of this
section, Ohio R.C. § 4511.21, or any provision of any other municipal ordinance
that is substantially equivalent to any provision of that section, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree;
         C.   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of any
provision of this section, Ohio R.C. § 4511.21, or any provision of any other
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any provision of that
section, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   If the offender has not previously been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of any provision of this section, Ohio R.C. § 4511.21, or
any other municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any provision
of that section, and operated a motor vehicle faster than 35 miles an hour in a
business district of the municipality, faster than 50 miles an hour in other
portions of the municipality, or faster than 35 miles an hour in a school zone
during recess or while children are going to or leaving school during the
school's opening or closing hours, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (3)   Notwithstanding division (j)(1) of this section, if the offender
operated a motor vehicle in a construction zone where a sign was then posted in
accordance with Ohio R.C. § 4511.98, the court, in addition to all other
penalties provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a fine of two times
the usual amount imposed for the violation. No court shall impose a fine of two
times the usual amount imposed for the violation upon an offender if the
offender alleges, in an affidavit filed with the court prior to the offender's
sentencing, that the offender is indigent and is unable to pay the fine imposed
pursuant to this division and if the court determines that the offender is an
indigent person and unable to pay the fine.
(Ord. 30-2012, passed 12-18-2012)
   Penalty - see Sections
408.01 and
408.02
Statutory reference:
   Speed limits; assured clear distance - see Ohio R.C. § 4511.21(A) - (G),
(P), (O)
§ 434.04 SLOW SPEED; POSTED MINIMUM SPEEDS.
   (a)   No person shall operate a vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede or
block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when stopping or
reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or to comply with law.
   (b)   Whenever the Director of Transportation or local authorities determine
on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that slow speeds on
any part of a controlled-access highway, expressway, or freeway consistently
impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, the Director or such
local authority may declare a minimum speed limit below which no person shall
operate a motor vehicle, except when necessary for safe operation or in
compliance with the law. No minimum speed limit established hereunder shall be
less than 30 miles per hour, greater than 50 miles per hour, nor effective
until the provisions of Ohio R.C. § 4511.21 or a substantially similar
municipal ordinance, relating to appropriate signs, have been fulfilled and
local authorities have obtained the approval of the Director.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(Ord. 30-2012, passed 12-18-2012)
   Penalty - see Sections
408.01 and
408.02
§ 434.05 SPEED LIMITATIONS OVER BRIDGES.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle over any bridge or other
elevated structure constituting a part of a highway at a speed which is greater
than the maximum speed that can be maintained with safety to such bridge or
structure, when such structure is posted with signs as provided in this
section.
      (2)   The Department of Transportation upon request from any local
authority shall, or upon its own initiative may, conduct an investigation of
any bridge or other elevated structure constituting a part of a highway, and if
it finds that such structure cannot with safety withstand traffic traveling at
the speed otherwise permissible under this Traffic Code, the Department shall
determine and declare the maximum speed of traffic which such structure can
withstand, and shall cause or permit suitable signs stating such maximum speed
to be erected and maintained at a distance of a least 100 feet before each end
of the structure.
      (3)   Upon the trial of any person charged with a violation of this
section, proof of such determination of the maximum speed by the Department and
the existence of such signs shall constitute prima facie evidence of the
maximum speed which can be maintained with safety to such bridge or structure.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(Ord. 30-2012, passed 12-18-2012)
   Penalty - see Sections
408.01 and
408.02
Statutory reference:
   Speed limits on bridges - see Ohio R.C. § 4511.23
§ 434.06 SPEED EXCEPTIONS FOR EMERGENCY OR SAFETY VEHICLES.
   The prima facie speed limitations set forth in Ohio R.C. § 4511.21 or a
substantially similar municipal ordinance do not apply to emergency vehicles or
public safety vehicles when they are responding to emergency calls and are
equipped with and displaying at least one flashing, rotating, or oscillating
light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet
to the front of the vehicle, and when the drivers thereof sound audible signals
by bell, siren, or exhaust whistle. This section does not relieve the driver of
an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons using the street or highway.
(Ord. 30-2012, passed 12-18-2012)
Statutory reference:
   Speed limits not applicable to emergency or public safety vehicles - see
Ohio R.C. § 4511.24
§ 434.07 STREET RACING PROHIBITED.
   (a)   As used in this section, STREET RACING means the operation of two or
more vehicles from a point side by side at accelerating speeds in a competitive
attempt to outdistance each other, or the operation of one or more vehicles
over a common selected course, from the same point to the same point, wherein
timing is made of the participating vehicles involving competitive
accelerations or speeds. Persons rendering assistance in any manner to such
competitive use of vehicles shall be equally charged as the participants. The
operation of two or more vehicles side by side either at speeds in excess of
prima facie lawful speeds established by Ohio R.C. § 4511.21(B)(1)(a) through
(B)(8) or a substantially similar municipal ordinance, or rapidly accelerating
from a common starting point to a speed in excess of such prima facie lawful
speeds shall be prima facie evidence of street racing.
   (b)   No person shall participate in street racing upon any public road,
street, or highway in this Municipality.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of street racing, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition to any other sanctions, the court
shall suspend the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating
privileges for not less than 30 days or more than three years. No judge shall
suspend the first 30 days of any suspension of an offender's license, permit,
or privilege imposed under this division.
(Ord. 30-2012, passed 12-18-2012)
Statutory reference:
   Street racing - see Ohio R.C. § 4511.251
§ 434.08 VEHICULAR HOMICIDE; VEHICULAR MANSLAUGHTER.
   (a)   No person, while operating or participating in the operation of a
motor vehicle, motorcycle, snowmobile, locomotive, watercraft, or aircraft,
shall cause the death of another or the unlawful termination of another's
pregnancy in any of the following ways:
      (1)   A.   As the proximate result of committing a violation of Ohio R.C.
§ 4511.19(A) or of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
         B.   As the proximate result of committing a violation of Ohio R.C. §
1547.11(A) or of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
         C.   As the proximate result of committing a violation of Ohio R.C. §
4561.15(A)(3) or of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (2)   In one of the following ways:
         A.   Recklessly;
         B.   As the proximate result of committing, while operating or
participating in the operation of a motor vehicle or motorcycle in a
construction zone, a reckless operation offense, provided that this division
applies only if the person whose death is caused or whose pregnancy is
unlawfully terminated is in the construction zone at the time of the offender's
commission of the reckless operation offense in the construction zone and does
not apply as described in division (d) of this section.
      (3)   In one of the following ways:
         A.   Negligently;
         B.   As the proximate result of committing, while operating or
participating in the operation of a motor vehicle or motorcycle in a
construction zone, a speeding offense, provided that this division applies only
if the person whose death is caused or whose pregnancy is unlawfully terminated
is in the construction zone at the time of the offender's commission of the
speeding offense in the construction zone and does not apply as described in
division (d) of this section.
      (4)   As the proximate result of committing a violation of any provision
of any section contained in Ohio R.C. Title 45 that is a minor misdemeanor or
of a municipal ordinance that, regardless of the penalty set by ordinance for
the violation, is substantially equivalent to any provision of any section
contained in Ohio R.C. Title 45 that is a minor misdemeanor.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a)(1) or (2) of this section is
guilty of aggravated vehicular homicide, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (2)   A.   Whoever violates division (a)(3) of this section is guilty of
vehicular homicide. Except as otherwise provided in this division, vehicular
homicide is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Vehicular homicide committed in
violation of division (a)(3) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law if, at the time of the offense, the offender was driving
under a suspension or cancellation imposed under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4510 or any
other provision of the Ohio Revised Code or was operating a motor vehicle or
motorcycle, did not have a valid driver's license, commercial driver's license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating
privilege, and was not eligible for renewal of the offender's driver's license
or commercial driver's license without examination under Ohio R.C. § 4507.10 or
if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a
violation of this section or any traffic- related homicide, manslaughter, or
assault offense. The court shall impose a mandatory jail term on the offender
when required by division (c) of this section.
         B.   In addition to any other sanctions imposed pursuant to this
division, the court shall impose upon the offender a class four suspension of
the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary
instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege
from the range specified in Ohio R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4) or, if the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this
section or any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or assault offense, a
class three suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in Ohio R.C. § 4510.02(A)(3), or,
if the offender previously had been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a
traffic-related murder, felonious assault, or attempted murder offense, a class
two suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating
privilege as specified in Ohio R.C. § 4510.02(A)(2).
      (3)   A.   Whoever violates division (a)(4) of this section is guilty of
vehicular manslaughter. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
vehicular manslaughter is a misdemeanor of the second degree. Vehicular
manslaughter is a misdemeanor of the first degree if, at the time of the
offense, the offender was driving under a suspension or cancellation imposed
under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4510 or any other provision of the Revised Code or was
operating a motor vehicle or motorcycle, did not have a valid driver's license,
commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary
license, or nonresident operating privilege, and was not eligible for renewal
of the offender's driver's license or commercial driver's license without
examination under Ohio R.C. § 4507.10 or if the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this section or any traffic-
related homicide, manslaughter, or assault offense.
         B.   In addition to any other sanctions imposed pursuant to this
division, the court shall impose upon the offender a class six suspension of
the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary
instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege
from the range specified in Ohio R.C. § 4510.02(A)(6) or, if the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this
section, any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or assault offense, or a
traffic-related murder, felonious assault, or attempted murder offense, a class
four suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in Ohio R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4).
   (c)   The court shall impose a mandatory prison term on an offender who is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a felony violation of this section, as
provided in Ohio R.C. § 2903.06(E). The court shall impose a mandatory jail
term of at least 15 days on an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to
a misdemeanor violation of division (a)(3)B. of this section and may impose
upon the offender a longer jail term as authorized pursuant to Ohio R.C. §
2929.24.
   (d)   Divisions (a)(2)B. and (a)(3)B. of this section do not apply in a
particular construction zone unless signs of the type described in Ohio R.C. §
2903.081 are erected in that construction zone in accordance with the
guidelines and design specifications established by the Director of
Transportation under Ohio R.C. § 5501.27. The failure to erect signs of the
type described in Ohio R.C. § 2903.081 in a particular construction zone in
accordance with those guidelines and design specifications does not limit or
affect the application of division (a)(1), (a)(2)A., (a)(3)A., or (a)(4) of
this section in that construction zone or the prosecution of any person who
violates any of those divisions in that construction zone.
   (e)   (1)   As used in this section:
         A.   CONSTRUCTION ZONE has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. § 5501.27.
         B.   MANDATORY PRISON TERM and MANDATORY JAIL TERM have the same
meanings as in Ohio R.C. § 2929.01.
         C.   MOTOR VEHICLE has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. § 4501.01.
         D.   RECKLESS OPERATION OFFENSE means a violation of Ohio R.C. §
4511.20 or a municipal ordinance substantially equivalent to Ohio R.C. §
4511.20.
         E   SPEEDING OFFENSE means a violation of Ohio R.C. § 4511.21 or a
municipal ordinance pertaining to speed.
         F.   TRAFFIC-RELATED HOMICIDE, MANSLAUGHTER, OR ASSAULT OFFENSE means
a violation of Ohio R.C. § 2903.04 in circumstances in which division (d) of
that section applies, a violation of Ohio R.C. § 2903.06 or 2903.08, or a
violation of Ohio R.C. § 2903.06, 2903.07, or 2903.08 as they existed prior to
March 23, 2000.
         G.   TRAFFIC-RELATED MURDER, FELONIOUS ASSAULT, OR ATTEMPTED MURDER
OFFENSE means a violation of Ohio R.C. § 2903.01 or Ohio R.C. § 2903.02 in
circumstances in which the offender used a motor vehicle as the means to commit
the violation, a violation of Ohio R.C. § 2903.11(A)(2) in circumstances in
which the deadly weapon used in the commission of the violation  is a motor
vehicle, or an attempt to commit aggravated murder or murder in violation of
Ohio R.C. § 2923.02 in circumstances in which the offender used a motor vehicle
as the means to attempt to commit the aggravated murder or murder.
      (2)   For the purposes of this section, when a penalty or suspension is
enhanced because of a prior or current violation of a specified law or a prior
or current specified offense, the reference to the violation of the specified
law or the specified offense includes any violation of any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, former law of this state, or current or former
law of this or another state or the United States.
(Ord. 30-2012, passed 12-18-2012)
Statutory reference:
   Aggravated vehicular assault, felony, see Ohio R.C. 2903.08
   Trial court to suspend driver’s license, see Ohio R.C. 4510.05, 4510.10
   Vehicular homicide; vehicular manslaughter see Ohio R.C. § 2903.06
§ 434.09 OPERATION RESTRICTED FOR MINI-TRUCKS AND LOW-SPEED, UNDER- SPEED, OR
UTILITY VEHICLES.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall operate a low-speed vehicle upon any street or
highway having an established speed limit greater than 35 miles per hour.
      (2)   No person shall operate an under-speed or utility vehicle or a
mini-truck upon any street or highway except as follows:
         A.   Upon a street or highway having an established speed limit not
greater than 35 miles per hour and only upon such streets or highways where the
municipality has granted permission for such operation in accordance with
division (e) of this section;
         B.   A state park or political subdivision employee or volunteer
operating a utility vehicle exclusively within the boundaries of state parks or
political subdivision parks for the operation or maintenance of state or
political subdivision park facilities.
      (3)   No person shall operate a motor-driven cycle or motor scooter upon
any street or highway having an established speed limit greater than 45 miles
per hour.
   (b)   This section does not prohibit either of the following:
      (1)   A person operating a low-speed, under- speed, or utility vehicle or
a mini-truck from proceeding across an intersection of a street or highway
having a speed limit greater than 35 miles per hour;
      (2)   A person operating a motor-driven cycle or motor scooter from
proceeding across an intersection of a street or highway having a speed limit
greater than 45 miles per hour.
   (c)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the municipality from adopting
more stringent local ordinances, resolutions, or regulations governing the
operation of a low-speed vehicle or a mini-truck, or a motor-driven cycle or
motor scooter.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If within one year of
the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.214)
   (e)   By ordinance or resolution, the municipality may authorize the
operation of under-speed or utility vehicles or mini-trucks on a public street
or highway under its jurisdiction. The municipality shall do all of the
following:
      (1)   Limit the operation of those vehicles to streets and highways
having an established speed limit not greater than 35 miles per hour;
      (2)   Require the vehicle owner who wishes to operate an under-speed or
utility vehicle or a mini- truck on the public streets or highways to submit
the vehicle to an inspection conducted by a local law enforcement agency that
complies with inspection requirements established by the Department of Public
Safety under R.C. § 4513.02;
      (3)   Permit the operation on public streets or highways of only those
vehicles that successfully pass the required vehicle inspection, are registered
in accordance with R.C. Chapter 4503, and are titled in accordance with R.C.
Chapter 4505;
      (4)   Notify the Director of Public Safety, in a manner the Director
determines, of the authorization for the operation of under-speed or utility
vehicles or mini-trucks.
   (f)   The municipality may establish additional requirements for the
operation of under-speed or utility vehicles or mini-trucks on its streets and
highways.
(R.C. § 4511.215)
   (g)   Notwithstanding divisions (a) through (f) of this section, a person
may operate a utility vehicle on any public roads or right-of-way, other than a
freeway, when traveling from one farm field to another for agricultural
purposes if the vehicle is displaying a triangular slow-moving vehicle emblem
as described in R.C. § 4513.112.
(R.C. § 4511.216)
   (h)   (1)   Except as provided in this division (h) and divisions (e) and
(f) of this section, no person shall operate a mini-truck within this
municipality.
      (2)   A person may operate a mini-truck on a farm for agricultural
purposes only when the owner of the farm qualifies for the current agricultural
use valuation tax credit. A mini-truck may be operated by or on behalf of such
a farm owner on public roads and rights-of-way only when traveling from one
farm field to another.
      (3)   A person may operate a mini-truck on property owned or leased by a
dealer who sells mini- trucks at retail.
      (4)   Whoever violates this division (h) shall be penalized as provided
in division (d) of this section.
(R.C. § 4519.401)
§ 434.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 436: LICENSING; ACCIDENTS
436.01   Driver’s or commercial driver’s license required.
436.02   Possession of more than one license prohibited.
436.03   Driving with temporary instruction permit.
436.035   Driving with probationary license.
436.04   Certain acts prohibited.
436.05   Owner or operator allowing another to drive.
436.06   Display of license.
436.07   Driving under suspension or revocation or without proof of financial
responsibility or in violation of license restrictions. (Repealed)
436.071   Driving under suspension or in violation of license restriction.
436.072   Operating motor vehicle without valid license.
436.073   Driving under O.V.I. suspension.
436.074   Driving under financial responsibility law suspension or
cancellation.
436.075   Failure to reinstate license.
436.08   Operation or sale without certificate of title.
436.09   Display of license plates; registration; obstructions.
436.10   Use of illegal license plates.
436.11   Failure to stop after accident.
436.12   Stopping after accident on other than public roads or highways.
436.13   Vehicle accident resulting in damage to realty.
436.14   Removal of vehicles after accidents.
436.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar State law
   Motor vehicle licensing law - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4503
   Driver’s license law - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4507
   Power of trial court of record to suspend license for certain violations -
see Ohio R.C. 4510.05, 4510.15
   Employment of a minor to operate a taxicab prohibited - see Ohio R.C.
4507.321
   State point system suspension - see Ohio R.C. 4507.021
   State accident reports - see Ohio R.C. 4509.01, 4509.06, 4509.74, 5502.11
   Suspension of driver’s license - see TRAF.
408.03; GEN. OFF.
698.07
   Glass removal from street after accident - see TRAF.
412.01
   Licensing requirements of snowmobile, off-highway and all-purpose vehicle
operator - see TRAF.
476.05
   Snowmobile, off-highway and all-purpose vehicle accident reports - see TRAF.
476.06
§ 436.01 DRIVER’S OR COMMERCIAL DRIVER’S LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (a)   No person shall permit the operation of a motor vehicle upon any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking, knowing the operator does not have a valid driver's license issued
to the operator by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a deputy registrar under
R.C. Chapter 4507 or a valid commercial driver's license issued under R.C.
Chapter 4506. Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
this division is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an
unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced pursuant to §
698.02, §
698.03, R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
698.02(d) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
698.02(f)(1)B.1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
698.02(e)(1)C. and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
698.02(e)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case. If, within three years of
the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
two or more violations of this section or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4507.02(A)(1))
   (b)   (1)   No person shall be required to obtain a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license for the purpose of temporarily driving, operating, drawing,
moving or propelling a road roller or road machinery upon a street or highway.
      (2)   No person shall be required to obtain a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license for the purpose of temporarily driving, operating, drawing,
moving or propelling any agricultural tractor or implement of husbandry upon a
street or highway at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less.
      (3)   No person shall drive, operate, draw, move or propel any
agricultural tractor or implement of husbandry upon a street or highway at a
speed greater than 25 miles per hour unless the person has a current, valid
driver’s or commercial driver’s license.
      (4)   No person having a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license
shall be required to have a motorcycle operator’s endorsement to operate a
motorcycle having three wheels with a motor of not more than 50 cubic
centimeters piston displacement.
      (5)   No person having a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license
shall be required to have a motorcycle operator’s endorsement to operate an
autocycle or a cab-enclosed motorcycle.
      (6)   Every person on active duty in the military or naval forces of the
United States, when furnished with a driver’s permit and when operating an
official motor vehicle in connection with that duty, is exempt from the license
requirements of R.C. Chapters 4506 and 4507. Every person on active duty in the
military or naval forces of the United States or in service with the Peace
Corps, Volunteers in Service to America or the foreign service of the United
States is exempt from the license requirements of such sections for the period
of the person’s active duty or service and for six months thereafter, provided
the person was a licensee under such sections at the time the person commenced
the person’s active duty or service. This section does not prevent such a
person or the person’s spouse or dependent from making an application, as
provided in R.C. § 4507.10(C), for the renewal of a driver’s license or
motorcycle operator’s endorsement or as provided in R.C. § 4506.14 for the
renewal of a commercial driver’s license during the period of the person’s
active duty or service.
      (7)   Whoever violates division (b)(3) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4507.03)
   (c)   Nonresidents, permitted to drive upon the highways of their own state,
may operate any motor vehicle upon any highway in this state without
examination or license under R.C. §§ 4507.01 to 4507.39, inclusive, upon
condition that the nonresident may be required at any time or place to prove
lawful possession or their right to operate the motor vehicle, and to establish
proper identity.
(R.C. § 4507.04)
   (d)   Surrender of driver’s license from another state.
      (1)   Any person who becomes a resident of this state, within 30 days of
becoming a resident, shall surrender any driver's license, temporary
instruction permit, or identification card issued by another state to the
Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a deputy registrar. If such a person intends to
operate a motor vehicle upon the public roads or highways, the person shall
apply for a temporary instruction permit or driver's license in this state. If
the person fails to apply for a driver's license or temporary instruction
permit or within 30 days of becoming a resident, the person shall not operate
any motor vehicle in this state under a license or permit issued by another
state.
      (2)   A.   Whoever violates division (d)(1) of this section is guilty of
a minor misdemeanor.
         B.   The offense established under division (d)(2)A. of this section
is a strict liability offense and strict liability is a culpable mental state
for purposes of R.C. § 2901.20. The designation of this offense as a strict
liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other offense, for
which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict liability
offense.
      (3)   For purposes of division (d)(1) of this section, “resident” means
any person to whom any of the following applies:
         A.   The person maintains their principal residence in this state and
does not reside in this state as a result of the person’s active service in the
United States armed forces.
         B.   The person is determined by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles to be
a resident in accordance with standards adopted by the Registrar under R.C. §
4507.01.
(R.C. § 4507.213)
§ 436.02 POSSESSION OF MORE THAN ONE LICENSE PROHIBITED.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall receive a driver's license, or a motorcycle
operator's endorsement of a driver's or commercial driver's license, temporary
instruction permit, or identification card unless and until the person
surrenders to the Registrar or a deputy registrar all valid licenses, temporary
instruction permits, and identification cards issued to the person by another
jurisdiction recognized by this state.
       (2)   The Registrar shall report the cancellation of a license,
temporary instruction permit, or identification card to the issuing authority,
together with information that the license, temporary instruction permit, or
identification card is now issued in this state. The Registrar or a deputy
registrar shall destroy any such license, temporary instruction permit, or
identification card that is not returned to the issuing authority.
      (3)   No person shall possess more than one valid license, temporary
instruction permit, or identification card at any time.
(R.C. § 4507.02(A)(2))
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(ORC 4507.99)
§ 436.03 DRIVING WITH TEMPORARY INSTRUCTION PERMIT.
   (a)   No holder of a temporary instruction permit issued under Ohio R.C.
4507.05(A) shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or
private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking
in violation of the conditions established under Ohio R.C. 4507.05(A).
   (b)   Except as provided in division (c) of this section, no holder of a
temporary instruction permit that is issued under Ohio R.C. 4507.05(A) and that
is issued on or after July 1, 1998, and who has not attained the age of 18
years, shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private
property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking between
the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m.
   (c)   The holder of a temporary instruction permit issued under Ohio R.C.
4507.05(A) on or after July 1, 1998, who has not attained the age of 18 years,
may operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property
used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking between the
hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m. if, at the time of such operation, the holder
is accompanied by the holder’s parent, guardian, or custodian, and the parent,
guardian, or custodian holds a current valid driver’s or commercial driver’s
license issued by this State, is actually occupying a seat beside the permit
holder, and does not have a prohibited concentration of alcohol in the whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine as provided in Ohio R.C. 4511.19
(A).
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4507.05(F), (I))
§ 436.035 DRIVING WITH PROBATIONARY LICENSE.
   (a)   (1)   A.   No holder of a probationary driver’s license who has held
the license for less than 12 months shall operate a motor vehicle upon a
highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m. unless
the holder is accompanied by the holder’s parent or guardian.
         B.   No holder of a probationary driver’s license who has held the
license for 12 months or longer shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or
any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. unless the
holder is accompanied by the holder’s parent or guardian.
      (2)   A.   Subject to division (c)(1) of this section, division (a)(1)A.
of this section does not apply to the holder of a probationary driver’s license
who is doing either of the following:
            1.   Traveling to or from work between the hours of midnight and 6:
00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession
written documentation from the holder’s employer.
            2.   Traveling to or from an official function sponsored by the
school the holder attends between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m., provided
that the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession written documentation
from an appropriate official of the school;
            3.   Traveling to or from an official religious event between the
hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s
immediate possession written documentation from an appropriate official
affiliated with the event.
         B.   Division (a)(1)B. of this section does not apply to the holder of
a probationary driver’s license who is doing either of the following:
            1.   Traveling to or from work between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and
5:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession
written documentation from the holder’s employer.
            2.   Traveling to or from an official function sponsored by the
school the holder attends between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.,
provided that the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession written
documentation from an appropriate official of the school;
            3.   Traveling to or from an official religious event between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s
immediate possession written documentation from an appropriate official
affiliated with the event.
      (3)   An employer, school official, or official affiliated with a
religious event is not liable in damages in a civil action for any injury,
death, or loss to person or property that allegedly arises from, or is related
to, the fact that the employer, school official, or official affiliated with a
religious event provided the holder of a probationary driver’s license with the
written documentation described in division (a)(2) of this section. The
Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall make available at no cost a form to serve as
the written documentation described in division (a)(2) of this section, and
employers, school officials, officials affiliated with religious events, and
holders of probationary driver’s licenses may utilize that form or may choose
to utilize any other written documentation to meet the requirements of that
division.
      (4)   No holder of a probationary driver’s license who has held the
license for less than 12 months shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or
any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking with more than one person who is not a family member
occupying the vehicle unless the probationary license holder is accompanied by
the probationary license holder’s parent, guardian, or custodian.
   (b)   It is an affirmative defense to a violation of division (a)(1)A. or
(a)(1)B. of this section if, at the time of the violation, an emergency existed
that required the holder of the probationary driver’s license to operate a
motor vehicle in violation of division (a)(1)A. or (a)(1)B. of this section or
the holder was an emancipated minor.
   (c)   (1)   If a person is issued a probationary driver’s license prior to
attaining the age of 17 years and the person pleads guilty to, is convicted of,
or is adjudicated in juvenile court of having committed a moving violation
during the six- month period commencing on the date on which the person is
issued the probationary driver’s license, the court with jurisdiction over the
violation may order that the holder must be accompanied by the holder’s parent
or guardian whenever the holder is operating a motor vehicle upon a highway or
any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking for a period not to exceed six months or the date the holder
attains the age of 17 years, whichever occurs first.
      (2)   Any person who is subject to the operating restrictions established
under division (c)(1) of this section as a result of a first moving violation
may petition the court for driving privileges without being accompanied by the
holder’s parent or guardian during the period of time determined by the court
under that division. In granting the driving privileges, the court shall
specify the purposes of the privileges and shall issue the person appropriate
forms setting forth the privileges granted. If a person is convicted of, pleads
guilty to, or is adjudicated in juvenile court of having committed a second or
subsequent moving violation, the court with jurisdiction over the violation may
terminate any driving privileges previously granted under this division.
      (3)   No person shall violate any operating restriction imposed under
division (c)(1) or (c)(2) of this section.
   (d)   No holder of a probationary license shall operate a motor vehicle upon
a highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking unless the total number of occupants of the vehicle
does not exceed the total number of occupant restraining devices originally
installed in the motor vehicle by its manufacturer, and each occupant of the
vehicle is wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted
occupant restraining device.
   (e)   A restricted license may be issued to a person who is 14 or 15 years
of age under proof of hardship satisfactory to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles.
   (f)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a motor vehicle being operated
on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of
determining whether each occupant of the motor vehicle is wearing all of the
available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device as
required by division (d) of this section, or for the sole purpose of issuing a
ticket, citation or summons if that requirement has been or is being violated,
or for causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for a
violation of that requirement.
   (g)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a motor vehicle being operated
on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of
determining whether a violation of division (a)(1)A. or (a)(1)B. of this
section has been or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a
ticket, citation or summons for such a violation or for causing the arrest or
commencing a prosecution of a person for such a violation.
   (h)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   FAMILY MEMBER of a probationary license holder. Includes any of the
following:
         A.   A spouse;
         B.   A child or stepchild;
         C.   A parent, stepparent, grandparent or parent-in-law;
         D.   An aunt or uncle;
         E.   A sibling, whether of the whole or half blood or by adoption, a
brother-in- law or a sister-in-law;
         F.   A son or daughter of the probationary license holder’s stepparent
if the stepparent has not adopted the probationary license holder;
         G.   An eligible adult, as defined in R.C. § 4507.05.
      (2)   MOVING VIOLATION. Any violation of any statute or ordinance that
regulates the operation of vehicles on the highways or streets. “Moving
violation” does not include a violation of R.C. § 4513.263 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, or a violation of any statute or ordinance
regulating pedestrians or the parking of vehicles, vehicle size or load
limitations, vehicle fitness requirements or vehicle registration.
      (3)   OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
4513.263.
   (i)   Whoever violates divisions (a)(1), (a)(4), (c)(3), or (d) of this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4507.071(B) - (J))
§ 436.04 CERTAIN ACTS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Display or cause or permit to be displayed, or possess any
identification card, driver’s or commercial driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, or commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit
knowing the same to be fictitious, or to have been canceled, suspended, or
altered;
      (2)   Lend to a person not entitled thereto, or knowingly permit a person
not entitled thereto to use any identification card, driver’s or commercial
driver’s license, temporary instruction permit or commercial driver’s license
temporary instruction permit issued to the person so lending or permitting the
use thereof;
      (3)   Display, or represent as one’s own, any identification card,
driver’s or commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, or
commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit not issued to the
person so displaying the same;
      (4)   Fail to surrender to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, upon the
Registrar’s demand, any identification card, driver’s or commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit that has been suspended or canceled;
      (5)   In any application for an identification card, driver’s or
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit or commercial
driver’s license temporary instruction permit or any renewal, reprint, or
duplicate thereof, knowingly conceal a material fact or present any statement
required under R.C. § 4507.08 or 4507.081 when knowing the same to be false or
fictitious.
   (b)   Whoever violates any division of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 4507.30)
§ 436.05 OWNER OR OPERATOR ALLOWING ANOTHER TO DRIVE.
   (a)   No person shall permit a motor vehicle owned by the person or under
the person’s control to be driven by another if any of the following apply:
      (1)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person does not have a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit or valid nonresident driving privileges.
      (2)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident
operating privileges have been suspended or canceled under R.C. Chapter 4510 or
any other provision of the Revised Code.
      (3)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person’s act of driving the motor vehicle would violate any prohibition
contained in R.C. Chapter 4509.
      (4)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person’s act of driving would violate R.C. § 4511.19 or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (5)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
vehicle is the subject of an immobilization waiver order issued under R.C.
4503.235 and the other person is prohibited from operating the vehicle under
that order.
   (b)   Without limiting or precluding the consideration of any other evidence
in determining whether a violation of division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4)
or (a)(5) of this section has occurred, it shall be prima facie evidence that
the offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the operator of the
motor vehicle owned by the offender or under the offender’s control is in a
category described in division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4) or (a)(5) of this
section if any of the following applies:
      (1)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in
division (a)(1), (a)(3) or (a)(5) of this section, the offender and the
operator of the motor vehicle reside in the same household and are related by
consanguinity or affinity.
      (2)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in
division (a)(2) of this section, the offender and the operator of the motor
vehicle reside in the same household, and the offender knows or has reasonable
cause to believe that the operator has been charged with or convicted of any
violation of law or ordinance, or has committed any other act or omission, that
would or could result in the suspension or cancellation of the operator’s
license, permit, or privilege.
      (3)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in
division (a)(4) of this section, the offender and the operator of the motor
vehicle occupied the motor vehicle together at the time of the offense.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of wrongful entrustment of a
motor vehicle, and shall be punished as provided in divisions (c) to (h) of
this section.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (c)(2) of this section, whoever
violates division (a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) of this section is guilty of an
unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the
offender shall be sentenced pursuant to §
698.02, §
698.03 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
698.02(d) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
698.02(f)(1)B.1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
698.02(e)(1)C. and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
698.02(e)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   A.   If, within three years of a violation of division (a)(1), (a)
(2), or (a)(3) of this section, the offender previously has pleaded guilty to
or been convicted of two or more violations of division (a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)
(3) of this section, R.C. § 4511.203(A)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
         B.   Whoever violates division (a)(4) or (a)(5) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   For any violation of this section, in addition to the penalties
imposed under this Code or R.C. Chapter 2929, the court may impose a class
seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7), and, if
the vehicle involved in the offense is registered in the name of the offender,
the court may order one of the following:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(3)B. or (c)(3)C. of
this section, the court may order, for 30 days, the immobilization of the
vehicle involved in the offense and the impoundment of that vehicle’s license
plates. If issued, the order shall be issued and enforced under R.C. §
4503.233.
         B.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one violation of this section, R.C. § 4511.203, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the court may order, for 60
days, the immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense and the
impoundment of that vehicle’s license plates. If issued, the order shall be
issued and enforced under R.C. § 4503.233.
         C.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of this section, R.C. § 4511.203, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court may order the criminal
forfeiture to the state of the vehicle involved in the offense. If issued, the
order shall be issued and enforced under R.C. § 4503.234.
      (4)   If title to a motor vehicle that is subject to an order for
criminal forfeiture under division (c)(3)C. of this section is assigned or
transferred and R.C. § 4503.234(B)(2) or (B)(3) applies, in addition to or
independent of any other penalty established by law, the court may fine the
offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications of the National
Automobile Dealers Association. The proceeds from any fine imposed under this
division shall be distributed in accordance with R.C. § 4503.234(C)(2).
   (d)   If a court orders the criminal forfeiture of a vehicle under division
(c)(3)A. or (c)(3)B. of this section, the court shall not release the vehicle
from the immobilization before the termination of the period of immobilization
ordered unless the court is presented with current proof of financial
responsibility with respect to that vehicle.
   (e)   If a court orders the criminal forfeiture of a vehicle under division
(c)(3)C. of this section, upon receipt of the order from the court, neither the
Registrar of Motor Vehicles nor any deputy registrar shall accept any
application for the registration or transfer of registration of any motor
vehicle owned or leased by the person named in the order. The period of denial
shall be five years after the date the order is issued, unless, during that
five-year period, the court with jurisdiction of the offense that resulted in
the order terminates the forfeiture and notifies the Registrar of the
termination. If the court terminates the forfeiture and notifies the Registrar,
the Registrar shall take all necessary measures to permit the person to
register a vehicle owned or leased by the person or to transfer the
registration of the vehicle.
   (f)   This section does not apply to motor vehicle rental dealers or motor
vehicle leasing dealers, as defined in R.C. § 4549.65.
   (g)   Evidence of a conviction of, plea of guilty to, or adjudication as a
delinquent child for a violation of this section shall not be admissible as
evidence in any civil action that involves the offender or delinquent child who
is the subject of the conviction, plea or adjudication and that arises from the
wrongful entrustment of a motor vehicle.
   (h)   For purposes of this section, a vehicle is owned by a person if, at
the time of a violation of this section, the vehicle is registered in the
person’s name.
(ORC 4511.203)
§ 436.06 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   (a)   The operator of a motor vehicle shall display the operator’s driver’s
license, or furnish satisfactory proof that the operator has a driver’s
license, upon demand of any peace officer or of any person damaged or injured
in any collision in which the licensee may be involved. When a demand is
properly made, and the operator has the operator’s driver’s license on or about
the operator’s person, the operator shall not refuse to display the license. A
person’s failure to furnish satisfactory evidence that the person is licensed
under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4507 when the person does not have the person’s license
on or about the person’s person shall be prima facie evidence of the person’s
not having obtained a driver’s license.
   (b)   (1)   Except as provided in division (b)(2) of this section, whoever
violates this section is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. When the
offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced
pursuant to §
698.02, §
698.03 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
698.02(d) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
698.02(f)(1)B.1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and notwithstanding §
698.02(e)(1)C. and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
698.02(e)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section,
R.C. § 4507.35, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense
is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 4507.35)
§ 436.07 DRIVING UNDER SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OR WITHOUT PROOF OF FINANCIAL
RESPONSIBILITY OR IN VIOLATION OF LICENSE RESTRICTIONS. (REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
   Section 436.07 was repealed as part of the 2005 updating and revision of
these Codified Ordinances because substantially equivalent State law (Ohio R.C.
4507.02(B) - (H)) was repealed by the Ohio General Assembly. See §§
436.071 through
436.075 for current provisions.
§ 436.071 DRIVING UNDER SUSPENSION OR IN VIOLATION OF LICENSE RESTRICTION.
   (a)   Driving under suspension or in violation of license restriction.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (a)(2) of this section, division (b)
of this section, §
436.11 and in R.C. §§ 4510.111 and 4510.16, no person whose driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege has
been suspended under any provision of the Revised Code, other than R.C. Chapter
4509, or under any applicable law in any other jurisdiction in which the
person’s license or permit was issued shall operate any motor vehicle upon the
public roads and highways or upon any public or private property used by the
public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking within this municipality
during the period of suspension unless the person is granted limited driving
privileges and is operating the vehicle in accordance with the terms of the
limited driving privileges.
      (2)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking in this municipality in violation of any restriction of the person’s
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit imposed under R.C. § 4506.10
(D) or § 4507.14.
      (3)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section may be admitted into
evidence as prima facie evidence that the license of the person was under
suspension at the time of the alleged violation of division (a)(1) of this
section or the person operated a motor vehicle in violation of a restriction at
the time of the alleged violation of division (a)(2) of this section. The
person charged with a violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section
may offer evidence to rebut this prima facie evidence.
      (4)   A.   Whoever violates division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. The court may impose upon the
offender a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary
license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. §
4510.02(A)(7).
         B.   1.   Except as provided in division (a)(4)B.2. or (a)(4)B.3. of
this section, the court, in addition to any other penalty that it imposes on
the offender and if the vehicle is registered in the offender’s name and if,
within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111
or 4510.16, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court, in
addition to or independent of any other sentence that it imposes upon the
offender, may order the immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense
for 30 days and the impoundment of that vehicle’s license plates for 30 days in
accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.
            2.   If the vehicle is registered in the offender’s name and if,
within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to two violations of this section, or any combination of
two violations of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111 or 4510.16, or of a
substantially similar municipal ordinance, the court, in addition to any other
sentence that it imposes on the offender, may order the immobilization of the
vehicle involved in the offense for 60 days and the impoundment of that
vehicle’s license plates for 60 days in accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.
            3.   If the vehicle is registered in the offender’s name and if,
within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of this section, or any
combination of three or more violations of this section or R.C. § 4510.11,
4510.111 or 4510.16, or of a substantially similar municipal ordinance, the
court, in addition to any other sentence that it imposes on the offender, may
order the criminal forfeiture of the vehicle involved in the offense to the
state.
      (5)   Any order for immobilization and impoundment under this section
shall be issued and enforced under R.C. §§ 4503.233 and 4507.02, as applicable.
The court shall not release a vehicle from immobilization ordered under this
section unless the court is presented with current proof of financial
responsibility with respect to that vehicle.
      (6)   Any order of criminal forfeiture under this section shall be issued
and enforced under R.C. § 4503.234. Upon receipt of the copy of the order from
the court, neither the Registrar of Motor Vehicles nor a deputy registrar shall
accept any application for the registration or transfer of registration of any
motor vehicle owned or leased by the person named in the declaration of
forfeiture. The period of registration denial shall be five years after the
date of the order, unless, during that period, the court having jurisdiction of
the offense that led to the order terminates the forfeiture and notifies the
registrar of the termination. The registrar then shall take necessary measures
to permit the person to register a vehicle owned or leased by the person or to
transfer registration of the vehicle.
      (7)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to §
698.02(f) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic
loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate
result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or after
committing the offense for which the offender is sentenced under this section.
(R.C. § 4510.11)
   (b)   Driving under suspension in violation of other provisions.
      (1)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking in this municipality whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license
has been suspended pursuant to R.C. § 2151.354, 2151.87, 2935.27, 3123.58,
4301.99, 4510.032, 4510.22, or 4510.33, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
      (2)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (b)(1) of this section may be admitted into evidence as
prima facie evidence that the license of the person was under suspension at the
time of the alleged violation of division (b)(1) of this section. The person
charged with a violation of division (b)(1) of this section may offer evidence
to rebut this prima facie evidence.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (b)(1) of this section is guilty of
driving under suspension and shall be punished as provided in division (b)(3)A.
or division (b)(3)B. of this section.
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(3)B. of this
section, the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor. The offender shall be
sentenced pursuant to §
698.02, §
698.03 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
698.02(d) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
698.02(f)(1)B.1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
698.02(e)(1)C. and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
698.02(e)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
         B.   If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously
was convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of division (b)(1)
of this section, or any combination of two or more violations of division (b)
(1) of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111 or 4510.16, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree, and the offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to R.C. § 2929.28 in
an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss arising from an accident
or collision that was the direct and proximate result of the offender’s
operation of the vehicle before, during, or after committing the offense for
which the offender is sentenced under this section.
(R.C. § 4510.111)
   (c)   Repeat traffic offender; point system suspension. Any person whose
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating
privileges are suspended as a repeat traffic offender under R.C. § 4510.037 and
who, during the suspension, operates any motor vehicle upon any public roads
and highways is guilty of driving under a 12-point suspension, a misdemeanor of
the first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to a minimum term of
three days in jail. No court shall suspend the first three days of jail time
imposed pursuant to this division.
(R.C. § 4510.037(J))
   (d)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this
section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a valid
permit or driver's or commercial driver's license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(R.C. § 4510.04)
§ 436.072 OPERATING MOTOR VEHICLE OR MOTORCYCLE WITHOUT VALID LICENSE.
   (a)   (1)   No person, except those expressly exempted under R.C. §§
4507.03, 4507.04 and 4507.05, shall operate any motor vehicle upon a public
road or highway or any public or private property used by the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or parking in this municipality unless the person
has a valid driver’s license issued under R.C. Chapter 4507 or a commercial
driver’s license issued under R.C. Chapter 4506.
      (2)   No person, except a person expressly exempted under R.C. §§
4507.03, 4507.04 and 4507.05, shall operate any motorcycle upon a public road
or highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking in this municipality unless the person has a valid
license as a motorcycle operator that was issued upon application by the
Registrar of Motor Vehicles under R.C. Chapter 4507. The license shall be in
the form of an endorsement, as determined by the Registrar, upon a driver’s or
commercial driver’s license, if the person has a valid license to operate a
motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle, or in the form of a restricted
license as provided in R.C. § 4507.14, if the person does not have a valid
license to operate a motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle.
   (b)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the registrar of motor vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section may be admitted into
evidence as prima facie evidence that the person did not have either a valid
driver’s or commercial driver’s license at the time of the alleged violation of
division (a)(1) of this section or a valid license as a motorcycle operator
either in the form of an endorsement upon a driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or a restricted license at the time of the alleged violation of
division (a)(2) of this section. The person charged with a violation of
division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section may offer evidence to rebut this
prima facie evidence.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of operating a motor vehicle
or motorcycle without a valid license and shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   If the trier of fact finds that the offender never has held a valid
driver’s or commercial driver’s license issued by this state or any other
jurisdiction, or, in a case involving the operation of a motorcycle by the
offender, if the offender has never held a valid license as a motorcycle
operator, either in the form of an endorsement upon a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or in the form of a restricted license, except as otherwise
provided in this division, the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor. When the
offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced
pursuant to §
698.02, §
698.03 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
698.02(d) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
698.02(f)(1)B.1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
698.02(e)(1)C. and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
698.02(e)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case. If the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any violation of this section or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
      (2)   If the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit
or, in a case involving the operation of a motorcycle by the offender, the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license bearing the motorcycle
endorsement or the offender’s restricted license was expired at the time of the
offense, except as otherwise provided in this division, the offense is a minor
misdemeanor. If within three years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
   (d)   The court shall not impose a license suspension for a first violation
of this section or if more than three years have passed since the offender’s
last violation of R.C. § 4510.12, this section, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
   (e)   If the offender is sentenced under division (c)(2) of this section, if
within three years of the offense the offender previously was convicted of or
pleaded guilty to one or more violations of R.C. § 4510.12, this section, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance within the past three years, and
if the offender’s license was expired for more than six months at the time of
the offense, the court may impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s
driver license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit,
probationary license or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).
(R.C. § 4510.12)
§ 436.073 DRIVING UNDER O.V.I. SUSPENSION.
   (a)   No person whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or
nonresident operating privilege has been suspended under Ohio R.C. 4511.19,
4511.191, or 4511.196 or under Ohio R.C. 4510.07 for a conviction of a
violation of a municipal O.V.I. ordinance shall operate any motor vehicle upon
the public roads or highways within this Municipality during the period of the
suspension.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of driving under O.V.I.
suspension. The court shall sentence the offender under Ohio R.C. Chapter 2929,
subject to the differences authorized or required by this section.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(2) or (3) of this
section, driving under O.V.I. suspension is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following:
         A.   A mandatory jail term of three consecutive days. The three-day
term shall be imposed, unless, subject to division (c) of this section, the
court instead imposes a sentence of not less than 30 consecutive days of house
arrest with electronic monitoring. A period of house arrest with electronic
monitoring imposed under this division shall not exceed six months. If the
court imposes a mandatory three-day jail term under this division, the court
may impose a jail term in addition to that term, provided that in no case shall
the cumulative jail term imposed for the offense exceed six months;
         B.   A fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and
not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00);
         C.   A license suspension under division (e) of this section;
         D.   If the vehicle the offender was operating at the time of the
offense is registered in the offender’s name, immobilization for 30 days of the
offender’s vehicle and impoundment for 30 days of the identification license
plates of that vehicle. The order for immobilization and impoundment shall be
issued and enforced in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4503.233.
      (2)   If, within six years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this section or one
equivalent offense, driving under O.V.I. suspension is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following:
         A.   A mandatory jail term of 10 consecutive days. Notwithstanding the
jail terms provided in Ohio R.C. 2929.21 to 2929.28, the court may sentence the
offender to a longer jail term of not more than one year. The 10-day mandatory
jail term shall be imposed unless, subject to division (c) of this section, the
court instead imposes a sentence of not less than 90 consecutive days of house
arrest with electronic monitoring. The period of house arrest with electronic
monitoring shall not exceed one year;
         B.   Notwithstanding the fines provided for in Ohio R.C. Chapter 2929,
a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and not more than two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00);
         C.   A license suspension under division (e) of this section;
         D.   If the vehicle the offender was operating at the time of the
offense is registered in the offender’s name, immobilization of the offender’s
vehicle for 60 days and the impoundment for 60 days of the identification
license plates of that vehicle. The order for immobilization and impoundment
shall be issued and enforced in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4503.233.
      (3)   If, within six years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section
or two or more equivalent offenses, driving under O.V.I. suspension is a
misdemeanor. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following:
         A.   A mandatory jail term of 30 consecutive days. Notwithstanding the
jail terms provided in Ohio R.C. 2929.21 to 2929.28, the court may sentence the
offender to a longer jail term of not more than one year. The court shall not
sentence the offender to a term of house arrest with electronic monitoring in
lieu of the mandatory portion of the jail term;
         B.   Notwithstanding the fines set forth in Ohio R.C. Chapter 2929, a
fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and not more than two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00);
         C.   A license suspension under division (e) of this section;
         D.   If the vehicle the offender was operating at the time of the
offense is registered in the offender’s name, criminal forfeiture to the state
of the offender’s vehicle. The order of criminal forfeiture shall be issued and
enforced in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4503.234. If title to a motor vehicle
that is subject to an order for criminal forfeiture under this division is
assigned or transferred and Ohio R.C. 4503.234(B)(2) or (3) applies, the court
may fine the offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications of
the National Automobile Dealers Association. The proceeds from any fine so
imposed shall be distributed in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4503.234(C)(2).
   (c)   (1)   No court shall impose an alternative sentence of house arrest
with electronic monitoring under division (b)(1) or (2) of this section unless,
within 60 days of the date of sentencing, the court issues a written finding on
the record that, due to the unavailability of space at the jail where the
offender is required to serve the jail term imposed, the offender will not be
able to begin serving that term within the 60-day period following the date of
sentencing.
      (2)   An offender sentenced under this section to a period of house
arrest with electronic monitoring shall be permitted work release during that
period.
   (d)   Fifty percent of any fine imposed by a court under division (b)(1),
(2), or (3) of this section shall be deposited into the Municipal Indigent
Drivers’ Alcohol Treatment Fund under the control of that court, as created by
the Municipality pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4511.191(H).
   (e)   In addition to or independent of all other penalties provided by law
or ordinance, the trial judge of any court of record or the mayor of a mayor’s
court shall impose on an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of this section a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege
from the range specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(7).
      (1)   When permitted as specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.021, if the court
grants limited driving privileges during a suspension imposed under this
section, the privileges shall be granted on the additional condition that the
offender must display restricted license plates, issued under Ohio R.C.
4503.231, on the vehicle driven subject to the privileges, except as provided
in Ohio R.C. 4503.231(B).
      (2)   A suspension of a commercial driver’s license under this section
shall be concurrent with any period of suspension or disqualification under
Ohio R.C. 3123.58 or 4506.16. No person who is disqualified for life from
holding a commercial driver’s license under Ohio R.C. 4506.16 shall be issued a
driver’s license under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period for which the
commercial driver’s license was suspended under this section, and no person
whose commercial driver’s license is suspended under this section shall be
issued a driver’s license under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period of the
suspension.
   (f)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to §
698.02(f) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic
loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate
result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or after
committing the offense that is a misdemeanor of the first degree under this
section for which the offender is sentenced.
   (g)   As used in this section:
      (1)   ELECTRONIC MONITORING. The same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2929.01.
      (2)   EQUIVALENT OFFENSE. Any of the following:
         A.   A violation of a municipal ordinance, law of another state, or
law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to division (a) of
this section;
         B.   A violation of a former law of this State that was substantially
equivalent to division (a) of this section.
      (3)   JAIL. The same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2929.01.
      (4)   MANDATORY JAIL TERM. The mandatory term in jail of three, ten, or
30 consecutive days that must be imposed under division (b)(1), (2), or (3) of
this section upon an offender convicted of a violation of division (a) of this
section and in relation to which all of the following apply:
         A.   Except as specifically authorized under this section, the term
must be served in a jail.
         B.   Except as specifically authorized under this section, the term
cannot be suspended, reduced, or otherwise modified pursuant to any provision
of the Ohio Revised Code.
(ORC 4510.14)
   (h)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this
section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a valid
permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(ORC 4510.04)
Statutory reference:
   Immobilization of vehicle; impoundment oflicense plates; criminal forfeiture
of vehicle, see Ohio R.C. 4510.161
§ 436.074 DRIVING UNDER FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY LAW SUSPENSION OR
CANCELLATION.
   (a)   No person, whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license or temporary
instruction permit or nonresident’s operating privilege has been suspended or
canceled pursuant to R.C. Chapter 4509, shall operate any motor vehicle within
this municipality, or knowingly permit any motor vehicle owned by the person to
be operated by another person in the municipality, during the period of the
suspension or cancellation, except as specifically authorized by R.C. Chapter
4509.
   (b)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any public
or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or
parking in this municipality if the person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or temporary instruction permit or nonresident operating privilege has
been suspended pursuant to R.C. § 4509.37 or 4509.40 for nonpayment of a
judgment.
   (c)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the registrar of motor vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (a) or (b) of this section may be admitted into evidence
as prima facie evidence that the license of the person was under either a
financial responsibility law suspension at the time of the alleged violation of
division (a) of this section or a nonpayment of judgment suspension at the time
of the alleged violation of division (b) of this section. The person charged
with a violation of division (a) or (b) of this section may offer evidence to
rebut this prima facie evidence.
   (d)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of driving
under financial responsibility law suspension or cancellation and shall be
punished as provided in division (d)(1) to (d)(3) of this section. Whoever
violates division (b) of this section is guilty of driving under a nonpayment
of judgment suspension and shall be punished as provided in division (d)(1) to
(d)(3) of this section.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (d)(2) of this
section, the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an
unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced pursuant to §
698.02, §
698.03 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
698.02(d) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
698.02(f)(1)B.1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
698.02(e)(1)C. and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
698.02(e)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously was
convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section, or
any combination of two violations of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111 or
4510.16, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to R.C. § 2929.28 in
an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss arising from an accident
or collision that was the direct and proximate result of the offender’s
operation of the vehicle before, during, or after committing the offense for
which the offender is sentenced under this section.
(R.C. § 4510.16)
   (e)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this
section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a valid
permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(R.C. § 4510.04)
Statutory reference:
   Immobilization of vehicle; impoundment of license plates; criminal
forfeiture of vehicle, see R.C. § 4510.161
§ 436.075 FAILURE TO REINSTATE LICENSE.
   (a)   No person whose driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit or nonresident’s operating privilege has been
suspended shall operate any motor vehicle upon a public road or highway or any
public or private property after the suspension has expired unless the person
has complied with all license reinstatement requirements imposed by the court,
the Bureau of Motor Vehicles or another provision of the Ohio Revised Code.
   (b)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the registrar of motor vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (a) of this section may be admitted into evidence as
prima facie evidence that the license of the person had not been reinstated by
the person at the time of the alleged violation of division (a) of this
section. The person charged with a violation of division (a) of this section
may offer evidence to rebut this prima facie evidence.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to reinstate a
license, and shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   Except as provided in division (c)(2) of this section, whoever
violates this section is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. When the
offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced
pursuant to §
698.02, §
698.03 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
698.02(d) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
698.02(f)(1)B.1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
698.02(e)(1)C. and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
698.02(e)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   If, within three years of a violation of division (a) of this
section, the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted of two
or more violations of this section, R.C. § 4510.21 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
      (3)   In all cases, the court may impose upon the offender a class seven
suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary driver's license, or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).
(R.C. § 4510.21)
   (d)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this
section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a valid
permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(R.C. § 4510.04)
§ 436.08 OPERATION OR SALE WITHOUT CERTIFICATE OF TITLE.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Operate in this municipality a motor vehicle for which a
certificate of title is required without having that certificate in accordance
with Ohio R.C. Chapter 4505 or, if a physical certificate of title has not been
issued for a motor vehicle, operate the motor vehicle in this State knowing
that the ownership information relating to the vehicle has not been entered
into the automated title processing system by a Clerk of a Court of Common
Pleas;
      (2)   Display or display for sale or sell as a dealer or acting on behalf
of a dealer, a motor vehicle without having obtained a manufacturer’s or
importer’s certificate, a certificate of title, or an assignment of a
certificate of title for it as provided in Ohio R.C. Chapter 4505;
      (3)   Fail to surrender any certificate of title or any certificate of
registration or license plates upon cancellation of the same by the Registrar
of Motor Vehicles and notice of the cancellation as prescribed in Ohio R.C.
Chapter 4505;
      (4)   Fail to surrender the certificate of title to a Clerk of a Court of
Common Pleas as provided in Ohio R.C. Chapter 4505 in case of the destruction
or dismantling or change of a motor vehicle in such respect that it is not the
motor vehicle described in the certificate of title;
      (5)   Violate any rules adopted pursuant to Ohio R.C. Chapter 4505;
      (6)   Except as otherwise provided in Ohio R.C. Chapters 4505 and 4517,
sell at wholesale a motor vehicle ownership of which is not evidenced by an
Ohio certificate of title, or the current certificate of title issued for the
motor vehicle, or the manufacturer’s certificate of origin, and all title
assignments that evidence the seller’s ownership of the motor vehicle, and an
odometer disclosure statement that complies with Ohio R.C. 4505.06 and
subchapter IV of the “Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act,” 86 Stat.
961 (1972), 15 U.S.C. 1981;
      (7)   Operate in this State a motor vehicle knowing that the certificate
of title to the vehicle or ownership of the vehicle as otherwise reflected in
the automated title processing system has been canceled.
   (b)   This section does not apply to persons engaged in the business of
warehousing or transporting motor vehicles for the purpose of salvage
disposition.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than two hundred
dollars ($200.00), imprisoned not more than 90 days, or both.
(ORC 4505.18)
§ 436.09 DISPLAY OF LICENSE PLATES; REGISTRATION; OBSTRUCTIONS.
   (a)   (1)   No person who is the owner or operator of a motor vehicle shall
fail to display in plain view on the rear of the motor vehicle a license plate
that displays the distinctive number and registration mark assigned to the
motor vehicle by the Ohio Director of Public Safety, including any county
identification sticker and any validation sticker when required by and issued
under R.C. §§ 4503.19 and 4503.191. However, a commercial tractor shall display
the license plate on the front of the commercial tractor.
      (2)   The license plate shall be securely fastened so as not to swing,
and shall not be covered by any material that obstructs its visibility.
      (3)   No person to whom a temporary motor vehicle license registration
has been issued for the use of a motor vehicle under R.C. § 4503.182, and no
operator of that motor vehicle, shall fail to display the temporary motor
vehicle license registration in plain view from the rear of the vehicle either
in the rear window or on an external rear surface of the motor vehicle.
      (4)   No person shall cover a temporary motor vehicle license
registration by any material that obstructs its visibility.
(R.C. § 4503.21(A))
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided by R.C. § 4503.103, 4503.107, 4503.173,
4503.41, 4503.43, and 4503.46, no person who is the owner or chauffeur of a
motor vehicle operated or driven upon the public roads or highways shall fail
to file annually the application for registration or to pay the tax therefor.
(R.C. § 4503.11(A))
   (c)   (1)   Within 30 days of becoming a resident of this state, any person
who owns a motor vehicle operated or driven upon the public roads or highways
shall register the vehicle in this state. If such a person fails to register a
vehicle owned by the person, the person shall not operate any motor vehicle in
this state under a license issued by another state.
      (2)   For purposes of division (c)(1) of this section, “resident” means
any person to whom any of the following applies:
         A.   The person maintains their principal residence in this state and
does not reside in this state as a result of the person’s active service in the
United States armed forces.
         B.   The person is determined by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles to be
a resident in accordance with standards adopted by the Registrar under R.C. §
4507.01.
(R.C. § 4503.111(A), (C))
   (d)   Upon the transfer of ownership of a motor vehicle, the registration of
the motor vehicle expires, and the original owner immediately shall remove the
license plates from the motor vehicle, except as otherwise provided in R.C. §
4503.12.
(R.C. § 4503.12(A))
   (e)   No person shall operate or drive upon the highways of this
Municipality a motor vehicle acquired from a former owner who has registered
the motor vehicle, while the motor vehicle displays the distinctive number or
identification mark assigned to it upon its original registration.
(R.C. § 4549.11(A))
   (f)   No person who is the owner of a motor vehicle and a resident of this
State shall operate or drive the motor vehicle upon the highways of this
Municipality while it displays a distinctive number or identification mark
issued by or under the authority of another state, without complying with the
laws of this State relating to the registration and identification of motor
vehicles.
(R.C. § 4549.12(A))
   (g)   No person shall park or operate any vehicle upon any public street or
highway upon which are displayed any license plates for any period of time
which has expired, or any license plates issued in another state for which the
period of reciprocal agreement with the state of issue has expired.
   (h)   No person shall park or operate any vehicle upon any public street or
highway upon which are displayed any license plates not legally registered and
issued for such vehicle, or upon which are displayed any license plates that
were issued on an application for registration that contains any false
statement by the applicant.
   (i)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle, upon which license plates are
required by law to be displayed, unless the license plates legally registered
and issued for such vehicle are fastened in such a manner, and not covered,
obscured or concealed by any part or accessory of such vehicle, to be readable
in their entirety from left to right.
   (j)   (1)   A.   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
a minor misdemeanor.
         B.   The offenses established under division (a) of this section are
strict liability offenses and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of
these offenses as strict liability offenses shall not be construed to imply
that any other offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability,
is not a strict liability offense.
(R.C. § 4503.21(B), (C))
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4503.11(D))
      (3)   A.   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
         B.   The offense established under division (j)(3)A. of this section
is a strict liability offense and strict liability is a culpable mental state
for purposes of R.C. § 2901.20. The designation of this offense as a strict
liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other offense, for
which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict liability
offense.
(R.C. § 4503.111(B))
      (4)   Whoever violates division (d) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (e) of this section is guilty of
operation of a motor vehicle bearing license plates or an identification mark
issued to another, a minor misdemeanor on a first offense and a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 4549.11(B))
      (6)   Whoever violates division (f) of this section is guilty of illegal
operation by a resident of this State of a motor vehicle bearing the
distinctive number or identification mark issued by a foreign jurisdiction, a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4549.12(B))
§ 436.10 USE OF ILLEGAL LICENSE PLATES.
   (a)   No person shall operate or drive a motor vehicle upon the public roads
and highways in this Municipality if it displays a license plate or a
distinctive number or identification mark that meets any of the following
criteria:
      (1)   It is fictitious;
      (2)   It is a counterfeit or an unlawfully made copy of any distinctive
number or identification mark;
      (3)   It belongs to another motor vehicle, provided that this section
does not apply to a motor vehicle that is operated on the public roads and
highways in this Municipality when the motor vehicle displays license plates
that originally were issued for a motor vehicle that previously was owned by
the same person who owns the motor vehicle that is operated on the public roads
and highways in this Municipality during the 30-day period described in Ohio
R.C. 4503.12(A)(4).
   (b)   A person who fails to comply with the transfer of registration
provisions of Ohio R.C. 4503.12 and is charged with a violation of that section
shall not be charged with a violation of this section.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a)(1), (2), or (3) of this section is
guilty of operating a motor vehicle bearing an invalid license plate or
identification mark, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor
of the fourth degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the third degree
on each subsequent offense.
(ORC 4549.08)
§ 436.11 FAILURE TO STOP AFTER ACCIDENT.
   (a)   (1)   In the case of a motor vehicle accident or collision with
persons or property on a public road or highway, the operator of the motor
vehicle, having knowledge of the accident or collision, immediately shall stop
the operator’s motor vehicle at the scene of the accident or collision. The
operator shall remain at the scene of the accident or collision until the
operator has given the operator’s name and address and, if the operator is not
the owner, the name and address of the owner of that motor vehicle, together
with the registered number of that motor vehicle, to all of the following:
         A.   Any person injured in the accident or collision;
         B.   The operator, occupant, owner, or attendant of any motor vehicle
damaged in the accident or collision;
         C.   The police officer at the scene of the accident or collision.
      (2)   In the event an injured person is unable to comprehend and record
the information required to be given under division (a)(1) of this section, the
other operator involved in the accident or collision shall notify the nearest
police authority concerning the location of the accident or collision, and the
operator’s name, address, and the registered number of the motor vehicle the
operator was operating. The operator shall remain at the scene of the accident
or collision until a police officer arrives, unless removed from the scene by
an emergency vehicle operated by a political subdivision or an ambulance.
      (3)   If the accident or collision is with an unoccupied or unattended
motor vehicle, the operator who collides with the motor vehicle shall securely
attach the information required to be given in this section, in writing, to a
conspicuous place in or on the unoccupied or unattended motor vehicle.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
failure to stop after an accident. Except as otherwise provided in division (b)
(2) or (b)(3) of this section, failure to stop after an accident is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   If the accident or collision results in serious physical harm to a
person, failure to stop after an accident is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the accident or collision results in the death of a person,
failure to stop after an accident is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (4)   In all cases, the court, in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a class five suspension of the
offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(5). No judge shall suspend the first six months
of suspension of an offender’s license, permit, or privilege required by this
division.
      (5)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to R.C. §
2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss
arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result
of the offender’s operation of the motor vehicle before, during, or after
committing the offense charged under this section.
(R.C. § 4549.02)
§ 436.12 STOPPING AFTER ACCIDENT ON OTHER THAN PUBLIC ROADS OR HIGHWAYS.
   (a)   (1)   In the case of a motor vehicle accident or collision resulting
in injury or damage to persons or property on any public or private property
other than a public road or highway, the operator of the motor vehicle, having
knowledge of the accident or collision, shall stop at the scene of the accident
or collision. Upon request of any person who is injured or damaged, or any
other person, the operator shall give that person the operator’s name and
address, and, if the operator is not the owner, the name and address of the
owner of that motor vehicle, together with the registered number of that motor
vehicle, and, if available, exhibit the operator’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license.
      (2)   If the operator of the motor vehicle involved in the accident or
collision does not provide the information specified in division (a)(1) of this
section, the operator shall give that information, within 24 hours after the
accident or collision, to the police department of the city or village in which
the accident or collision occurred, or if it occurred outside the corporate
limits of a city or village, to the sheriff of the county in which the accident
or collision occurred.
      (3)   If the accident or collision is with an unoccupied or unattended
motor vehicle, the operator who collides with the motor vehicle shall securely
attach the information required under division (a)(1) of this section, in
writing, to a conspicuous place in or on the unoccupied or unattended motor
vehicle.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident. Except as otherwise provided
in division (b)(2) or (b)(3) of this section, failure to stop after a nonpublic
road accident is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   If the accident or collision results in serious physical harm to a
person, failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the accident or collision results in the death of a person,
failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
      (4)   In all cases, the court, in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a class five suspension of the
offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(5). No judge shall suspend the first six months
of suspension of an offender’s license, permit, or privilege required by this
division.
      (5)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to R.C. §
2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss
arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result
of the offender’s operation of the motor vehicle before, during, or after
committing the offense charged under this section.
(R.C. § 4549.021)
§ 436.13 VEHICLE ACCIDENT RESULTING IN DAMAGE TO REALTY.
   (a)   (1)   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in
damage to real property, or personal property attached to real property,
legally upon or adjacent to a public road or highway immediately shall stop and
take reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or person in charge of the
property of that fact, of the driver’s name and address, and of the
registration number of vehicle the driver is driving and, upon request and if
available, shall exhibit the driver’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license.
      (2)   If the owner or person in charge of the property cannot be located
after reasonable search, the driver of the vehicle involved in the accident
resulting in damage to the property within 24 hours after the accident, shall
forward to the Police Department of the municipality the same information
required to be given to the owner or person in control of the property and give
the location of the accident and a description of the damage insofar as it is
known.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
failure to stop after an accident involving the property of others, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to §
698.02(f) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic
loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate
result of the offender’s operation of the motor vehicle before, during, or
after committing the offense charged under this section.
(ORC 4549.03)
§ 436.14 REMOVAL OF VEHICLES AFTER ACCIDENTS.
   (a)   If a motor vehicle accident occurs on any highway, public street, or
other property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel and if any
motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property that has been damaged or spilled as
a result of the motor vehicle accident is blocking the highway, street, or
other property or is otherwise endangering public safety, a public safety
official may do either of the following without the consent of the owner but
with the approval of the law enforcement agency conducting any investigation of
the accident:
      (1)   Remove, or order the removal of, the motor vehicle if the motor
vehicle is unoccupied, cargo, or personal property from the portion of the
highway, public street, or property ordinarily used for vehicular travel on the
highway, public street, or other property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular travel.
      (2)   If the motor vehicle is a commercial motor vehicle, allow the owner
or operator of the vehicle the opportunity to arrange for the removal of the
motor vehicle within a period of time specified by the public safety official.
If the public safety official determines that the motor vehicle cannot be
removed within the specified period of time, the public safety official shall
remove or order the removal of the motor vehicle.
   (b)   (1)   Except as provided in division (b)(2) of this section, the
Department of Transportation, any employee of the Department of Transportation,
or a public safety official who authorizes or participates in the removal of
any unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property as authorized by
division (a) of this section, regardless of whether the removal is executed by
a private towing service, is not liable for civil damages for any injury,
death, or loss to person or property that results from the removal of that
unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property. Further, except as
provided in division (b)(2) of this section, if a public safety official
authorizes, employs, or arranges to have a private towing service remove any
unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property as authorized by division
(a) of this section, that private towing service is not liable for civil
damages for any injury, death, or loss to person or property that results from
the removal of that unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property.
      (2)   Division (b)(1) of this section does not apply to any of the
following:
         A.   Any person or entity involved in the removal of an unoccupied
motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property pursuant to division (a) of this
section if that removal causes or contributes to the release of a hazardous
material or to structural damage to the roadway;
         B   A private towing service that was not authorized, employed, or
arranged by a public safety official to remove an unoccupied motor vehicle,
cargo, or personal property under this section;
         C.   Except as provided in division (b)(2)D. of this section, a
private towing service that was authorized, employed, or arranged by a public
safety official to perform the removal of the unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo,
or personal property but the private towing service performed the removal in a
negligent manner;
         D.   A private towing service that was authorized, employed, or
arranged by a public safety official to perform the removal of the unoccupied
motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property that was endangering public safety
but the private towing service performed the removal in a reckless manner.
   (c)   As used in divisions (a) and (b) of this section:
      (1)   HAZARDOUS MATERIAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2305.232.
      (2)   PUBLIC SAFETY OFFICIAL. Means any of the following:
         A.   The sheriff of the county, or the chief of a law enforcement
agency in the municipal corporation, township, port authority, conservancy
district, university campus police department, park district police force, or
township or joint police district, in which the accident occurred;
         B.   A state highway patrol trooper;
         C.   The chief of the fire department having jurisdiction where the
accident occurred;
         D.   A duly authorized subordinate acting on behalf of an official
specified in divisions A. to C. of this definition;
         E.   A natural resources officer or a wildlife officer.
(R.C. § 4513.66)
   (d)   If a towing service is removing a motor vehicle, and the removal was
not authorized under R.C. § 4513.60, 4513.601, 4513.61, or 4513.66, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, prior to removing the motor
vehicle, the towing service shall provide a written estimate of the price for
the removal to the operator of the motor vehicle, if requested.
   (e)   The towing service shall ensure that any estimate provided under
division (d) of this section includes the fees, services to be rendered, and
destination of the vehicle.
   (f)   If a towing service fails to provide a written estimate as required by
this section, the towing service shall not charge fees for the towing and
storage of the motor vehicle that exceed 25% of any applicable fees established
by the public utilities commission in rules adopted under R.C. § 4921.25(B)(4)
or, if the vehicle was towed within a municipal corporation that has
established vehicle removal and storage fees, 25% of the fees established by
the municipal corporation.
   (g)   Any storage facility that accepts towed vehicles shall conspicuously
post a notice at the entrance to the storage facility that states the
limitation on fees established under division (f) of this section.
(R.C. § 4513.68)
§ 436.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 438: SAFETY AND EQUIPMENT
438.01   Driving unsafe vehicles; application.
438.02   Lighted lights; measurement of distances and heights.
438.03   Headlights on motor vehicles and motorcycles.
438.04   Tail light; illumination of rear license plate.
438.05   Rear red reflectors.
438.06   Safety lighting on commercial vehicles.
438.07   Obscured lights on vehicles in combination.
438.08   Red light or red flag on extended loads.
438.09   Lights on parked or stopped vehicles.
438.10   Lights, emblems, and reflectors on slow-moving vehicles, farm
machinery, agricultural tractors, and animal-drawn vehicles.
438.11   Spotlight and auxiliary lights.
438.12   Cowl, fender and back-up lights.
438.13   Two lights displayed.
438.14   Use of headlight beams.
438.15   Lights of less intensity on slow- moving vehicles.
438.16   Number of lights permitted; red and flashing lights.
438.165   Lights and sound-producing devices on coroners’ vehicles.
438.17   Vehicles transporting preschool children.
438.18   Focus and aim of headlights.
438.19   Motor vehicle and motorcycle brakes.
438.20   Horn, siren and theft alarm signal.
438.21   Muffler; muffler cutout; excessive smoke, gas or noise.
438.22   Rear-view mirror; clear view to front, both sides and rear.
438.23   Windshield required; sign or poster upon windshield; windshield wiper.
438.235   Tinted glass; materials on glass.
438.24   Limited load extension on left side of passenger vehicle.
438.25   Motor vehicle stop lights.
438.26   Bumpers.
438.27   Air cleaner required.
438.28   Use of child restraints.
438.29   Use of occupant restraining devices.
438.30   Ignition interlock devices. (Repealed)
438.31   Noise-producing instruments and sound-amplifying devices in motor
vehicles.
438.32   Air bags.
438.33   Use of wireless handsets to text message and engage in other forms of
communication while driving.
438.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar State law
   Warning devices for commercial vehicles disabled upon freeways - see Ohio
R.C. 4513.28
   Collector’s vehicles - see Ohio R.C. 4513.38, 4513.41
   Use of stop and turn signals - see TRAF.
432.13
   Wheel protectors for commercial vehicles - see TRAF.
440.03
   Vehicles transporting explosives - see TRAF.
440.04
   Towing requirements; exception to size and weight restrictions - see TRAF.
440.05
   Occupying travel trailers while in motion - see TRAF.
440.08
   Bicycle equipment - see TRAF.
474.05
   Snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle and all-purpose vehicle equipment - see
TRAF.
476.02
   Improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle - see GEN. OFF.
672.04
§ 438.01 DRIVING UNSAFE VEHICLES; APPLICATION.
   (a)   No person shall drive or move, or cause or knowingly permit to be
driven or moved, on any highway any vehicle or combination of vehicles which is
in such unsafe condition as to endanger any person.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.02(A), (H))
§ 438.02 LIGHTED LIGHTS; MEASUREMENT OF DISTANCES AND HEIGHTS.
   (a)   Every vehicle, other than a motorized bicycle, operated upon a street
or highway within this state shall display lighted lights and illuminating
devices as required by R.C. §§ 4513.04 through 4513.37 during all of the
following times:
      (1)   The time from sunset to sunrise;
      (2)   At any other time when, due to insufficient natural light or
unfavorable atmospheric conditions, persons, vehicles and substantial objects
on the highway are not discernible at a distance of 1,000 feet ahead;
      (3)   At any time when the windshield wipers of the vehicle are in use
because of precipitation on the windshield.
   (b)   Every motorized bicycle shall display at such times lighted lights
meeting the rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety under R.C. §
4511.521. No motor vehicle, during any time specified in this section, shall be
operated upon a street or highway within this state using only parking lights
as illumination.
   (c)   Whenever in such sections a requirement is declared as to the distance
from which certain lamps and devices shall render objects visible, or within
which such lamps or devices shall be visible, such distance shall be measured
upon a straight level unlighted highway under normal atmospheric conditions
unless a different condition is expressly stated.
   (d)   Whenever in such sections a requirement is declared as to the mounted
height of lights or devices, it shall mean from the center of such light or
device to the level ground upon which the vehicle stands.
   (e)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a vehicle being operated upon a
street or highway within this state to stop the vehicle solely because the
officer observes that a violation of division (a)(3) of this section has been
or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation, or
summons for a violation of that division, or causing the arrest of or
commencing a prosecution of a person for a violation of that division.
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.03)
§ 438.03 HEADLIGHTS ON MOTOR VEHICLES AND MOTORCYCLES.
   (a)   (1)   Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, shall be equipped
with at least two headlights with at least one near each side of the front of
the motor vehicle.
      (2)   Every motorcycle shall be equipped with at least one and not more
than two headlights.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.04)
§ 438.04 TAIL LIGHT; ILLUMINATION OF REAR LICENSE PLATE.
   (a)   (1)   Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, pole trailer or
vehicle which is being drawn at the end of a train of vehicles shall be
equipped with at least one tail light mounted on the rear which, when lighted,
shall emit a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear,
provided that in the case of a train of vehicles only the tail light on the
rearmost vehicle need be visible from the distance specified.
      (2)   Either a tail light or a separate light shall be so constructed and
placed as to illuminate with a white light the rear registration plate, when
such registration plate is required, and render it legible from a distance of
50 feet to the rear. Any tail light, together with any separate light for
illuminating the rear registration plate, shall be so wired as to be lighted
whenever the headlights or auxiliary driving lights are lighted, except where
separate lighting systems are provided for trailers for the purpose of
illuminating such registration plate.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.05)
§ 438.05 REAR RED REFLECTORS.
   (a)   (1)   Every new motor vehicle sold after September 6, 1941, and
operated on a highway, other than a commercial tractor to which a trailer or
semitrailer is attached, shall carry at the rear, either as a part of the tail
lamps or separately, two red reflectors meeting the requirements of this
section, except that vehicles of the type mentioned in Ohio R.C. 4513.07 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance shall be equipped with reflectors
as required by the regulations provided for in that section.
      (2)   Every such reflector shall be of such size and characteristics and
so maintained as to be visible at night from all distances within 300 feet to
50 feet from such vehicle.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.06)
§ 438.06 SAFETY LIGHTING ON COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.
   (a)   (1)   When the Director of Public Safety prescribes and promulgates
regulations relating to clearance lights, marker lights, reflectors and stop
lights on buses, trucks, commercial tractors, trailers, semitrailers and pole
trailers, when operated upon any highway, these vehicles shall be equipped as
required by such regulations, and such equipment shall be lighted at all times
mentioned in Ohio R.C. 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, except that clearance lights and side marker lights need not be
lighted on any such vehicle when it is operated within the Municipality where
there is sufficient light to reveal any person or substantial object on the
highway at a distance of 500 feet.
      (2)   Such equipment shall be in addition to all other lights
specifically required by Ohio R.C. 4513.03 through 4513.16, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinances.
      (3)   Vehicles operated under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities
Commission are not subject to this section.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.07)
§ 438.07 OBSCURED LIGHTS ON VEHICLES IN COMBINATION.
   Whenever motor and other vehicles are operated in combination during the
time that lights are required, any light, except tail lights, which by reason
of its location on a vehicle of the combination would be obscured by another
vehicle of the combination, need not be lighted, but this section does not
affect the requirement that lighted clearance lights be displayed on the front
of the foremost vehicle required to have clearance lights or that all lights
required on the rear of the rearmost vehicle of any combination shall be
lighted.
(ORC 4513.08)
§ 438.08 RED LIGHT OR RED FLAG ON EXTENDED LOADS.
   (a)   Whenever the load upon any vehicle extends to the rear four feet or
more beyond the bed or body of this vehicle, there shall be displayed at the
extreme rear end of the load, at the times specified in Ohio R.C. 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, a red light or lantern plainly
visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the sides and rear. The red
light or lantern required by this section is in addition to the red rear light
required upon every vehicle. At any other time there shall be displayed at the
extreme rear end of such load a red flag or cloth not less than 16 inches
square.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.09)
§ 438.09 LIGHTS ON PARKED OR STOPPED VEHICLES.
   (a)   Except in case of an emergency, whenever a vehicle is parked or
stopped upon a roadway open to traffic or a shoulder adjacent thereto, whether
attended or unattended, during the times mentioned in Ohio R.C. 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, such vehicle shall be equipped
with one or more lights which shall exhibit a white or amber light on the
roadway side visible from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle,
and a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear. No lights need
be displayed upon any such vehicle when it is stopped or parked within the
Municipality where there is sufficient light to reveal any person or
substantial object within a distance of 500 feet upon such highway. Any lighted
headlights upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed.
(ORC 4513.10)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.99)
§ 438.10 LIGHTS, EMBLEMS, AND REFLECTORS ON SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES, FARM
MACHINERY, AGRICULTURAL TRACTORS, AND ANIMAL-DRAWN VEHICLES.
   (a)   Definitions. As used in this section:
      (1)   BOAT TRAILER. Means any vehicle designed and used exclusively to
transport a boat between a place of storage and a marina, or in and around a
marina, when drawn or towed on a street or highway for a distance of no more
than ten miles and at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less.
      (2)   SLOW-MOVING VEHICLE and SMV. Mean a boat trailer, unit of farm
machinery, road construction machinery, or other machinery designed by the
manufacturer to operate at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less. The term does
not include a bicycle, motorized bicycle, electric bicycle, or animal-drawn
vehicle.
(R.C. § 4513.11)
   (b)   Generally.
      (1)   At the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, no person shall operate
either of the following vehicles unless it is equipped with and displays the
lamps described in division (b)(2) of this section:
         A.   A vehicle not specifically required to be equipped with lamps or
other lighting devices by R.C. §§ 4513.03 to 4513.10;
         B.   A vehicle referred to in R.C. § 4513.02(G).
      (2)   Vehicles described in division (b)(1) of this section shall be
equipped with both of the following:
         A.   At least one lamp displaying a white light visible from a
distance of not less than 1,000 feet to the front of the vehicle;
         B.   Two lamps displaying red light visible from a distance of not
less than 1,000 feet to the rear of the vehicle, or as an alternative, one lamp
displaying a red light visible from a distance of not less than 1,000 feet to
the rear and two red reflectors visible from all distances of 600 feet to 100
feet to the rear when illuminated by the lawful lower beams of headlamps.
      (3)   A.   At the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, no person shall
operate a multi-wheel agricultural tractor model year 2001 or earlier on a
street or highway unless it is equipped with and displays reflectors and
illuminated amber lamps so that the extreme left and right projections of the
tractor are indicated by all of the following:
            1.   Flashing lamps displaying amber light, visible to the front
and the rear. The lamps need not flash simultaneously and need not flash in
conjunction with any directional signals of the tractor.
            2.   Amber reflectors, all visible to the front;
            3.   Red reflectors, all visible to the rear.
         B.   Rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety under R.C. §
4513.111 governing the lamps and reflectors described in division (b)(3)A. of
this section and their placement correlate with and, as far as possible,
conform with paragraphs 4.1.4.1, 4.1.7.1, and 4.1.7.2 respectively of the
American Society of Agricultural Engineers Standard ANSI/ASAE S279.10 OCT 98,
Lighting and Marking of Agricultural Equipment on Highways.
      (4)   At the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, no person shall operate a
unit of farm machinery model year 2002 or later on a street or highway unless
it is equipped with and displays markings and illuminated lamps that meet or
exceed the lighting, illumination, and marking standards and specifications
that are applicable to that type of farm machinery for the unit's model year
specified in the American society of agricultural engineers standard ANSI/ASAE
S279.10 OCT 98, lighting and marking of agricultural equipment on highways.
      (5)   Any unit of farm machinery designed by its manufacturer to operate
at a speed of 25 miles per hour or greater or any SMV may be equipped with and
display a red flashing light that is visible from a distance of not less than
1,000 feet to the rear at all times specified in R.C. § 4513.03. When a double-
faced light is used, it shall display amber light to the front and red light to
the rear.
      (6)   Lights and reflectors required under divisions (b)(3) and (b)(4) of
this section and authorized under division (b)(5) of this section are in
addition to other lights required or permitted by this division (b) or R.C. §
4513.17.
      (7)   The Ohio Director of Public Safety shall adopt rules in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 119 that establish standards and specifications for lamps and
reflectors required or authorized by this section. Lamps and reflectors
required or authorized by this section shall meet those standards and
specifications.
      (8)   This division (b) does not apply to a bicycle, motorized bicycle,
electric bicycle, or animal-drawn vehicle.
      (9)   Whoever violates this division (b) is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.111)
   (c)   Slow-moving vehicles.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall
operate an SMV on a street or highway as follows:
         A.   At a speed exceeding 25 miles per hour;
         B.   Without displaying the triangular SMV emblem mounted in
accordance with division (c)(2) of this section.
      (2)   The SMV emblem shall be mounted so as to be visible from a distance
of not less than 500 feet to the rear. In accordance with R.C. Chapter 119, the
Ohio Director of Public Safety shall adopt standards and specifications for the
design and position of mounting the SMV emblem. The standards and
specifications for the SMV emblem correlate with and, so far as possible,
conform with those approved by the American Society of Agricultural Engineers.
      (3)   A person may operate an SMV on a street or highway without
displaying the triangular SMV emblem when any of the following apply:
         A.   The SMV is being used in actual construction and maintenance work
in an area guarded by a flagperson, or where flares are used.
         B.   The SMV is operating or traveling within the limits of a
construction area designated by the Ohio Director of Transportation, a city
engineer, or the county engineer of the several counties, when such
construction area is marked in accordance with requirements of the Ohio
Director of Transportation and the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices,
as set forth in R.C. § 4511.09.
      (4)   No person shall display an SMV emblem on any of the following:
         A.   Any vehicle not required to use the SMV emblem by this division
(c) or R.C. § 4513.113 or 4513.114;
         B.   An SMV being transported upon any other vehicle;
         C.   Any stationary object on the highway.
      (5)   No person shall sell, lease, rent, or operate an SMV, except a unit
designed to be completely mounted on a primary power unit that is manufactured
or assembled on or after April 1, 1966, unless it is equipped with an SMV
emblem mounting device.
      (6)   Whoever violates this division (c) is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.112)
   (d)   Farm machinery and agricultural tractors.
      (1)   No person shall sell, lease, rent, or operate on a street or
highway any unit of farm machinery that is designed by its manufacturer to
operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour unless the unit displays both
of the following:
         A.   The SMV emblem mounted in accordance with R.C. § 4513.112(B);
         B.   A speed identification symbol that does both of the following:
            1.   Meets the specifications contained in the American Society of
Agricultural Engineers Standard ANSI/ASAE S584 JAN2005, Agricultural Equipment:
Speed Identification Symbol (SIS);
            2.   Indicates the maximum speed in miles per hour at which the
unit of farm machinery is designed by its manufacturer to operate.
      (2)   No person operating a tractor on a street or highway that is
designed by its manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per
hour and that is towing, pulling, or otherwise drawing a unit of farm machinery
while operating at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour shall fail to display
both of the following on the unit of farm machinery:
         A.   The SMV emblem;
         B.   The speed identification symbol that matches the speed
identification symbol required to be displayed on the agricultural tractor.
      (3)   No person shall operate an agricultural tractor that is designed by
its manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour unless
the person possesses documentation published or provided by the manufacturer
indicating the maximum speed in miles per hour at which the manufacturer
designed the agricultural tractor to operate.
      (4)   Whoever violates this division (d) is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.113)
   (e)   Animal-drawn vehicles.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (e)(4) of this section, no
person shall operate an animal-drawn vehicle on a street or highway unless it
is equipped with and displays, at the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, both
of the following:
         A.   At least one lamp displaying a white light visible from a
distance of not less than 1,000 feet to the front of the animal-drawn vehicle;
         B.   Two lamps displaying red light visible from a distance of not
less than 1,000 feet to the rear of the animal-drawn vehicle, or as an
alternative, one lamp displaying a red light visible from a distance of not
less than 1,000 feet to the rear and two red reflectors visible from all
distances of 600 feet to one hundred feet to the rear when illuminated by the
lawful lower beams of headlamps.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (e)(4) of this section, no
person shall operate an animal-drawn vehicle on a street or highway unless it
is equipped with and displays, at all times, all of the following:
         A.   One yellow flashing lamp displaying yellow light that is visible
from a distance of not less than 1,000 feet and that is mounted in either of
the following positions:
            1.   On the top most portion of the rear of the animal-drawn
vehicle;
            2.   On the top of the animal-drawn vehicle.
         B.   At least one of the following:
            1.   An SMV emblem mounted in accordance with R.C. § 4513.112(B);
            2.   Micro-prism reflective tape that is visible from a distance of
not less than 500 feet to the rear when illuminated by the lawful lower beams
of headlamps;
            3.   Both an SMV emblem and micro-prism reflective tape, as
specified in this division.
         C.   Lamps and micro-prism reflective tape required by this section
shall meet standards and specifications adopted by the Ohio Director of Public
Safety under R.C. § 4513.114.
      (3)   The Ohio Director of Public Safety, in accordance with R.C. Chapter
119, shall adopt rules establishing standards and specifications for the
position and mounting of the lamps and micro-prism reflective tape required by
R.C. § 4513.114. The rules permit the micro-prism reflective tape to be red,
amber, white, or silver in color.
      (4)   A.   Divisions (e)(1) and (e)(2) of this section do not apply to
the operator of animal-drawn agricultural equipment who is not transporting any
livestock or a person other than the operator.
         B.   No operator described in division (e)(4)A. of this section shall
operate animal-drawn agricultural equipment unless it is equipped with and
displays, at all times, the SMV emblem mounted in accordance with R.C. §
4513.112(B).
         C.   As used in division (e)(4) of this section, "animal-drawn
agricultural equipment" means equipment drawn by the muscular power of an
animal that is used solely for agricultural purposes. "Animal-drawn
agricultural equipment" includes any of the following:
            1.   A plow;
            2.   A manure spreader;
            3.   A thresher.
      (5)   Whoever violates this division (e) is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.114)
   (f)   Strict liability offenses. The offenses established under this section
are strict liability offenses, and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The
designation of these offenses as strict liability offenses shall not be
construed to imply that any other offense, for which there is no specified
degree of culpability, is not a strict liability offense.
(R.C. § 4513.115)
§ 438.11 SPOTLIGHT AND AUXILIARY LIGHTS.
   (a)   (1)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than one
spotlight and every lighted spotlight shall be so aimed and used upon
approaching another vehicle that no part of the high-intensity portion of the
beam will be directed to the left of the prolongation of the extreme left side
of the vehicle, nor more than 100 feet ahead of the vehicle.
      (2)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than three
auxiliary driving lights mounted on the front of the vehicle. Any such lights
which do not conform to the specifications for auxiliary driving lights and the
regulations for their use prescribed by the Director of Public Safety shall not
be used.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.12)
§ 438.12 COWL, FENDER AND BACK-UP LIGHTS.
   (a)   (1)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with side cowl or fender
lights which shall emit a white or amber light without glare.
      (2)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with lights on each side thereof
which shall emit a white or amber light without glare.
      (3)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with back-up lights, either
separately or in combination with another light. No back-up lights shall be
continuously lighted when the motor vehicle is in forward motion.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.13)
§ 438.13 TWO LIGHTS DISPLAYED.
   (a)   At all times mentioned in Ohio R.C. 4513.03 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, at least two lighted lights shall be displayed,
one near each side of the front of every motor vehicle, except when such
vehicle is parked subject to the regulations governing lights on parked
vehicles.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.14)
§ 438.14 USE OF HEADLIGHT BEAMS.
   (a)   Whenever a motor vehicle is being operated on a roadway or shoulder
adjacent thereto during the times specified in Ohio R.C. 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the driver shall use a
distribution of light, or composite beam, directed high enough and of
sufficient intensity to reveal persons, vehicles and substantial objects at a
safe distance in advance of the vehicle, subject to the following requirements:
      (1)   Whenever the driver of a vehicle approaches an oncoming vehicle,
such driver shall use a distribution of light, or composite beam, so aimed that
the glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of the oncoming driver.
      (2)   Every new motor vehicle registered in this State which has
multiple-beam road lighting equipment shall be equipped with a beam indicator,
which shall be lighted whenever the uppermost distribution of light from the
headlights is in use, and shall not otherwise be lighted. This indicator shall
be so designed and located that, when lighted, it will be readily visible
without glare to the driver of the vehicle.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.15)
§ 438.15 LIGHTS OF LESS INTENSITY ON SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES.
   (a)   Any motor vehicle may be operated under the conditions specified in
Ohio R.C. 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance when it is
equipped with two lighted lights upon the front thereof capable of revealing
persons and substantial objects 75 feet ahead, in lieu of lights required in
Ohio R.C. 4513.14 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, provided
that such vehicle shall not be operated at a speed in excess of 20 miles per
hour.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.16)
§ 438.16 NUMBER OF LIGHTS PERMITTED; RED AND FLASHING LIGHTS.
   (a)   Whenever a motor vehicle equipped with headlights is also equipped
with any auxiliary lights or spotlight or any other light on the front thereof
projecting a beam of an intensity greater than 300 candlepower, not more than a
total of five of any such lights on the front of a vehicle shall be lighted at
any one time when the vehicle is upon a highway.
   (b)   Any lighted light or illuminating device upon a motor vehicle, other
than headlights, spotlights, signal lights or auxiliary driving lights, that
projects a beam of light of an intensity greater than 300 candlepower shall be
so directed that no part of the beam will strike the level of the roadway on
which the vehicle stands at a distance of more than 75 feet from the vehicle.
   (c)   (1)   Flashing lights are prohibited on motor vehicles, except as a
means for indicating a right or a left turn, or in the presence of a vehicular
traffic hazard requiring unusual care in approaching, or overtaking or passing.
      (2)   The prohibition in division (c)(1) of this section does not apply
to any of the following:
         A.   Emergency vehicles, road service vehicles servicing or towing a
disabled vehicle, stationary waste collection vehicles actively collecting
garbage, refuse, trash, or recyclable materials on the roadside, rural mail
delivery vehicles, vehicles as provided in R.C. § 4513.182, highway maintenance
vehicles, and similar equipment operated by state or local authorities,
provided such vehicles are equipped with and display, when used on a street or
highway for the special purpose necessitating such lights, a flashing,
oscillating, or rotating amber light;
         B.   Vehicles or machinery permitted by R.C. § 4513.111 to have a
flashing red light;
         C.   Farm machinery and vehicles escorting farm machinery, provided
such machinery and vehicles are equipped with and display, when used on a
street or highway, a flashing, oscillating, or rotating amber light. Farm
machinery also may display the lights described in R.C. § 4513.111.
         D.   A funeral hearse or funeral escort vehicle, provided that the
funeral hearse or funeral escort vehicle is equipped with and displays, when
used on a street or highway for the special purpose necessitating such lights,
a flashing, oscillating, or rotating purple or amber light.
         E.   A vehicle being used for emergency preparedness, response, and
recovery activities, as those terms are defined in R.C. § 5502.21, that is
equipped with and displays, when used on a street or highway for the special
purpose necessitating such lights, a flashing, oscillating, or rotating amber
or red and white light, provided that the vehicle is being operated by a person
from one of the following and the vehicle is clearly marked with the applicable
agency’s or authority’s insignia:
            1.   The Ohio Emergency Management Agency;
            2.   A countywide emergency management agency established under
R.C. § 5502.26;
            3.   A regional authority for emergency management established
under R.C. § 5502.27;
            4.   A program for emergency management established under R.C. §
5502.271.
      (3)   Division (c)(1) of this section does not apply to animal-drawn
vehicles subject to R.C. § 4513.114.
   (d)   (1)   Except a person operating a public safety vehicle, as defined in
R.C. § 4511.01(E), or a school bus, no person shall operate, move, or park
upon, or permit to stand within the right-of-way of any public street or
highway any vehicle or equipment that is equipped with and displaying a
flashing red or a flashing combination red and white light, or an oscillating
or rotating red light, or a combination red and white oscillating or rotating
light.
      (2)   Except a public law enforcement officer, or other person sworn to
enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state, operating a public safety
vehicle when on duty, no person shall operate, move, or park upon, or permit to
stand within the right-of-way of any street or highway any vehicle or equipment
that is equipped with, or upon which is mounted, and displaying a flashing blue
or a flashing combination blue and white light, or an oscillating or rotating
blue light, or a combination blue and white oscillating or rotating light.
   (e)   This section does not prohibit the use of warning lights required by
law or the simultaneous flashing of turn signals on disabled vehicles or on
vehicles being operated in unfavorable atmospheric conditions in order to
enhance their visibility. This section also does not prohibit the simultaneous
flashing of turn signals or warning lights whether on farm machinery or
vehicles escorting farm machinery when used on a street or highway.
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.17)
§ 438.165 LIGHTS AND SOUND-PRODUCING DEVICES ON CORONERS’ VEHICLES.
   (a)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a motor vehicle operated
by a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s investigator may be equipped with a
flashing, oscillating or rotating red or blue light and siren, whistle or bell
capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a distance of
not less than 500 feet. Such a vehicle may display the flashing, oscillating or
rotating red or blue light and may give the audible signal of the siren,
whistle or bell only when responding to a fatality or a fatal motor vehicle
accident on a street or highway and only at those locations where the stoppage
of traffic impedes the ability of the coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s
investigator to arrive at the site of the fatality.
   (b)   This section does not relieve the coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s
investigator operating a motor vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard
for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.171)
§ 438.17 VEHICLES TRANSPORTING PRESCHOOL CHILDREN.
   (a)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle owned, leased, or hired by a
nursery school, kindergarten, or day-care center, while transporting preschool
children to or from such an institution unless the motor vehicle is equipped
with and displaying two amber flashing lights mounted on a bar attached to the
top of the vehicle, and a sign bearing the designation “caution — children,”
which shall be attached to the bar carrying the amber flashing lights in such a
manner as to be legible to persons both in front of and behind the vehicle. The
lights and sign shall meet standards and specifications adopted by the Director
of Public Safety.
   (b)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle displaying the lights and sign
required by this section for any purpose other than the transportation of
preschool children as provided in this section.
(ORC 4513.182)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.99)
§ 438.18 FOCUS AND AIM OF HEADLIGHTS.
   (a)   No person shall use any lights mentioned in R.C. §§ 4513.03 through
4513.18, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, upon any motor
vehicle, trailer or semitrailer unless these lights are equipped, mounted and
adjusted as to focus and aim in accordance with regulations which are
prescribed by the Director of Public Safety.
   (b)   The headlights on any motor vehicle shall comply with the headlamp
color requirements contained in Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number
108, 49 C.F.R. § 571.108. No person shall operate a motor vehicle in violation
of this division.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.19)
§ 438.19 MOTOR VEHICLE AND MOTORCYCLE BRAKES.
   (a)   The following requirements govern as to brake equipment on vehicles:
      (1)   Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, when operated upon a
highway shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and
to stop and hold the motor vehicle, including two separate means of applying
the brakes, each of which means shall be effective to apply the brakes to at
least two wheels. If these two separate means of applying the brakes are
connected in any way, then on such motor vehicles, manufactured or assembled
after January 1, 1942, they shall be so constructed that failure of any one
part of the operating mechanism shall not leave the motor vehicle without
brakes on at least two wheels.
      (2)   Every motorcycle, when operated upon a highway shall be equipped
with at least one adequate brake, which may be operated by hand or by foot.
      (3)   Every motorized bicycle shall be equipped with brakes meeting the
rules adopted by the Director of Public Safety under Ohio R.C. 4511.521.
      (4)   When operated upon the highways, the following vehicles shall be
equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and to
hold the vehicle, designed to be applied by the driver of the towing motor
vehicle from its cab, and also designed and connected so that, in case of a
breakaway of the towed vehicle, the brakes shall be automatically applied:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, every trailer or
semitrailer, except a pole trailer, with an empty weight of 2,000 pounds or
more, manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 1942;
         B.   Every manufactured home or travel trailer with an empty weight of
2,000 pounds or more, manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 2001.
      (5)   Every watercraft trailer with a gross weight or manufacturer’s
gross vehicle weight rating of 3,000 pounds or more that is manufactured or
assembled on or after January 1, 2008, shall have separate brakes equipped with
hydraulic surge or electrically operated brakes on two wheels.
      (6)   In any combination of motor-drawn trailers or semitrailers equipped
with brakes, means shall be provided for applying the rearmost brakes in
approximate synchronism with the brakes on the towing vehicle, and developing
the required braking effort on the rearmost wheels at the fastest rate; or
means shall be provided for applying braking effort first on the rearmost
brakes; or both of the above means, capable of being used alternatively, may be
employed.
      (7)   Every vehicle and combination of vehicles, except motorcycles and
motorized bicycles, and except trailers and semitrailers of a gross weight of
less than 2,000 pounds, and pole trailers, shall be equipped with parking
brakes adequate to hold the vehicle on any grade on which it is operated, under
all conditions of loading, on a surface free from snow, ice, or loose material.
The parking brakes shall be capable of being applied in conformance with the
foregoing requirements by the driver’s muscular effort or by spring action or
by equivalent means. Their operation may be assisted by the service brakes or
other source of power provided that failure of the service brake actuation
system or other power assisting mechanism will not prevent the parking brakes
from being applied in conformance with the foregoing requirements. The parking
brakes shall be so designed that when once applied they shall remain applied
with the required effectiveness despite exhaustion of any source of energy or
leakage of any kind.
      (8)   The same brake drums, brake shoes and lining assemblies, brake shoe
anchors, and mechanical brake shoe actuation mechanism normally associated with
the wheel brake assemblies may be used for both the service brakes and the
parking brakes. If the means of applying the parking brakes and the service
brakes are connected in any way, they shall be so constructed that failure of
any one part shall not leave the vehicle without operative brakes.
      (9)   Every motor vehicle or combination of motor-drawn vehicles shall,
at all times and under all conditions of loading, be capable of being stopped
on a dry, smooth, level road free from loose material, upon application of the
service or foot brake, within the following specified distances, or shall be
capable of being decelerated at a sustained rate corresponding to these
distances:
         A.   Vehicles or combinations of vehicles having brakes on all wheels
shall come to a stop in 30 feet or less from a speed of 20 miles per hour.
         B.   Vehicles or combinations of vehicles not having brakes on all
wheels shall come to a stop in 40 feet or less from a speed of 20 miles per
hour.
      (10)   All brakes shall be maintained in good working order and shall be
so adjusted as to operate as equally as practicable with respect to the wheels
on opposite sides of the vehicle.
(ORC 4513.20)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.99)
§ 438.20 HORN, SIREN AND THEFT ALARM SIGNAL.
   (a)   (1)   Every motor vehicle when operated upon a highway shall be
equipped with a horn which is in good working order and capable of emitting
sound audible, under normal conditions, from a distance of not less than 200
feet.
      (2)   No motor vehicle shall be equipped with, nor shall any person use
upon a vehicle, any siren, whistle, or bell. Any vehicle may be equipped with a
theft alarm signal device which shall be so arranged that it cannot be used as
an ordinary warning signal. Every emergency vehicle shall be equipped with a
siren, whistle or bell, capable of emitting sound audible under normal
conditions from a distance of not less than 500 feet and of a type approved by
the Director of Public Safety. Such equipment shall not be used except when
such vehicle is operated in response to an emergency call or is in the
immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, in which case
the driver of the emergency vehicle shall sound such equipment when it is
necessary to warn pedestrians and other drivers of the approach thereof.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.21)
§ 438.21 MUFFLER; MUFFLER CUTOUT; EXCESSIVE SMOKE, GAS OR NOISE.
   (a)   (1)   Every motor vehicle and motorcycle with an internal combustion
engine shall at all times be equipped with a muffler which is in good working
order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise, and no
person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass or similar device upon a motor
vehicle on a highway. Every motorcycle muffler shall be equipped with baffle
plates.
      (2)   No person shall own, operate or have in the person’s possession any
motor vehicle or motorcycle equipped with a device for producing excessive
smoke or gas, or so equipped as to permit oil or any other chemical to flow
into or upon the exhaust pipe or muffler of such vehicle, or equipped in any
way to produce or emit smoke or dangerous or annoying gases from any portion of
such vehicle, other than the ordinary gases emitted by the exhaust of an
internal combustion engine under normal operation.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.22)
§ 438.22 REAR-VIEW MIRROR; CLEAR VIEW TO FRONT, BOTH SIDES AND REAR.
   (a)   Every motor vehicle and motorcycle shall be equipped with a mirror so
located as to reflect to the operator a view of the highway to the rear of such
vehicle or motorcycle. Operators of vehicles and motorcycles shall have a clear
and unobstructed view to the front and to both sides of their vehicles and
motorcycles and shall have a clear view to the rear of their vehicles and
motorcycles by mirror.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.23)
§ 438.23 WINDSHIELD REQUIRED; SIGN OR POSTER UPON WINDSHIELD; WINDSHIELD WIPER.
   (a)   No person shall drive any motor vehicle on a street or highway in this
Municipality, other than a motorcycle or motorized bicycle, that is not
equipped with a windshield.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall drive any motor vehicle, other than a bus, with
any sign, poster or other nontransparent material upon the front windshield,
sidewings, side or rear windows of the vehicle other than a certificate or
other paper required to be displayed by law, except that there may be in the
lower left-hand or right-hand corner of the windshield a sign, poster or decal
not to exceed four inches in height by six inches in width. No sign, poster or
decal shall be displayed in the front windshield in such a manner as to conceal
the vehicle identification number for the motor vehicle when, in accordance
with federal law, that number is located inside the vehicle passenger
compartment and so placed as to be readable through the vehicle glazing without
moving any part of the vehicle.
      (2)   Division (b)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is
driving a passenger car with an electronic device, including an antenna,
electronic tolling or other transponder, camera, directional navigation device,
or other similar electronic device located in the front windshield if either of
the following apply to the device:
         A.   It is a "vehicle safety technology" as defined in 49 C.F.R. §
393.5 and complies with 49 C.F.R. § 393.60(e)(1)(ii).
         B.   It does not restrict the vehicle operator's sight lines to the
road and highway signs and signals, and it does not conceal the vehicle
identification number.
      (3)   Division (b)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is
driving a commercial car with an electronic device, including an antenna,
electronic tolling or other transponder, camera, directional navigation device,
or other similar electronic device located in the front windshield if either of
the following apply to the device:
         A.   It is a "vehicle safety technology" as defined in 49 C.F.R. §
393.5 and complies with 49 C.F.R. § 393.60(e)(1)(ii).
         B.   It does not restrict the vehicle operator's sight lines to the
road and highway signs and signals, and it is mounted not more than 8.5 inches
below the upper edge of the windshield.
   (c)   The windshield on every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a device
for cleaning rain, snow, or other moisture from the windshield. The device
shall be maintained in good working order and so constructed as to be
controlled or operated by the operator of the vehicle.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.24)
§ 438.235 TINTED GLASS; MATERIALS ON GLASS.
   (a)   No person shall operate, on any highway or other public or private
property open to the public for vehicular travel or parking, lease or rent any
motor vehicle that is registered in this state unless the motor vehicle
conforms to the requirements concerning tinted glass and reflectorized material
of R.C. § 4513.241 and of any applicable rule adopted under that section.
   (b)   No person shall install in or on any motor vehicle any glass or other
material that fails to conform to the requirements of R.C. § 4513.241 or of any
rule adopted under that section.
   (c)   (1)   No used motor vehicle dealer or new motor vehicle dealer, as
defined in R.C. § 4517.01, shall sell any motor vehicle that fails to conform
to the requirements of R.C. § 4513.241 or of any rule adopted under that
section.
      (2)   No manufacturer, remanufacturer, or distributor, as defined in R.C.
§ 4517.01, shall provide to a motor vehicle dealer licensed under R.C. Chapter
4517 or to any other person, a motor vehicle that fails to conform to the
requirements of R.C. § 4513.241 or of any rule adopted under that section.
   (d)   No reflectorized materials shall be permitted upon or in any front
windshield, side windows, sidewings or rear window.
   (e)   This section does not apply to the manufacturer’s tinting or glazing
of motor vehicle windows or windshields that is otherwise in compliance with or
permitted by Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 205.
   (f)   With regard to any side window behind a driver’s seat or any rear
window other than any window on an emergency door, this division (b) does not
apply to any school bus used to transport a child with disabilities pursuant to
R.C. Chapter 3323, whom it is impossible or impractical to transport by regular
school bus in the course of regular route transportation provided by a school
district. As used in this division, CHILD WITH DISABILITIES has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 3323.01.
   (g)   This section does not apply to any school bus that is to be sold and
operated outside the municipality.
   (h)   (1)   This section does not apply to a motor vehicle used by a law
enforcement agency when the motor vehicle is used by the law enforcement agency
for a purpose within the scope of the law enforcement agency’s duties.
      (2)   As used in this division, LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY means a police
department, the office of a sheriff, the State Highway Patrol, a county
prosecuting attorney, or a federal, state, or local governmental body that
enforces criminal laws and that has employees who have a statutory power of
arrest.
(R.C. § 4513.241(C) - (J))
   (i)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a), (c)(2) or (d) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (c)(1) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor if the dealer or the dealer’s agent knew of the nonconformity
at the time of sale.
      (3)   A.   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree, except that an organization may not be
convicted unless the act of installation was authorized by the board of
directors, trustees, partners, or by a high managerial officer acting on behalf
of the organization, and installation was performed by an employee of the
organization acting within the scope of the person’s employment.
         B.   In addition to any other penalty imposed under this section,
whoever violates division (b) of this section is liable in a civil action to
the owner of a motor vehicle on which was installed the nonconforming glass or
material for any damages incurred by that person as a result of the
installation of the nonconforming glass or material, costs of maintaining the
civil action, and attorney fees.
         C.   In addition to any other penalty imposed under this section, if
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation
of division (b) of this section and the offender is a motor vehicle repair
operator registered under R.C. Chapter 4775 or a motor vehicle dealer licensed
under R.C. Chapter 4517, whoever violates division (b) of this section is
subject to a registration or license suspension, as applicable, for a period of
not more than 180 days.
(R.C. § 4513.241(K))
Statutory reference:
   Administrative regulations, see O.A.C. Chapter 4501-41
§ 438.24 LIMITED LOAD EXTENSION ON LEFT SIDE OF PASSENGER VEHICLE.
   (a)   No passenger-type vehicle shall be operated on a highway with any load
carried on the vehicle which extends more than six inches beyond the line of
the fenders on the vehicle’s left side.
(ORC 4513.30)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.99)
§ 438.25 MOTOR VEHICLE STOP LIGHTS.
   (a)   (1)   Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, and pole trailer when
operated upon a highway shall be equipped with two or more stop lights, except
that passenger cars manufactured or assembled prior to January 1, 1967,
motorcycles, and motor-driven cycles shall be equipped with at least one stop
light. Stop lights shall be mounted on the rear of the vehicle, actuated upon
application of the service brake, and may be incorporated with other rear
lights. Such stop lights when actuated shall emit a red light visible from a
distance of 500 feet to the rear; provided that in the case of a train of
vehicles only the stop lights on the rearmost vehicle need be visible from the
distance specified.
      (2)   Such stop lights when actuated shall give a steady warning light to
the rear of a vehicle or train of vehicles to indicate the intention of the
operator to diminish the speed of or stop a vehicle or train of vehicles.
      (3)   When stop lights are used as required by this section, they shall
be constructed or installed so as to provide adequate and reliable illumination
and shall conform to the appropriate rules and regulations established under
Ohio R.C. 4513.19.
      (4)   Historical motor vehicles as defined in Ohio R.C. 4503.181, not
originally manufactured with stop lights, are not subject to this section.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.071)
§ 438.26 BUMPERS.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING. The manufacturer’s gross vehicle
weight rating established for that vehicle.
      (2)   MANUFACTURER. The same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4501.01.
      (3)   MULTIPURPOSE PASSENGER VEHICLE. A motor vehicle with motive power,
except a motorcycle, designed to carry ten persons or less, that is constructed
either on a truck chassis or with special features for occasional off-road
operation.
      (4)   PASSENGER CAR. Any motor vehicle with motive power, designed for
carrying ten persons or less, except a multipurpose passenger vehicle or
motorcycle.
      (5)   TRUCK. Every motor vehicle, except trailers and semitrailers,
designed and used to carry property and having a gross vehicle weight rating of
10,000 pounds or less.
   (b)   Rules adopted by the Director of Public Safety, in accordance with
Ohio R.C. Chapter 119, shall govern the maximum bumper height or, in the
absence of bumpers and in cases where bumper height have been lowered or
modified, the maximum height to the bottom of the frame rail of any passenger
car, multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck.
   (c)   No person shall operate upon a street or highway any passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck registered in this State that does not
conform to the requirements of this section or any applicable rule adopted
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4513.021.
   (d)   No person shall modify any motor vehicle registered in this State in
such a manner as to cause the vehicle body or chassis to come in contact with
the ground, expose the fuel tank to damage from collision, or cause the wheels
to come in contact with the body under normal operation, and no person shall
disconnect any part of the original suspension system of the vehicle to defeat
the safe operation of that system.
   (e)   Nothing contained in this section or in the rules adopted pursuant to
Ohio R.C. 4513.021 shall be construed to prohibit either of the following:
      (1)   The installation upon a passenger car, multipurpose passenger
vehicle or truck registered in this State of heavy duty equipment, including
shock absorbers and overload springs.
      (2)   The operation on a street or highway of a passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle, or truck registered in this State with normal
wear to the suspension system if the normal wear does not adversely affect the
control of the vehicle.
   (f)   This section and the rules adopted pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4513.021 do
not apply to any specially designed or modified passenger car, multipurpose
passenger vehicle, or truck when operated off a street or highway in races and
similar events.
   (g)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.021)
Statutory reference:
   Maximum height on bumpers, see O.A.C. Chapter 4501-43
§ 438.27 AIR CLEANER REQUIRED.
   (a)   No person shall operate any vehicle with motive power of four
cylinders or more on the streets or other public property or private property
within the Village unless the carburetor of such vehicle has attached to it an
air cleaner or air breather having a minimum diameter of six inches.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a
first offense; on each subsequent offense such person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(Ord. 11-1977, passed 3-22-1977)
§ 438.28 USE OF CHILD RESTRAINTS.
   (a)   When any child who is in either or both of the following categories is
being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety
vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4511.01, that is required by the United States
Department of Transportation to be equipped with seat belts at the time of
manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child
properly secured in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions in a child
restraint system that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards:
      (1)   A child who is less than four years of age;
      (2)   A child who weighs less than 40 pounds.
   (b)   When any child who is in either or both of the following categories is
being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab, that is owned,
leased or otherwise under the control of a nursery school or child care center,
the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child properly secured in
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions in a child restraint system
that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards:
      (1)   A child who is less than four years of age;
      (2)   A child who weighs less than 40 pounds.
   (c)   When any child who is less than eight years of age and less than four
feet nine inches in height, who is not required by division (a) or (b) of this
section to be secured in a child restraint system, is being transported in a
motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety vehicle as defined in R.C.
§ 4511.01 or a vehicle that is regulated under R.C. § 5104.015, that is
required by the United States Department of Transportation to be equipped with
seat belts at the time of manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor
vehicle shall have the child properly secured in accordance with the
manufacturer’s instructions on a booster seat that meets federal motor vehicle
safety standards.
   (d)   When any child who is at least eight years of age but not older than
15 years of age, and who is not otherwise required by division (a), (b), or (c)
of this section to be secured in a child restraint system or booster seat, is
being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety
vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4511.01, that is required by the United States
Department of Transportation to be equipped with seat belts at the time of
manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child
properly restrained either in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions
in a child restraint system that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards
or in an occupant restraining device as defined in R.C. § 4513.263.
   (e)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause an operator of a motor vehicle being operated
on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of
determining whether a violation of division (c) or (d) of this section has been
or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation or
summons for a violation of division (c) or (d) of this section or causing the
arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for a violation of division
(c) or (d) of this section, and absent another violation of law, a law
enforcement officer’s view of the interior or visual inspection of a motor
vehicle being operated on any street or highway may not be used for the purpose
of determining whether a violation of division (c) or (d) of this section has
been or is being committed.
   (f)   The Director of Public Safety shall adopt such rules as are necessary
to carry out this section.
   (g)   The failure of an operator of a motor vehicle to secure a child in a
child restraint system, a booster seat or in an occupant restraining device as
required in this section is not negligence imputable to the child, is not
admissible as evidence in any civil action involving the rights of the child
against any other person allegedly liable for injuries to the child, is not to
be used as a basis for a criminal prosecution of the operator of the motor
vehicle other than a prosecution for a violation of this section, and is not
admissible as evidence in any criminal action involving the operator of the
motor vehicle other than a prosecution for a violation of this section.
   (h)   This section does not apply when an emergency exists that threatens
the life of any person operating or occupying a motor vehicle that is being
used to transport a child who otherwise would be required to be restrained
under this section. This section does not apply to a person operating a motor
vehicle who has an affidavit signed by a physician licensed to practice in this
state under R.C. Chapter 4731, a clinical nurse specialist or certified nurse
practitioner licensed to practice in this state under R.C. Chapter 4723, or a
chiropractor licensed to practice in this state under R.C. Chapter 4734 that
states that the child who otherwise would be required to be restrained under
this section has a physical impairment that makes use of a child restraint
system, booster seat, or an occupant restraining device impossible or
impractical, provided that the person operating the vehicle has safely and
appropriately restrained the child in accordance with any recommendations of
the physician, nurse, or chiropractor as noted on the affidavit.
   (i)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require any person to
carry with the person the birth certificate of a child to prove the age of the
child, but the production of a valid birth certificate for a child showing that
the child was not of an age to which this section applies is a defense against
any ticket, citation or summons issued for violating this section.
   (j)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a), (b), (c), or (d) of this section
shall be punished as follows, provided that the failure of an operator of a
motor vehicle to secure more than one child in a child restraint system,
booster seat or occupant restraining device as required by this section that
occurred at the same time, on the same day and at the same location is deemed
to be a single violation of this section:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (j)(1)B. of this
section, the offender is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not
less than $25 nor more than $75.
         B.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (a), (b), (c) or (d) of this section or of a
state law or municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent any of those
divisions, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   All fines imposed pursuant to division (j)(1) of this section shall
be forwarded to the State Treasurer for deposit in the Child Highway Safety
Fund created by R.C. § 4511.81(I).
(R.C. § 4511.81(A) - (H), (K), (L))
§ 438.29 USE OF OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICES.
   (a)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      (1)   AUTOMOBILE. Any commercial tractor, passenger car, commercial car,
or truck that is required to be factory-equipped with an occupant restraining
device for the operator or any passenger by regulations adopted by the United
States Secretary of Transportation pursuant to the “National Traffic and Motor
Vehicle Safety Act of 1966,” 80 Stat. 719, 15 U.S.C. 1392.
      (2)   COMMERCIAL TRACTOR, PASSENGER CAR and COMMERCIAL CAR. The same
meanings as in Ohio R.C. 4501.01.
      (3)   OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICE. A seat safety belt, shoulder belt,
harness, or other safety device for restraining a person who is an operator of
or passenger in an automobile and that satisfies the minimum Federal vehicle
safety standards established by the United States Department of Transportation.
      (4)   PASSENGER. Any person in an automobile, other than its operator,
who is occupying a seating position for which an occupant restraining device is
provided.
      (5)   TORT ACTION. A civil action for damages for injury, death, or loss
to person or property. TORT ACTION includes a product liability claim, as
defined in Ohio R.C. 2307.71, and as asbestos claim, as defined in Ohio R.C.
2307.91, but does not include a civil action for damages for breach of contract
or another agreement between persons.
      (6)   VEHICLE and MOTOR VEHICLE. As used in the definitions of the terms
set forth above, have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 4511.01.
   (b)   Prohibited acts. No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Operate an automobile on any street or highway unless he or she is
wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant
restraining device, or operate a school bus that has an occupant restraining
device installed for use in its operator’s seat unless he or she is wearing all
of the available elements of the device, as properly adjusted.
      (2)   Operate an automobile on any street or highway unless each
passenger in the automobile who is subject to the requirement set forth in
division (b)(3) of this section is wearing all of the available elements of a
properly adjusted occupant restraining device.
      (3)   Occupy, as a passenger, a seating position on the front seat of an
automobile being operated on any street or highway unless he or she is wearing
all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining
device.
      (4)   Operate a taxicab on any street or highway unless all factory-
equipped occupant restraining devices in the taxicab are maintained in usable
form.
   (c)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Division (b)(3) of this section does not apply to a person who is
required by R.C. § 4511.81 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to
be secured in a child restraint device or booster seat.
      (2)   Division (b)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is
an employee of the United States Postal Service or of a newspaper home delivery
service, during any period in which the person is engaged in the operation of
an automobile to deliver mail or newspapers to addressees.
      (3)   Divisions (b)(1) and (b)(3) of this section do not apply to a
person who has an affidavit signed by a physician licensed to practice in this
state under R.C. Chapter 4731 or a chiropractor licensed to practice in this
state under R.C. Chapter 4734 that states the following:
         A.   That the person has a physical impairment that makes use of an
occupant restraining device impossible or impractical;
         B.   Whether the physical impairment is temporary, permanent, or
reasonably expected to be permanent;
         C.   If the physical impairment is temporary, how long the physical
impairment is expected to make the use of an occupant restraining device
impossible or impractical.
      (4)   Divisions (b)(1) and (b)(3) of this section do not apply to a
person who has registered with the Registrar of Motor Vehicles in accordance
with division (c)(5) of this section.
      (5)   A person who has received an affidavit under division (c)(3) of
this section stating that the person has a permanent or reasonably expected to
be permanent physical impairment that makes use of an occupant restraining
device impossible or impracticable may register with the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles attesting to that fact. Upon such registration, the Registrar shall
make that information available in the law enforcement automated data system. A
person included in the database under division (c)(5) of this section is not
required to have the affidavit obtained in accordance with division (c)(3) of
this section in their possession while operating or occupying an automobile.
      (6)   A physician or chiropractor who issues an affidavit for the
purposes of division (c)(3) or (c)(4) of this section is immune from civil
liability arising from any injury or death sustained by the person who was
issued the affidavit due to the failure of the person to wear an occupant
restraining device unless the physician or chiropractor, in issuing the
affidavit, acted in a manner that constituted willful, wanton, or reckless
misconduct.
      (7)   The Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall adopt rules in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 119 establishing a process for a person to be included in the
database under division (c)(5) of this section. The information provided and
included in the database under division (c)(5) of this section is not a public
record subject to inspection or copying under R.C. § 149.43.
   (d)   Officers not permitted to stop cars to determine violation.
Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law enforcement
officer shall cause an operator of an automobile being operated on any street
or highway to stop the automobile for the sole purpose of determining whether a
violation of division (b) of this section has been or is being committed or for
the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation, or summons for the violation or
for causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for the
violation. No law enforcement officer shall view the interior or visually
inspect any automobile being operated on any street or highway for the sole
purpose of determining whether the violation has been or is being committed.
   (e)   Use of fines for educational program. All fines collected for
violations of division (b) of this section shall be forwarded to the State
Treasurer for deposit in the funds as set forth in Ohio R.C. 4513.263(E).
   (f)   Limitations on evidence used for prosecution.
      (1)   Subject to division (f)(2) of this section, the failure of a person
to wear all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant
restraining device in violation of division (b)(1) or (b)(3) of this section or
the failure of a person to ensure that each minor who is a passenger of an
automobile being operated by that person is wearing all of the available
elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device in violation of
division (b)(2) of this section shall not be considered or used by the trier of
fact in a tort action as evidence of negligence or contributory negligence.
But, the trier of fact may determine based on evidence admitted consistent with
the Ohio Rules of Evidence that the failure contributed to the harm alleged in
the tort action and may diminish a recovery of compensatory damages that
represents non- economic loss, as defined in Ohio R.C. 2307.011, in a tort
action that could have been recovered but for the plaintiff’s failure to wear
all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining
device. Evidence of that failure shall not be used as a basis for a criminal
prosecution of the person other than a prosecution for a violation of this
section; and shall not be admissible as evidence in a criminal action involving
the person other than a prosecution for a violation of this section.
      (2)   If, at the time of an accident involving a passenger car equipped
with occupant restraining devices, any occupant of the passenger car who
sustained injury or death was not wearing an available occupant restraining
device, was not wearing all of the available elements of such a device, or was
not wearing such a device as properly adjusted, then, consistent with the Rules
of Evidence, the fact that the occupant was not wearing the available occupant
restraining device, was not wearing all of the available elements of such a
device, or was not wearing such a device as properly adjusted is admissible in
evidence in relation to any claim for relief in a tort action to the extent
that the claim for relief satisfies all of the following:
         A.   It seeks to recover damages for injury or death to the occupant;
         B.   The defendant in question is the manufacturer, designer,
distributor, or seller of the passenger car;
         C.   The claim for relief against the defendant in question is that
the injury or death sustained by the occupant was enhanced or aggravated by
some design defect in the passenger car or that the passenger car was not
crashworthy.
   (g)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates division (b)(1) of this section shall be fined
thirty dollars ($30.00).
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b)(2) of this section shall be subject
to the penalty set forth in Section 408.02.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (b)(3) of this section shall be fined
twenty dollars ($20.00).
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (b)(4) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of
division (b)(4) of this section, whoever violates division (b)(4) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4513.263)
§ 438.30 IGNITION INTERLOCK DEVICES. (REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
   Section 438.31 was repealed as part of the 2005 updating and revision of
these Codified Ordinances because substantially equivalent State law (Ohio R.C.
4511.83(A), (B), (E)) was repealed by the Ohio General Assembly.
§ 438.31 NOISE-PRODUCING INSTRUMENTS AND SOUND-AMPLIFYING DEVICES IN MOTOR
VEHICLES.
   (a)   No person shall generate or permit to be generated from a motor
vehicle, being operated by him or her or under his or her control, unreasonable
noise or loud sound which is likely to cause inconvenience or annoyance to
persons of ordinary sensibilities, by means of a radio, phonograph,
television, tape or disc player, loudspeaker or any other sound-amplifying
device, or by means of any horn, drum, piano or other musical or percussion
instrument.
   (b)   It is prima facie unlawful for a person to generate or permit to be
generated, from a motor vehicle, sound by the devices or instruments described
in division (a) hereof if the sound is audible 100 feet from the device
generating the sound. Persons in possession of a current parade permit issued
pursuant to Chapter 644 of these Codified Ordinances are exempt from the
provisions of this section.
   (c)   Warning or alarm devices permitted under §
438.20 are exempt from the prohibitions of this section.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of generating unreasonable
noise, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
§ 438.32 AIR BAGS.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   AIR BAG. Has the same meaning as in 49 C.F.R. § 579.4, as amended.
      (2)   COUNTERFEIT AIR BAG. An air bag displaying a mark identical or
similar to the genuine mark of a motor vehicle manufacturer, without the
authorization of the motor vehicle manufacturer.
      (3)   NONFUNCTIONAL AIR BAG. Any of the following:
         A.   A replacement air bag that has been previously deployed or
damaged;
         B.   A replacement air bag that has an electrical fault that is
detected by the air bag diagnostic system of a vehicle after the air bag is
installed;
         C.   A counterfeit air bag, air bag cover, or some other object that
is installed in a vehicle to deceive an owner or operator of the vehicle into
believing that a functional air bag has been installed.
   (b)   No person shall install or reinstall in any motor vehicle a
counterfeit or nonfunctional air bag or any object intended to fulfill the
function of an air bag other than an air bag that was designed in conformance
with or that is regulated by Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number 208
for the make, model, and model year of the vehicle, knowing that the object is
not in accordance with that standard.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly manufacture, import, sell, or offer for sale
any of the following:
      (1)   A counterfeit air bag;
      (2)   A nonfunctional air bag;
      (3)   Any other object that is intended to be installed in a motor
vehicle to fulfill the function of an air bag and that is not in conformance
with Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number 208 for the make, model, and
model year of the vehicle in which the object is intended to be installed.
   (d)   No person shall knowingly sell, install, or reinstall a device in a
motor vehicle that causes the diagnostic system of a vehicle to inaccurately
indicate that the vehicle is equipped with a functional air bag.
   (e)   (1)   Whoever violates division (b) or (d) of this section is guilty
of improper replacement of a motor vehicle air bag, a misdemeanor of the first
degree on a first offense. On each subsequent offense, or if the violation
results in serious physical harm to an individual, the person is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   A violation of division (c) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Each manufacture, importation, installation, reinstallation, sale,
or offer for sale in violation of this section shall constitute a separate and
distinct violation.
(ORC 4549.20)
§ 438.33 USE OF WIRELESS HANDSETS TO TEXT MESSAGE AND ENGAGE IN OTHER FORMS OF
COMMUNICATION WHILE DRIVING.
   (a)   Definitions.
      (1)   COMPUTER means a portable electronic device capable of transmitting
and/or receiving data.
      (2)   ENGAGE IN OTHER FORMS OF COMMUNICATION means to use a wireless
handset to dial, answer, talk, and/or listen, or to use a computer.
      (3)   TEXT MESSAGE means a message sent, stored, or received via a
wireless handset. For purposes of this section, an email shall be considered a
text message.
      (4)   WIRELESS HANDSET means a portable electronic device capable of
transmitting or receiving data in the form of a text message and capable of
engaging in other forms of communication as defined in division (a)(2) above.
   (b)   No person shall use a wireless handset or a computer to compose, send,
or read text messages or engage in other forms of communication as defined in
division (a)(2) of this section, while driving a motor vehicle in the Village.
   (c)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (b) of this section, this
section shall not be construed to prohibit the use of a wireless handset or
computer inside a motor vehicle to compose, send, or read a text message or
engage in other forms of communication as defined in division (a)(2) of this
section when:
      (1)   A driver is using a wireless handset to contact any law
enforcement, emergency services personnel, emergency medical technicians, or
fire safety officials to report an emergency situation; or
      (2)   A driver is using a wireless handset inside a motor vehicle when
such vehicle is parked, standing or stopped and is removed from the flow of
traffic, or is stopped due to the inoperability of such vehicle; or
      (3)   A driver is using a wireless handset connected to a hands-free
device which allows the driver to maintain both hands on the vehicle's steering
wheel while the vehicle is operating; or
      (4)   Safety and service personnel are using such communication devices
in the course of the work.
   (d)   Penalty. Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(Ord. 54-2011, passed 2-27-2011)
 § 438.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 440: COMMERCIAL AND HEAVY VEHICLES
440.01   Load limits.
440.02   Maximum width, height and length.
440.03   Wheel protectors.
440.04   Vehicles transporting explosives.
440.05   Towing requirements; exception to size and weight restrictions.
440.06   Loads dropping or leaking; tracking mud; removal required.
440.07   Vehicles with spikes, lugs and chains.
440.08   Occupying travel trailer, fifth wheel vehicle, or manufactured or
mobile home while in motion.
440.09   Route and load information.
440.10   Shifting load; loose loads.
440.11   Chauffeured limousines.
440.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar State law
   Display of certificates of registration - see Ohio R.C. 4549.18
   Arrest notice of drivers - see Ohio R.C. 5577.14
   Riding in cargo storage areas - see TRAF.
416.06
   Stopping at grade crossings - see TRAF.
432.34,
432.35
   Slow-moving equipment at grade crossings - see TRAF.
432.35
   Fatigued or ill drivers - see TRAF.
442.09
   Truck loading zones - see TRAF.
452.10
   Bus stops and taxicab stands - see TRAF.
452.11
§ 440.01 LOAD LIMITS.
   (a)   State regulations.
      (1)   A.   The municipality, with respect to highways under their
jurisdiction, upon application in writing, shall issue a special regional heavy
hauling permit authorizing the applicant to operate or move a vehicle or
combination of vehicles as follows:
            1.   At a size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding the maximum
specified in R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or otherwise not in conformity with
R.C. §§ 4513.01 to 4513.37.
            2.   Upon any highway under the jurisdiction of municipality except
those highways with a condition insufficient to bear the weight of the vehicle
or combination of vehicles as stated in the application.
            3.   Issuance of a special regional heavy hauling permit is subject
to the payment of a fee established by the municipality in accordance with this
section.
         B.   In circumstances where a person is not eligible to receive a
permit under division (a)(1)A. of this section, the municipality, with respect
to highways under its jurisdiction, upon application in writing and for good
cause shown, may issue a special permit in writing authorizing the applicant to
operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size or weight of
vehicle or load exceeding the maximum specified in R.C. §§ 5577.01 through
5577.09, or otherwise not in conformity with R.C. §§ 4513.01 through 4513.37,
upon any highway under its jurisdiction.
      (2)   A.   Notwithstanding R.C. §§ 715.22 and 723.01, the holder of a
permit issued by the Director of Transportation under R.C. § 4513.34 may move
the vehicle or combination of vehicles described in the permit on any highway
that is a part of the state highway system when the movement is partly within
and partly without the corporate limits of the municipality. No local authority
shall require any other permit or license or charge any license fee or other
charge against the holder of a permit for the movement of a vehicle or
combination of vehicles on any highway which is a part of the state highway
system. The Ohio Director of Transportation shall not require the holder of a
permit issued by the municipality to obtain a special permit for the movement
of vehicles or combination of vehicles on highways within the jurisdiction of
the municipality.
         B.   Except as provided in R.C. § 4513.34(B)(3), permits may be issued
for any period of time not to exceed one year, as the local authority in its
discretion determines advisable or for the duration of any public construction
project.
      (3)   A.   The application for a permit issued under this section shall
be in the form that the municipality prescribes. The municipality may prescribe
a permit fee to be imposed and collected when any permit described in this
section is issued. The permit fee may be in an amount sufficient to reimburse
the municipality for the administrative costs incurred in issuing the permit,
and also to cover the cost of normal and expected damage caused to the roadway
or a street or highway structure as the result of the operation of the
nonconforming vehicle or combination of vehicles.
         B.   For the purposes of this section and of rules adopted by the
Director under R.C. § 4513.34, milk transported in bulk by vehicle is deemed a
nondivisible load.
         C.   For purposes of this section and of rules adopted by the Director
under R.C. § 4513.34, three or fewer aluminum coils, transported by a vehicle,
are deemed a nondivisible load. The Director shall adopt rules establishing
requirements for an aluminum coil permit that are substantially similar to the
requirements for a steel coil permit under O.A.C. Chapter 5501:2-1.
      (4)   The municipality shall issue a special regional heavy hauling
permit under division (a)(1)A. of this section upon application and payment of
the applicable fee. However, the municipality may issue or withhold a special
permit specified in division (a)(1)B. of this section. If a permit is to be
issued, the municipality may limit or prescribe conditions of operation for the
vehicle and may require the posting of a bond or other security conditioned
upon the sufficiency of the permit fee to compensate for damage caused to the
roadway or a street or highway structure. In addition, the municipality, as a
condition of issuance of an overweight permit, may require the applicant to
develop and enter into a mutual agreement with the municipality to compensate
for or to repair excess damage caused to the roadway by travel under the
permit.
      (5)   Every permit issued under this section shall be carried in the
vehicle or combination of vehicles to which it refers and shall be open to
inspection by any police officer or authorized agent of any authority granting
the permit. No person shall violate any of the terms of a permit.
      (6)   The Director of Transportation may debar an applicant from applying
for a special permit under this section upon a finding based on a reasonable
belief that the applicant has done any of the actions specified in R.C. §
4513.34(F).
      (7)   Notice and procedures for debarment shall be as provided in R.C. §
4513.34(G).
      (8)   A.   No person shall violate the terms of a permit issued under
this section that relate to gross load limits.
         B.   No person shall violate the terms of a permit issued under this
section that relate to axle load by more than 2,000 pounds per axle or group of
axles.
         C.   No person shall violate the terms of a permit issued under this
section that relate to an approved route except upon order of a law enforcement
officer or authorized agent of the issuing authority.
      (9)   A permit issued by the municipality under this section for the
operation of a vehicle or combination of vehicles is valid for the purposes of
the vehicle operation in accordance with the conditions and limitations
specified on the permit. Such a permit is voidable by law enforcement only for
operation of a vehicle or combination of vehicles in violation of the weight,
dimension, or route provisions of the permit. However, a permit is not voidable
for operation in violation of a route provision of a permit if the operation is
upon the order of a law enforcement officer.
(R.C. § 4513.34)
   (b)   Violations. Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
   (c)   Chester Road; Wayne Avenue. No person shall operate a tractor-trailer,
semitrailer, tractor, truck, excavating machine or any self-propelled or
animal-drawn vehicle or equipment bearing a gross weight of more than 20,000
pounds, including load, upon Chester Road or Wayne Avenue within the corporate
limits of the Village. The gross weight, including the load, of any vehicle,
shall include the gross weight of any trailer attached to any vehicle, together
with its load. Notwithstanding the provisions of this division, the vehicles
described in this division may use Chester Road and Wayne Avenue for the
purpose of delivering goods or merchandise to, or receiving the same from,
premises located along such streets and not otherwise accessible. Such vehicles
so using such streets shall enter and leave the same at the intersection of
Glendale-Milford Road.
(Ord. 17-1959, passed 6-9-1959)
   (d)   Other local streets. No person shall operate a vehicle exceeding a
size as specified in Ohio R.C. 5577.01 through 5577.09, or otherwise not in
conformity with Ohio R.C. 4513.01 through 4513.37, or exceeding a gross weight
of five tons, upon any street in the Municipality other than State routes and
County roads, except those local streets designated as a truck route and marked
as such by appropriate traffic signs, and except when such operation is
necessary to load or unload property, to go to or from the usual place of
storage of such vehicle or to perform any other legitimate business or act
other than passage through the Municipality. Operators of vehicles so deviating
from either a state route or a designated truck route within the Municipality
shall confine such deviation to that required in order to accomplish the
purpose of the departure. On County roads, Council or other duly designated
local authority shall establish reasonable weight limits commensurate with the
construction and material specifications for such roads and the load resistance
of such roads as determined by the County Engineer. County roads shall be
posted with signs indicating such weight limits.
   (e)   Local permit and conditions. Upon application and for good cause, the
Police Chief may issue a local permit authorizing an applicant to move an
oversize or overweight vehicle or combination of vehicles upon local streets
and highways.
      (1)   No permittee shall be required to obtain a special permit from the
Ohio Director of Transportation for the movement of the vehicle or combination
of vehicles on streets or highways under local jurisdiction. However, the
approval of the Ohio Director of Transportation shall be required for movement
upon state routes as provided in division (a) of this section.
      (2)   The Police Chief may grant a permit for a single or round trip, or
for such period of time, not to exceed one year, as the Police Chief in his or
her discretion deems advisable, or for the duration of any construction
project. The Police Chief may limit or prescribe terms or conditions of
operation for such vehicle or combination of vehicles by designating the route,
hours, speed or such other restrictions as may be necessary for the
preservation of the public peace, property, health and safety. The Police Chief
may require the posting of bond or other security necessary to compensate for
any damage to a roadway or road structure.
      (3)   For each such permit, the Police Chief shall charge twenty-five
dollars ($25.00), and for each hour of time or any part thereof spent by the
Police Department in supervising the movement of such vehicle, the applicant
shall pay the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00).
      (4)   Except as provided in divisions (a) and (b) of this section,
streets and highways shall be posted with signs indicating “no thru trucks -
gross weight 5 tons” or words of similar import to inform drivers of the
limitations imposed by this section. No driver shall disobey the instructions
indicated on any such sign.
      (5)   Violation of any of the limitations, terms or conditions of the
permit granted by the Police Chief shall be cause for immediate revocation or
suspension of such permit and denial of request for any future permit. Such
violation shall also subject the violator to the penalties prescribed by §§
408.01 and
408.02.
§ 440.02 MAXIMUM WIDTH, HEIGHT AND LENGTH.
   (a)   No vehicle shall be operated upon the public highways, streets,
bridges and culverts within this municipality whose dimensions exceed those
specified in this section.
   (b)   No such vehicle shall have a width:
      (1)   In excess of 104 inches for passenger bus type vehicles operated
exclusively within the municipality.
      (2)   In excess of 102 inches, excluding such safety devices as are
required by law, for passenger bus type vehicles operated over freeways, and
other state roads with minimum pavement widths of 22 feet, except those roads
or portions of roads over which operation of 102-inch buses is prohibited by
order of the Director of Transportation.
      (3)   In excess of 132 inches for traction engines.
      (4)   In excess of 102 inches for recreational vehicles, excluding safety
devices and retracted awnings and other appurtenances of six inches or less in
width and except that the Director may prohibit the operation of 102-inch
recreational vehicles on designated state highways or portions of highways.
      (5)   In excess of 102 inches, including load, for all other vehicles,
except that the Director may prohibit the operation of 102-inch vehicles on the
state highways or portions of state highways as the Director designates.
   (c)   No such vehicle shall have a length:
      (1)   In excess of 66 feet for passenger bus type vehicles and
articulated passenger bus type vehicles operated by a regional transit
authority pursuant to R.C. §§ 306.30 to 306.54.
      (2)   In excess of 45 feet for all other passenger bus type vehicles.
      (3)   In excess of 53 feet for any semitrailer when operated in a
commercial tractor-semitrailer combination, with or without load, except that
the Director may prohibit the operation of any such commercial tractor-
semitrailer combination on the state highways or portions of state highways as
the Director designates.
      (4)   In excess of 28.5 feet for any semitrailer or trailer when operated
in a commercial tractor-semitrailer-trailer or commercial tractor- semitrailer-
semitrailer combination, except that the Director may prohibit the operation of
any such commercial tractor-semitrailer-trailer or commercial tractor-
semitrailer-semitrailer combination on the state highways or portions of state
highways as the Director designates.
      (5)   A.   In excess of 97 feet for drive-away saddlemount vehicle
transporter combinations and drive-away saddlemount with fullmount vehicle
transporter combinations when operated on any interstate, United States route
or state route, including reasonable access travel on all other roadways for a
distance not to exceed one road mile from any interstate, United States route
or state route, not to exceed three saddlemounted vehicles, but which may
include one fullmount;
         B.   In excess of 75 feet for drive-away saddlemount vehicle
transporter combinations and drive-away saddlemount with fullmount vehicle
transporter combinations when operated on any roadway not designated as an
interstate, United States route or state route, not to exceed three
saddlemounted vehicles, but which may include one fullmount.
      (6)   In excess of 65 feet for any other combination of vehicles coupled
together, with or without load, except as provided in division (c)(3) and (c)
(4), and in division (e) below.
      (7)   In excess of 45 feet for recreational vehicles.
      (8)   In excess of 50 feet for all other vehicles, except trailers and
semitrailers, with or without load.
   (d)   No such vehicle shall have a height in excess of 13.5 feet, with or
without load.
   (e)   An automobile transporter or boat transporter shall be allowed a
length of 65 feet, and a stinger-steered automobile transporter or stinger-
steered boat transporter shall be allowed a length of 75 feet, except that the
load thereon may extend no more than four feet beyond the rear of such vehicles
and may extend no more than three feet beyond the front of the vehicles, and
except further that the Director may prohibit the operation of a stinger-
steered automobile transporter, stinger-steered boat transporter, or a B-train
assembly on any state highway or portion of any state highway that the Director
designates.
   (f)   (1)   The widths prescribed in division (b) of this section shall not
include side mirrors, turn signal lamps, marker lamps, handholds for cab entry
and egress, flexible fender extensions, mud flaps, splash and spray suppressant
devices, and load-induced tire bulge.
      (2)   The widths prescribed in division (b)(5) of this section shall not
include automatic covering devices, tarp and tarp hardware, and tiedown
assemblies, provided these safety devices do not extend more than three inches
from either side of the vehicle.
      (3)   The lengths prescribed in divisions (c)(2) to (c)(7) shall not
include safety devices, bumpers attached to the front or rear of the bus or
combination, non-property carrying devices or components that do not extend
more than 24 inches beyond the rear of the vehicle and are needed for loading
or unloading, B-train assembly used between the first and second semitrailer of
a commercial tractor-semitrailer-semitrailer combination, energy conservation
devices as provided in any regulations adopted by the Secretary of the United
States Department of Transportation, or any noncargo- carrying refrigerator
equipment attached to the front of trailers and semitrailers. In special cases,
vehicles that dimensions exceed those prescribed by this section may operate in
accordance with rules adopted by the Director.
   (g)   (1)   This section does not apply to fire engines, fire trucks or
other vehicles or apparatus belonging to the municipality or to the volunteer
fire department thereof or used by that department in the discharge of its
functions. This section does not apply to vehicles and pole trailers used in
the transportation of wooden and metal poles, nor to the transportation of
pipes or well-drilling equipment, nor to farm machinery and equipment.
      (2)   The owner or operator of any vehicle, machinery or equipment not
specifically enumerated in this section but the dimensions of which exceed the
dimensions provided by this section, when operating the same on the highways
and streets of the municipality, shall comply with the rules of the Director
governing such movement. Any person adversely affected shall have the same
right of appeal as provided in R.C. Chapter 119.
      (3)   This section does not require the municipality or any railroad or
other private corporation to provide sufficient vertical clearance to permit
the operation of the vehicle, or to make any changes in or about existing
structures now crossing streets, roads and other public thoroughfares.
   (h)   As used in this section, RECREATIONAL VEHICLE has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 4501.01.
(ORC 5577.05)
§ 440.03 WHEEL PROTECTORS.
   (a)   No person shall drive or operate, or cause to be driven or operated,
any commercial car, trailer, or semitrailer, used for the transportation of
goods or property, the gross weight of which, with load, exceeds three tons,
upon the public highways, streets, bridges, and culverts within the
Municipality, unless such vehicle is equipped with suitable metal protectors or
substantial flexible flaps on the rearmost wheels of such vehicle or
combination of vehicles to prevent, as far as practicable, the wheels from
throwing dirt, water, or other materials on the windshields of following
vehicles. Such protectors or flaps shall have a ground clearance of not more
than one-third of the distance from the center of the rearmost axle to the
center of the flaps under any conditions of loading of the vehicle, and they
shall be at least as wide as the tires they are protecting. If the vehicle is
so designed and constructed that such requirements are accomplished by means of
fenders, body construction, or other means of enclosure, then no such
protectors or flaps are required. Rear wheels not covered at the top by
fenders, bodies, or other parts of the vehicle shall be covered at the top by
protective means extending at least to the center line of the rearmost axle.
(ORC 5577.11)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than twenty-five
dollars ($25.00).
(ORC 5577.99(E))
§ 440.04 VEHICLES TRANSPORTING EXPLOSIVES.
   (a)   Any person operating any vehicle transporting explosives upon a
highway shall at all times comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   The vehicle shall be marked or placarded on each side and on the
rear with the word “EXPLOSIVES” in letters not less than eight inches high, or
there shall be displayed on the rear of such vehicle a red flag not less than
24 inches square marked with the word “DANGER” in white letters six inches
high, or shall be marked or placarded in accordance with § 177.823 of the
United States Department of Transportation regulations.
      (2)   The vehicle shall be equipped with not less than two fire
extinguishers, filled and ready for immediate use, and placed at convenient
points on such vehicle.
(ORC 4513.29)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.99)
§ 440.05 TOWING REQUIREMENTS; EXCEPTION TO SIZE AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS.
   (a)   (1)   When one vehicle is towing another vehicle, the drawbar or other
connection shall be of sufficient strength to pull all the weight towed
thereby, and the drawbar or other connection shall not exceed 15 feet from one
vehicle to the other, except the connection between any two vehicles
transporting poles, pipe, machinery, or other objects of structural nature
which cannot readily be dismembered.
      (2)   When one vehicle is towing another and the connection consists only
of a chain, rope, or cable, there shall be displayed upon such connection a
white flag or cloth not less than 12 inches square.
      (3)   In addition to such drawbar or other connection, each trailer and
each semitrailer which is not connected to a commercial tractor by means of a
fifth wheel shall be coupled with stay chains or cables to the vehicle by which
it is being drawn. These chains or cables shall be of sufficient size and
strength to prevent the towed vehicle’s parting from the drawing vehicle in
case the drawbar or other connection should break or become disengaged. In case
of a loaded pole trailer, the connecting pole to the drawing vehicle shall be
coupled to the drawing vehicle with stay chains or cables of sufficient size
and strength to prevent the towed vehicle’s parting from the drawing vehicle.
      (4)   Every trailer or semitrailer, except pole and cable trailers and
pole and cable dollies operated by a public utility as defined in Ohio R.C.
5727.01, shall be equipped with a coupling device which shall be so designed
and constructed that the trailer will follow substantially in the path of the
vehicle drawing it, without whipping or swerving from side to side. Vehicles
used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural production materials
between a local place of storage and supply and the farm, when drawn or towed
on a street or highway at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less, and vehicles
designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of storage
and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a street or
highway for a distance of no more than ten miles and at a speed of 25 miles per
hour or less, shall have a drawbar or other connection, including the hitch
mounted on the towing vehicle, which shall be of sufficient strength to pull
all the weight towed thereby. Only one such vehicle used to transport
agricultural produce or agricultural production materials as provided in this
section may be towed or drawn at one time except as follows:
         A.   An agricultural tractor may tow or draw more than one such
vehicle;
         B.   A pickup truck or straight truck designed by the manufacturer to
carry a load of not less than one-half ton and not more than two tons may tow
or draw not more than two such vehicles that are being used to transport
agricultural produce from the farm to a local place of storage. No vehicle
being so towed by such a pickup truck or straight truck shall be considered to
be a motor vehicle.
(ORC 4513.32)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.99)
   (c)   Exception to size and weight restrictions.
      (1)   The size and weight provisions of this chapter and R.C. Chapter
5577 do not apply to any of the following:
         A.   A person who is engaged in the initial towing or removal of a
wrecked or disabled motor vehicle from the site of an emergency on a public
highway where the vehicle became wrecked or disabled to the nearest site where
the vehicle can be brought into conformance with the requirements of this
chapter and R.C. Chapter 5577, to the nearest storage facility, or to the
nearest qualified repair facility;
         B.   A person who is en route to the site of an emergency on a public
highway to remove a wrecked or disabled motor vehicle;
         C.   A person who is returning from delivering a wrecked or disabled
motor vehicle to a site, storage facility, or repair facility as specified in
division (c)(1)A. of this section.
      (2)   Any subsequent towing of a wrecked or disabled vehicle shall comply
with the size and weight provisions of this chapter and R.C. Chapter 5577.
      (3)   No court shall impose any penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99 or
the civil liability established in R.C. § 5577.12 upon a person who is
operating a vehicle in the manner described in division (c)(1) of this section.
(R.C. § 5577.15)
§ 440.06 LOADS DROPPING OR LEAKING; TRACKING MUD; REMOVAL REQUIRED.
   (a)   (1)   No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any highway unless the
vehicle is so constructed, loaded, or covered as to prevent any of its load
from dropping, sifting, leaking, or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that
sand or other substances may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction,
or water or other substances may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or
maintaining the roadway.
      (2)   Except for a farm vehicle used to transport agricultural produce or
agricultural production materials or a rubbish vehicle in the process of
acquiring its load, no vehicle loaded with garbage, swill, cans, bottles, waste
paper, ashes, refuse, trash, rubbish, waste, wire, paper, cartons, boxes,
glass, solid waste, or any other material of an unsanitary nature that is
susceptible to blowing or bouncing from a moving vehicle shall be driven or
moved on any highway unless the load is covered with a sufficient cover to
prevent the load or any part of the load from spilling onto the highway.
(ORC 4513.31)
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.99)
   (c)   No person shall operate any vehicle so as to track mud on any public
way or place.
   (d)   It shall be the duty of the driver of a vehicle who unlawfully drops
or deposits mud or permits the load or any portion thereof to be dropped or
deposited upon any public way or place to immediately remove the same or cause
it to be removed.
§ 440.07 VEHICLES WITH SPIKES, LUGS AND CHAINS.
   (a)   No person shall drive over the improved highways of this Municipality
a traction engine or tractor with tires or wheels equipped with ice picks,
spuds, spikes, chains or other projections of any kind extending beyond the
cleats, and no person shall tow or in any way pull another vehicle over the
improved highways of this Municipality which towed or pulled vehicle has tires
or wheels equipped with ice picks, spuds, spikes, chains or other projections
of any kind. TRACTION ENGINE or TRACTOR, as used in this section, applies to
all self-propelling engines equipped with metal-tired wheels operated or
propelled by any form of engine, motor or mechanical power.
   (b)   This Municipality shall not adopt, enforce, or maintain any ordinance,
rule or regulation contrary to or inconsistent with division (a), nor shall
this Municipality require any license tax upon or registration fee for any
traction engine, tractor, or trailer, or any permit or license to operate.
Operators of traction engines or tractors shall have the same rights upon the
public streets and highways as the drivers of any other vehicles, unless some
other safe and convenient way is provided, and no public road open to traffic
shall be closed to traction engines or tractors.
(ORC 5589.08)
   (c)   For the purposes of this section, STUDDED TIRE means any tire designed
for use on a vehicle and equipped with metal studs or studs of wear- resisting
material that project beyond the tread of the traction surface of the tire.
   (d)   (1)   Except as provided in division (d)(2) of this section, no person
shall operate any motor vehicle other than a public safety vehicle or school
bus that is equipped with studded tires on any street or highway in this
Municipality, except during the period extending from the first day of November
of each year through the fifteenth day of April of the succeeding year.
      (2)   A person may operate a motor vehicle that is equipped with
retractable studded tires with the studs retracted at any time of the year, but
shall operate the motor vehicle with the studs extended only as provided in
division (d)(1) of this section.
   (e)   Division (d) of this section does not apply to the use of tire chains
when there is snow or ice on the streets or highways where such chains are
being used, or the immediate vicinity thereof.
(ORC 5589.081)
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 5589.99(B))
§ 440.08 OCCUPYING TRAVEL TRAILER, FIFTH WHEEL VEHICLE, OR MANUFACTURED OR
MOBILE HOME WHILE IN MOTION.
   (a)   Except as provided in division (b) of this section, no person shall
occupy any travel trailer, fifth wheel trailer, or manufactured or mobile home
while it is being used as a conveyance upon a street or highway.
   (b)   (1)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to a fifth wheel
trailer when both of the following apply:
         A.   Any child riding in the fifth wheel trailer is properly secured
in the manner provided in R.C. § 4511.81.
         B.   The operator of the vehicle towing the fifth wheel trailer has
some means of viable communication with the passengers riding in the trailer.
      (2)   As used in this division, "viable communication" includes a
cellular or satellite telephone, a radio, or any other similar electronic
wireless communications device.
   (c)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   The offense established under this section is a strict liability
offense and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of this offense as a
strict liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other
offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict
liability offense.
(R.C. § 4511.701)
§ 440.09 ROUTE AND LOAD INFORMATION.
   Drivers of vehicles described in this chapter are required, upon request by
a police officer, to give full and true information as to the route they are
following and the name of the consignor and consignee and place of delivery or
removal and the location of any consignment being hauled or goods being
removed, and upon a designation by such police officer of a route to be
followed, shall immediately adopt and pursue such route.
§ 440.10 SHIFTING LOAD; LOOSE LOADS.
   (a)   In addition to any other lawful requirements of load distribution, no
person shall operate any vehicle upon a street or highway unless such vehicle
is so laden as to prevent its contents from shifting or otherwise unbalancing
the vehicle to such an extent as to interfere with the safe operation of the
same.
   (b)   No motor vehicle or trailer shall be driven unless the tailboard or
tailgate, tarpaulins, chains (except ground or contact chains), ropes, stakes,
poles, and the like, or any part of the load, are securely fastened to prevent
dangling, flapping, swinging or falling from the side, end or top of the load
or body. All projecting cargo shall be properly guarded by a red flag or cloth
or a red light or lantern as required by Ohio R.C. 4513.09, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
§ 440.11 CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINES.
   (a)   The operator of a chauffeured limousine shall accept passengers only
on the basis of prearranged contracts, as defined in Ohio R.C. 4501.01, and
shall not cruise in search of patronage unless the limousine is in compliance
with any statute or ordinance governing the operation of taxicabs or other
similar vehicles for hire.
   (b)   The operator of a chauffeured limousine may provide transportation to
passengers who arrange for the transportation through an intermediary,
including a digital dispatching service. Notwithstanding any law to the
contrary, when providing transportation arranged through an intermediary, the
operator of a chauffeured limousine may establish the fare and method of fare
calculation, so long as the method of fare calculation is provided to the
passenger upon request.
   (c)   No person shall advertise or hold himself or herself out as doing
business as a limousine service or
livery service or other similar designation unless each vehicle used by the
person to provide the service is registered in accordance with Ohio R.C.
4503.24 and is in compliance with Ohio R.C. 4509.80.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(ORC 4511.85)
§ 440.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See Sections
408.01 and
408.02 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 442: DRIVERS OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES
442.01   Definitions.
442.02   Use of actual gross weight in lieu of rating.
442.03   Licensing requirements.
442.04   Physical qualification to operate commercial motor vehicles.
442.05   Criminal offenses.
442.06   Application of Title 49 C.F.R. Part 383.
442.07   Information required of prospective drivers by employers; unauthorized
driving.
442.08   Authority of peace officers regarding drunk driving.
442.09   Permitting or driving while fatigued or ill prohibited.
442.10   Driver’s consecutive service and off- duty hours (Repealed)
442.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar State law
   Warning devices when disabled on freeways - see Ohio R.C. 4513.28
   Hours of service of truck drivers - see Ohio R.C. 4921.30, 4923.16
   Arrest notice of drivers - see Ohio R.C. 5577.14
   Driving under the influence, generally - see TRAF.
434.01
   Stopping after accidents, generally - see TRAF.
436.11,
436.12
   Load limits - see TRAF.
440.01
   Route and load information - see TRAF.
440.09
§ 442.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   ALCOHOL CONCENTRATION. The concentration of alcohol in a person’s
blood, breath or urine. When expressed as a percentage, it means grams of
alcohol per the following: 100 milliliters of whole blood, blood serum, or
blood plasma; 210 liters of breath; or 100 milliliters of urine.
   (b)   COMMERCIAL DRIVER’S LICENSE. A license issued in accordance with R.C.
Chapter 4506 that authorizes an individual to drive a commercial motor vehicle.
   (c)   COMMERCIAL DRIVER’S LICENSE INFORMATION SYSTEM.
      (1)   A license issued in accordance with R.C. Chapter 4506 that
authorizes an individual to drive a commercial motor vehicle. Except as
otherwise specifically provided, “commercial driver’s license” includes an
“enhanced commercial driver’s license.”
      (2)   “Enhanced commercial driver’s license” means a commercial driver’s
license issued in accordance with R.C. §§ 4507.021 and 4506.072 that denotes
citizenship and identity and is approved by the United States Secretary of
Homeland Security or other designated federal agency for purposes of entering
the United States.
   (d)   COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE. Except when used in R.C. § 4506.25, any
motor vehicle designed or used to transport persons or property that meets any
of the following qualifications:
      (1)   Any combination of vehicles with a gross vehicle weight or combined
gross vehicle weight rating of 26,001 pounds or more, provided that the gross
vehicle weight or gross vehicle weight rating of the vehicle or vehicles being
towed is in excess of 10,000 pounds;
      (2)   Any single vehicle with a gross vehicle weight or gross vehicle
weight rating of 26,001 pounds or more;
      (3)   Any single vehicle or combination of vehicles that is not a Class A
or Class B vehicle, but is designed to transport 16 or more passengers
including the driver;
      (4)   Any school bus with a gross vehicle weight or gross vehicle weight
rating of less than 26,001 pounds that is designed to transport fewer than 16
passengers including the driver;
      (5)   Is transporting hazardous materials for which placarding is
required under 49 C.F.R. part 172, subpart F, as amended; or
      (6)   Any single vehicle or combination of vehicles that is designed to
be operated and to travel on a public street or highway and is considered by
the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration to be a commercial motor
vehicle, including but not limited to a motorized crane, a vehicle whose
function is to pump cement, a rig for drilling wells, and a portable crane.
   (e)   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Includes all of the following:
      (1)   Any substance classified as a controlled substance under the
“Controlled Substances Act”, 80 Stat. 1242 (1970), 21 U.S.C. § 802(6), as
amended;
      (2)   Any substance included in Schedules I through V of 21 C.F.R. part
1308, as amended;
      (3)   Any drug of abuse.
   (f)   CONVICTION. An unvacated adjudication of guilt or a determination that
a person has violated or failed to comply with the law in a court of original
jurisdiction or an authorized administrative tribunal, an unvacated forfeiture
of bail or collateral deposited to secure the person’s appearance in court, a
plea of  guilty or nolo contendere accepted by the court, the payment of a fine
or court cost, or violation of a condition of release without bail, regardless
of whether or not the penalty is rebated, suspended or probated.
   (g)   DISQUALIFICATION. Means any of the following:
      (1)   The suspension, revocation, or cancellation of a person’s
privileges to operate a commercial motor vehicle;
      (2)   Any withdrawal of a person’s privileges to operate a commercial
motor vehicle as the result of a violation of state or local law relating to
motor vehicle traffic control other than parking, vehicle weight, or vehicle
defect violations;
      (3)   A determination by the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration
that a person is not qualified to operate a commercial motor vehicle under 49
C.F.R. § 391.
   (h)   DOMICILED. Having a true, fixed, principal, and permanent residence to
which an individual intends to return.
   (i)   DOWNGRADE. Any of the following, as applicable:
      (1)   A change in the commercial driver’s license, or commercial driver’s
license temporary instruction permit, holder’s self-certified status as
described in R.C. § 4506.10(A)(2);
      (2)   A change to a lesser class of vehicle;
      (3)   Removal of commercial driver’s license privileges from the
individual’s driver’s license.
   (j)   DRIVE. To drive, operate or be in physical control of a motor vehicle.
   (k)   DRIVER. Any person who drives, operates or is in physical control of a
commercial motor  vehicle or is required to have a commercial driver’s license.
   (l)   DRIVER’S LICENSE. A license issued by the Bureau of Motor Vehicles
that authorizes an individual to drive.
   (m)   DRUG OF ABUSE. Any controlled substance, dangerous drug as defined in
R.C. § 4729.01, harmful intoxicant as defined in R.C. § 2925.01, or over-the-
counter medication that, when taken in quantities exceeding the recommended
dosage, can result in impairment of judgment or reflexes.
   (n)   ELECTRONIC DEVICE. Includes a cellular telephone, a personal digital
assistant, a pager, a computer, and any other device used to input, write,
send, receive, or read text.
   (o)   ELIGIBLE UNIT OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT. A village, township, or county that
has a population of not more than 3,000 persons according to the most recent
federal census.
   (p)   EMPLOYER. Any person, including the federal government, any state, and
a political subdivision of any state, that owns or leases a commercial motor
vehicle or assigns a person to drive such a motor vehicle.
   (q)   ENDORSEMENT. An authorization on a person’s commercial driver’s
license that is required to permit the person to operate a specified type of
commercial motor vehicle.
   (r)   FARM TRUCK. A truck controlled and operated by a farmer for use in the
transportation to or from a farm, for a distance of not more than 150 miles, of
products of the farm, including livestock and its products, poultry and its
products, floricultural and horticultural products, and in the transportation
to the farm, from a distance of not more than 150 miles, of supplies for the
farm, including tile, fence and every other thing or commodity used in
agricultural, floricultural, horticultural, livestock, and poultry production,
and livestock, poultry, and other animals and things used for breeding,
feeding, or other  purposes connected with the operation of the farm, when the
truck is operated in accordance with this definition and is not used in the
operations of a motor carrier, as defined in R.C. § 4923.01.
   (s)   FATALITY. The death of a person as the result of a motor vehicle
accident occurring not more than 365 days prior to the date of death.
   (t)   FELONY. Any offense under federal or state law that is punishable by
death or imprisonment for a term exceeding one year and includes any offense
specifically classified as a felony under the law of this state, regardless of
the penalty that may be imposed.
   (u)   FOREIGN JURISDICTION. Any jurisdiction other than a state.
   (v)   GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING. The value specified by the manufacturer
as the maximum loaded weight of a single or a combination vehicle. The gross
vehicle weight rating of a combination vehicle is the gross vehicle weight
rating of the power unit plus the gross vehicle weight rating of each towed
unit.
   (w)   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any material that has been designated as
hazardous under 49 U.S.C. § 5103 and is required to be placarded under 49
C.F.R. part 172, subpart F or any quantity of a material listed as a select
agent or toxin in 42 C.F.R. part 73, as amended.
   (x)   IMMINENT HAZARD. The existence of a condition that presents a
substantial likelihood that death, serious illness, severe personal injury, or
a substantial endangerment to health, property, or the environment may occur
before the reasonably foreseeable completion date of a formal proceeding begun
to lessen the risk of death, illness, injury, or endangerment.
   (y)   MEDICAL VARIANCE. One of the following received by a driver from the
Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration that allows the driver to be issued
a medical certificate:
      (1)   An exemption letter permitting operation of a commercial motor
vehicle under 49 C.F.R. part 381, subpart C or 49 C.F.R. § 391.64;
      (2)   A skill performance evaluation certificate permitting operation of
a commercial motor vehicle pursuant to 49 C.F.R. § 391.49.
   (z)   MOBILE TELEPHONE. A mobile communication device that falls under or
uses any commercial mobile radio service as defined in 47 C.F.R. part 20,
except that mobile telephone does not include two-way or citizens band radio
services.
   (aa)   MOTOR VEHICLE. A vehicle, machine, tractor, trailer, or semitrailer
propelled or drawn by mechanical power used on highways, except that such term
does not include a vehicle, machine, tractor, trailer, or semitrailer operated
exclusively on a rail.
   (bb)   OUT-OF-SERVICE ORDER. A declaration by an authorized enforcement
officer of a federal, state, local, Canadian, or Mexican jurisdiction declaring
that the driver, commercial motor vehicle, or commercial motor carrier
operation is out of service as defined in 49 C.F.R. § 390.5.
   (cc)   PEACE OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2935.01
   (dd)   PORTABLE TANK. A liquid or gaseous packaging designed primarily to be
loaded onto or temporarily attached to a vehicle and equipped with skids,
mountings, or accessories to facilitate handling of the tank by mechanical
means.
   (ee)   PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01(E)
(1) and (E)(3).
   (ff)   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Includes every vehicle that is defined as a
recreational vehicle in R.C. § 4501.01 and is used exclusively for purposes
other than engaging in business for profit.
   (gg)   RESIDENCE. Any person’s residence determined in accordance with
standards prescribed in the rules adopted by the Registrar.
   (hh)   SCHOOL BUS. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   (ii)   SERIOUS TRAFFIC VIOLATION. Any of the following:
      (1)   A conviction arising from a single charge of operating a commercial
motor vehicle in violation of any provision of R.C. § 4506.03;
      (2)   A.   Except as provided in division (2)B. of this definition, a
violation while operating a commercial motor vehicle of a law of this state, or
any municipal ordinance or county or township resolution, or any other
substantially equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of
another state, prohibiting either of the following:
            1.   Texting while driving;
            2.   Using a handheld mobile telephone.
         B.   It is not a serious traffic violation if the person was texting
or using a handheld mobile telephone to contact law enforcement or other
emergency services.
      (3)   A conviction arising from the operation of any motor vehicle that
involves any of the following:
         A.   A single charge of any speed in excess of the posted speed limit
by 15 miles per hour or more;
         B.   Violations of R.C. § 4511.20 or R.C. § 4511.201 or any
substantially equivalent ordinance or resolution, or of any substantially
equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of another state;
         C.   Violation of a law of this state or an ordinance or resolution
relating to traffic control, other than a parking violation, or of any
substantially equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of
another state, that results in a fatal accident;
         D.   Violation of R.C. § 4506.03 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance or county or township resolution, or of any substantially
equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of another state, that
involves the operation of a commercial motor vehicle without a valid commercial
driver’s license with the proper class or endorsement for the specific vehicle
group being operated or for the passengers or type of cargo being transported;
         E.   Violation of R.C. § 4506.03 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance or county or township resolution, or of any substantially
equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of another state, that
involves the operation of a commercial motor vehicle without a valid commercial
driver’s license being in the person’s possession;
         F.   Violation of R.C. § 4511.33 or R.C. § 4511.34, or any municipal
ordinance or county or township resolution substantially equivalent to either
of those sections, or any substantially equivalent law of another state or
political subdivision of another state;
         G.   Violation of any other law of this state, any law of another
state, or any ordinance or resolution of a political subdivision of this state
or another state that meets both of the following requirements:
            1.   It relates to traffic control, other than a parking violation;
            2.   It is determined to be a serious traffic violation by the
United States Secretary of Transportation and is designated by the director as
such by rule.
   (jj)   STATE. A state of the United States and includes the District of
Columbia.
   (kk)   TANK VEHICLE. Any commercial motor vehicle that is designed to
transport any liquid or gaseous materials within a tank or tanks that are
either permanently or temporarily attached to the vehicle or its chassis and
have an individual rated capacity of  more than 119 gallons and an aggregate
rated capacity of 1,000 gallons or more. The term does not include a commercial
motor vehicle transporting an empty storage container tank that is not designed
for transportation, has a rated capacity of 1,000 gallons or more, and is
temporarily attached to a flatbed trailer.
   (ll)   TESTER. Means a person or entity acting pursuant to a valid agreement
entered into pursuant to R.C. § 4506.09(B).
   (mm)   TEXTING. Manually entering alphanumeric text into, or reading text
from, an electronic device. “Texting” includes short message service (SMS), e-
mail, instant messaging, a command or request to access a world wide web page,
pressing more than a single button to initiate or terminate a voice
communication using a mobile telephone, or engaging in any other form of
electronic text retrieval or entry, for present or future communication.
“Texting” does not include the following:
      (1)   Using voice commands to initiate, receive, or terminate a voice
communication using a mobile telephone;
      (2)   Inputting, selecting, or reading information on a global
positioning system or navigation system;
      (3)   Pressing a single button to initiate or terminate a voice
communication using a mobile telephone; or
      (4)   Using, for a purpose that is not otherwise prohibited by law, a
device capable of performing multiple functions, such as a fleet management
system, a dispatching device, a mobile telephone, a citizens band radio, or a
music player.
   (nn)   TEXTING WHILE DRIVING. Texting while operating a commercial motor
vehicle, with the motor running, including while temporarily stationary because
of traffic, a traffic control device, or other momentary delays. Texting while
driving does not include operating a commercial motor vehicle with or without
the motor running when the driver has moved  the vehicle to the side of, or
off, a highway and is stopped in a location where the vehicle can safely remain
stationary.
   (oo)   UNITED STATES. The 50 states and the District of Columbia.
   (pp)   UPGRADE. A change in the class of vehicles, endorsements, or self-
certified status as described in R.C. § 4506.10(A)(1) that expands the ability
of a current commercial driver’s license holder to operate commercial motor
vehicles under this chapter or R.C. Chapter 4506.
   (qq)   USE OF A HANDHELD MOBILE TELEPHONE.
      (1)   Using at least one hand to hold a mobile telephone to conduct a
voice communication;
      (2)   Dialing or answering a mobile telephone by pressing more than a
single button; or
      (3)   Reaching for a mobile telephone in a manner that requires a driver
to maneuver so that the driver is no longer in a seated driving position, or
restrained by a seat belt that is installed in accordance with 49 C.F.R. §
393.93 and adjusted in accordance with the vehicle manufacturer’s instructions.
   (rr)   VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
(R.C. § 4506.01)
§ 442.02 USE OF ACTUAL GROSS WEIGHT IN LIEU OF RATING.
   For purposes of this chapter, the actual gross weight of a vehicle or
combination of vehicles may be used in lieu of a gross vehicle weight rating to
determine whether a vehicle or combination of vehicles qualifies as a
commercial motor vehicle if the gross vehicle weight rating specified by the
manufacturer for the vehicle or combination of vehicles is not determinable, or
if the manufacturer of the vehicle has not specified a gross vehicle weight
rating.
(ORC 4506.011)
§ 442.03 LICENSING REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having in the person’s
possession or otherwise under the person’s control more than one valid driver’s
license issued by this State, any other state, or by a foreign jurisdiction;
      (2)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle on a highway in this Municipality
in violation of an out-of- service order while the person’s driving privilege
is suspended, revoked, or cancelled, or while the person is subject to
disqualification;
      (3)   Drive a motor vehicle on a highway in the Municipality under the
authority of a commercial driver’s license issued by another state or a foreign
jurisdiction, after having been a resident of this state for 30 days or longer;
      (4)   Knowingly give false information in any application or
certification required by Ohio R.C. 4506.07;
      (5)   Knowingly provide false statements or engage in any fraudulent act
related to testing for a commercial driver’s license as required in R.C. §
4506.09.
   (b)   The Municipality shall give every conviction occurring out of this
State and notice of which was received by the State Department of Public Safety
after December 31, 1989, full faith and credit and treat it for sanctioning
purposes under this chapter as though the conviction had occurred in this
State.
(R.C. § 4506.04(A), (B))
   (c)   No person shall drive any commercial motor vehicle for which an
endorsement is required under R.C. § 4506.12 unless the proper endorsement
appears on the person’s commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s
license temporary instruction permit. No person shall drive a commercial motor
vehicle in violation of a restriction established under R.C. § 4506.12 that
appears on the person’s commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s
license temporary instruction permit.
(R.C. § 4506.12(I))
   (d)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a)(1), (2) or (3) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (a)(4) of this section is guilty of
falsification, a misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition, the provisions
of Ohio R.C. 4507.19 apply.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (a)(5) of this section is guilty of
falsification, a misdemeanor of the third degree. In addition, the provisions
of R.C. § 4507.19 apply.
(R.C. § 4506.04(C))
      (4)   A.   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
         B.   The offenses established under division (c) of this section are
strict liability offenses and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of
these offenses as strict liability offenses shall not be construed to imply
that any other offense for which there is no specified degree of culpability,
whether in this section or another section of this code or the Ohio Revised
Code, is not a strict liability offense.
(R.C. § 4506.12(J))
§ 442.04 PHYSICAL QUALIFICATION TO OPERATE COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (a)   No person who holds a valid commercial driver’s license shall drive a
commercial motor vehicle unless the person is physically qualified to do so.
      (1)   Any person applying for a commercial driver’s license or commercial
driver’s license temporary instruction permit, the renewal or upgrade of a
commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit, or the transfer of a commercial driver’s license from out
of state shall self-certify to the Registrar for purposes of 49 C.F.R. § 383.71
one of the following in regard to the applicant’s operation of a commercial
motor vehicle, as applicable:
         A.   1.   If the applicant operates or expects to operate a commercial
motor vehicle in interstate or foreign commerce and is subject to and meets the
requirements under 49 C.F.R. part 391, the applicant shall self-certify that
the applicant is non- excepted interstate and shall provide the Registrar with
the original or a copy of a medical examiner’s certificate and each
subsequently issued medical examiner’s certificate prepared by a qualified
medical examiner to maintain a medically certified status on the applicant’s
commercial driver licensing system driver record;
            2.   If the applicant operates or expects to operate a commercial
motor vehicle in interstate commerce, but engages in transportation or
operations excepted under 49 C.F.R. §§ 390.3(f), 391.2, 391.68, or 398.3 from
all or parts of the qualification requirements of 49 C.F.R. part 391, the
applicant shall self-certify that the applicant is excepted interstate and is
not required to obtain a medical examiner’s certificate;
         B.   1.   If the applicant operates only in intrastate commerce and is
subject to state driver qualification requirements, the applicant shall self-
certify that the applicant is non-excepted intrastate;
            2.   If the applicant operates only in intrastate commerce and is
excepted from all or parts of the state driver qualification requirements, the
applicant shall self-certify that the applicant is excepted intrastate.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the expiration date on a person’s commercial
driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit,
every commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit holder shall provide the Registrar with the certification
required by this section on or after January 30, 2012, but prior to January 30,
2014.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4506.10(A), (E))
§ 442.05 CRIMINAL OFFENSES.
   (a)   No person who holds a commercial driver’s license or commercial
driver’s license temporary instruction permit or who operates a motor vehicle
for which a commercial driver’s license or permit is required shall do any of
the following:
      (1)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having a measurable or
detectable amount of alcohol or of a controlled substance in the person’s
blood, breath or urine;
      (2)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of 0.04% or more by whole blood or breath;
      (3)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of 0.048% or more by blood serum or blood plasma;
      (4)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of 0.056% or more by urine;
      (5)   Drive a motor vehicle while under the influence of a controlled
substance;
      (6)   Drive a motor vehicle in violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a municipal
O.V.I. ordinance as defined in R.C. § 4511.181;
      (7)   Use a vehicle in the commission of a felony;
      (8)   Refuse to submit to a test under R.C. § 4506.17 or R.C. § 4511.191,
or any substantially similar municipal ordinance;
      (9)   Operate a commercial motor vehicle while the person’s commercial
driver’s license or permit or other commercial driving privileges are revoked,
suspended, cancelled or disqualified;
      (10)   Cause a fatality through the negligent operation of a commercial
motor vehicle, including but not limited to the offenses of aggravated
vehicular homicide, vehicular homicide and vehicular manslaughter;
      (11)   Fail to stop after an accident in violation of R.C. §§ 4549.02 to
4549.03, or any substantially similar municipal ordinance;
      (12)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle in violation of any provision of
R.C. §§ 4511.61 to 4511.63 or any federal or local law or ordinance pertaining
to railroad-highway grade crossings;
      (13)   Use a motor vehicle in the commission of a felony involving the
manufacture, distribution, or dispensing of a controlled substance as defined
in R.C. § 3719.01 or the possession with intent to manufacture, distribute, or
dispense a controlled substance;
      (14)   Use a commercial motor vehicle in the commission of a violation of
R.C. § 2905.32 or any other substantially equivalent offense established under
federal law or the laws of another state.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
   (c)   The offenses established under this section are strict liability
offenses and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of these offenses
as strict liability offenses shall not be construed to imply that any other
offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict
liability offense.
(R.C. § 4506.15)
Statutory reference:
   Alcohol or controlled substance testing, disqualification of drivers, see
Ohio R.C. 4506.17
   Disqualification of drivers for violations, see Ohio R.C. 4506.16
§ 442.06 APPLICATION OF TITLE 49 C.F.R. PART 383.
   (a)   The provisions of Title 49 C.F.R. part 383, Subpart C (Notification
Requirements and Employer Responsibilities), as amended, shall apply to all
commercial drivers or persons who apply for employment as commercial drivers.
No person shall fail to make a report to the person’s employer as required by
this section.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(ORC 4506.19)
§ 442.07 INFORMATION REQUIRED OF PROSPECTIVE DRIVERS BY EMPLOYERS; UNAUTHORIZED
DRIVING.
   (a)   Each employer shall require every applicant for employment as a driver
of a commercial vehicle to provide the applicant’s employment history for the
10 years preceding the date the employment application is submitted to the
prospective employer. The following information shall be submitted:
      (1)   A list of the names and addresses of the applicant’s previous
employers for which the applicant was the operator of a commercial motor
vehicle;
      (2)   The dates the applicant was employed by these employers;
      (3)   The reason for leaving each of these employers.
   (b)   No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize any driver employed by
the employer to drive a commercial motor vehicle during any period in which any
of the following apply:
      (1)   The driver’s commercial driver’s license is suspended, revoked, or
cancelled by any state or a foreign jurisdiction;
      (2)   The driver has lost the privilege to drive, or currently is
disqualified from driving, a commercial motor vehicle in any state or foreign
jurisdiction;
      (3)   The driver, the commercial motor vehicle the driver is driving, or
the motor carrier operation is subject to an out-of-service order in any state
or a foreign jurisdiction;
      (4)   The driver has more than one driver’s license.
   (c)   No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to operate a
commercial motor vehicle in violation of Ohio R.C. 4506.15.
   (d)   No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to operate a
commercial motor vehicle if the driver does not hold a valid, current
commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit bearing the proper class or endorsements for the vehicle. No
employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to operate a commercial
motor vehicle in violation of the restrictions on the driver’s commercial
driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit.
   (e)   Whoever violates division (a), (b) or (d) of this section is guilty of
a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (f)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 4506.20)
§ 442.08 AUTHORITY OF PEACE OFFICERS REGARDING DRUNK DRIVING.
   (a)   Within the jurisdictional limits of the appointing authority, any
peace officer shall stop and detain any person found violating Ohio R.C.
4506.15, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, without obtaining
a warrant. When there is reasonable ground to believe that a violation of Ohio
R.C. 4506.15, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, has been
committed and a test or tests of the person’s whole blood, blood plasma or
blood serum, breath or urine is necessary, the peace officer shall take the
person to an appropriate place for testing. If a person refuses to submit to a
test after being warned as provided in Ohio R.C. 4506.17(C), or submits to a
test that discloses the presence of a controlled substance or an alcohol
concentration of 0.04 percent or more by whole blood or breath, an alcohol
concentration of .048 percent or more by blood serum or blood plasma, or an
alcohol concentration of .056 percent or more by urine, the peace officer shall
require that the person immediately surrender the person’s commercial driver’s
license to the peace officer.
   (b)   As used in this section, JURISDICTIONAL LIMITS means the limits within
which a peace officer may arrest and detain a person without a warrant under
Ohio R.C. 2935.03, except that the Superintendent and the troopers of the State
Highway Patrol may stop and detain, without warrant, any person who, in the
presence of the Superintendent or any trooper, is engaged in a violation of any
of the provisions of this subchapter or Ohio R.C. Chapter 4506.
(ORC 4506.23)
§ 442.09 PERMITTING OR DRIVING WHILE FATIGUED OR ILL PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall drive a commercial motor vehicle, as defined in Ohio
R.C. 4506.01, or a commercial car or commercial tractor, as defined in Ohio
R.C. 4501.01, while the person’s ability or alertness is so impaired by
fatigue, illness, or other causes that it is unsafe for the person to drive
such vehicle. No driver shall use any drug which would adversely affect the
driver’s ability or alertness.
   (b)   No owner, as defined in Ohio R.C. 4501.01, of a commercial motor
vehicle, commercial car or commercial tractor, or a person employing or
otherwise directing the driver of such vehicle, shall require or knowingly
permit a driver in any such condition described in division (a) of this section
to drive such vehicle upon any street or highway.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of this section or
Ohio R.C. 4511.79, or Ohio R.C. 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.762, 4511.764,
or 4511.77 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of
those sections, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
(ORC 4511.79)
§ 442.10 DRIVER’S CONSECUTIVE SERVICE AND OFF-DUTY HOURS. (REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
   Section 442.10, previously codified as § 442.03, was repealed as part of the
1991 updating and revision of these Codified Ordinances because substantially
identical State law (ORC 4511.80) was repealed by the General Assembly by Am.
Sub. S.B. No. 38, effective December 31, 1990.
§ 442.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 444: OFFENSES RELATING TO THEFT AND FRAUD
444.01   Police may remove ignition key.
444.02   Illegal sale or possession of master vehicle keys. (Repealed)
444.03   Motor vehicle with concealed identity. (Repealed)
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar State law
   Unattended vehicles; duty to lock ignition, remove key, set brake, etc. -
see TRAF.
452.06
   Theft - see GEN. OFF.
642.02,
642.03
   Unauthorized use of a vehicle; vehicle trespass - see GEN. OFF.
642.04
   Criminal damaging or endangering - see GEN. OFF.
642.10
   Criminal mischief (tampering) - see GEN. OFF.
642.11
   Receiving stolen property - see GEN. OFF.
642.22
§ 444.01 POLICE MAY REMOVE IGNITION KEY.
   A law enforcement officer may remove the ignition key left in the ignition
switch of an unlocked and unattended motor vehicle parked on a street or
highway. The officer removing the key shall place notification upon the vehicle
detailing his or her name and badge number, the place where the key may be
reclaimed, and the procedure for reclaiming the key. The key shall be returned
to the owner of the motor vehicle upon presentation of proof of ownership.
(ORC 4549.05)
§ 444.02 ILLEGAL SALE OR POSSESSION OF MASTER VEHICLE KEYS. (REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
   Section 444.02 was repealed as part of the 1988 updating and revision of
these Codified Ordinances because the offense of illegal sale or possession of
master vehicle keys was made a felony by the General Assembly. See Ohio R.C.
4549.042 and 4549.99(C).)
§ 444.03 MOTOR VEHICLE WITH CONCEALED IDENTITY. (REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
   Section 444.03 was repealed as part of the 1988 updating and revision of
these Codified Ordinances because the offense of tampering with motor vehicle
identification numbers was made a felony by the General Assembly. See Ohio R.C.
4549.61 et seq. and 4549.99(F).)
TITLE EIGHT: PARKING
CHAPTER 452: PARKING GENERALLY
452.01   Prohibition against parking on streets or highways.
452.02   Police may remove illegally parked vehicle.
452.03   Prohibited standing or parking places.
452.04   Manner of parallel and angle parking; disabled persons.
452.05   Willfully leaving vehicles on private or public property.
452.055   Parking prohibitions on private property; private tow-away zones.
452.06   Unattended vehicles; duty to lock ignition, remove key, set brake,
etc.
452.07   Opening doors on side available to traffic.
452.08   Selling, washing or repairing vehicle upon roadway.
452.09   Truck loading zones.
452.10   Bus stops and taxicab stands.
452.11   Parking in alleys and narrow streets; exceptions.
452.12   Parking in residential districts generally.
452.13   Parking of commercial and heavy vehicles in residential districts.
452.14   Registered owner prima facie liable for unlawful parking.
452.15   Waiver.
452.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar State law
   Parking defined - see TRAF.
402.23
   Stop defined - see TRAF.
402.41
   Stopping and standing defined - see TRAF.
402.43
   Impounding; redemption - see TRAF.
404.05
   Parking near stopped fire apparatus - see TRAF.
432.25
   Lights on parked or stopped vehicles - see TRAF.
438.09
   Police may remove ignition key from unattended vehicle - see TRAF.
444.01
   Parking of bicycles; locks - see TRAF.
474.08
   Storage of junk vehicles - see GEN. OFF.
660.07
§ 452.01 PROHIBITION AGAINST PARKING ON STREETS OR HIGHWAYS.
   (a)   (1)   Upon any highway, no person shall stop, park, or leave standing
any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the paved or main traveled
part of the highway if it is practicable to stop, park, or so leave such
vehicle off the paved or main traveled part of the highway. In every event a
clear and unobstructed portion of the highway opposite such standing vehicle
shall be left for the free passage of other vehicles, and a clear view of such
stopped vehicle shall be available from a distance of 200 feet in each
direction upon such highway.
      (2)   This section does not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is
disabled while on the paved or improved or main traveled portion of a highway
in such manner and to such extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and
temporarily leaving the disabled vehicle in such position.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.66)
§ 452.02 POLICE MAY REMOVE ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLE.
   (a)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a highway in
violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.66 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, such officer may move such vehicle, or require the driver or other
person in charge of the vehicle to move the same, to a position off the paved
or improved or main traveled part of such highway.
   (b)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any
highway, bridge, or causeway, or in any tunnel, where such vehicle constitutes
an obstruction to traffic, such officer may provide for the removal of such
vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety.
(ORC 4511.67)
§ 452.03 PROHIBITED STANDING OR PARKING PLACES.
   (a)   No person shall stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or to comply with the provisions of this
title, or while obeying the directions of a police officer or a traffic-control
device, in any of the following places:
      (1)   On a sidewalk, except as provided in division (b) of this section;
      (2)   In front of a public or private driveway;
      (3)   Within an intersection;
      (4)   Within ten feet of a fire hydrant;
      (5)   On a crosswalk;
      (6)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
      (7)   Within 30 feet of, and upon the approach to, any flashing beacon,
stop sign, or traffic- control device;
      (8)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a
different length is indicated by a traffic-control device;
      (9)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
      (10)   Within 20 feet of a driveway entrance to any fire station and, on
the side of the street opposite the entrance to any fire station, within 75
feet of the entrance when it is properly posted with signs;
      (11)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
such standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
      (12)   Alongside any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a
street;
      (13)   Upon any bridge or elevated structure upon a highway, or within a
highway tunnel;
      (14)   At any place where signs prohibit stopping;
      (15)   Within one foot of another parked vehicle;
      (16)   On the roadway portion of a freeway, expressway, or thruway.
(ORC 4511.68(A))
      (17)   On either side of the following streets:
   Jones Avenue         Springfield Pike
   Chester Road         Sheffield Road
   Hillsmith Drive      Novner Drive
   Glendale-Milford Road   *Wayne Avenue
   Taconic Terrace      Firestone Avenue
   Redna Terrace         Marion Road
   Glendale Road         Linden Avenue
   Grove Road         Woodlawn Boulevard
   Riddle Road         Mayview Forest Place
   Mayview Forest Drive   Beech Lane
   Forest Avenue
   Brown Avenue
*Parking is permitted on the west side from a point 600 feet south of Marion
Road to a point 885 feet south thereof except from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and
4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday.
      (18)   On the right-hand side of the following streets or roads heading
in the direction of the termini of the cul-de-sac or dead end:
   Grandview Avenue      Ronnie Road
   Springer Avenue      Mar-Ric Lane
   Prairie Avenue      Tanager Lane
   Grueninger Way      Shady Lane
   Chatsworth Avenue      Rustic Lane
   Warren Avenue      Waverly Avenue
   Princess Court      Jasmine Court
   Leslie Avenue      Faxon Court
   McLean Street      Julian Drive
   Barren Drive         Skillman Drive
   Terrace Drive      Barron Drive
   Woodstock Road      Arnold Drive
   Timberland         Timberview Court
      (19)   On the following streets, as indicated:
         A.   Oak Road, on the south side;
         B.   Roberta Drive, on the east side;
         C.   Panola Drive, on the east side;
         D.   Nedro Drive, on the east side;
         E.   Joliet Drive, on the north or west sides except at the eastern
terminus where there shall be no parking on the south side;
         F.   Brookhaven Street, on the north side except at the eastern
terminus where there shall be no parking on the south side; and
         G.   Leacrest Road, on the east side.
(Ord. 10-1977, passed 3-22-1977; Am. Ord. 35-1978, passed 11-28-1978; Am. Ord.
33-1979, passed 9-25-1979; Am. Ord. 8-1980, passed 1-22-1980; Am. Ord. 42-1990,
passed 10-25-1990)
   (b)   A person is permitted, without charge or restriction, to stand or park
on a sidewalk a motor-driven cycle or motor scooter that has an engine not
larger than 150 cubic centimeters, a low-speed micromobility device, or a
bicycle or electric bicycle, provided that the motor-driven cycle, motor
scooter, low-speed micromobility device, bicycle, or electric bicycle does not
impede the normal flow of pedestrian traffic. This division does not authorize
any person to operate a vehicle in violation of R.C. § 4511.711, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.68(B), (C))
§ 452.04 MANNER OF PARALLEL AND ANGLE PARKING; DISABLED PERSONS.
   (a)   Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there is an
adjacent curb shall be stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of the
vehicle parallel with and not more than 12 inches from the right-hand curb,
unless it is impossible to approach so close to the curb; in such case the stop
shall be made as close to the curb as possible and only for the time necessary
to discharge and receive passengers or to load or unload merchandise. Local
authorities by ordinance may permit angle parking on any roadway under their
jurisdiction, except that angle parking shall not be permitted on a state route
within the Municipality unless an unoccupied roadway width of not less than 25
feet is available for free-moving traffic.
   (b)   Local authorities by ordinance may permit parking of vehicles with the
left-hand wheels adjacent to and within 12 inches of the left-hand curb of a
one- way roadway.
   (c)   No vehicle shall be stopped or parked on a road or highway with the
vehicle facing in a direction other than the direction of travel on that side
of the road or highway.
   (d)   Notwithstanding any statute or any rule, regulation, resolution, or
ordinance, air compressors, tractors, trucks, and other equipment, while being
used in the construction, reconstruction, installation, repair, or removal of
facilities near, on, over, or under a street or highway, may stop, stand, or
park where necessary in order to perform such work, provided a flagperson is on
duty or warning signs or lights are displayed as may be prescribed by the
Director of Transportation.
   (e)   Special parking locations and privileges for persons with disabilities
that limit or impair the ability to walk, also known as disabled parking spaces
or disability parking spaces, shall be provided and designated by all political
subdivisions and by the State and all agencies and instrumentalities thereof at
all offices and facilities where parking is provided, whether owned, rented, or
leased, and at all publicly owned parking garages. The locations shall be
designated through the posting of an elevated sign, whether permanently affixed
or movable, imprinted with the international symbol of access and shall be
reasonably close to exits, entrances, elevators, and ramps. All elevated signs
posted in accordance with this division and Ohio R.C. 3781.111(C) shall be
mounted on a fixed or movable post, and the distance from the ground to the top
edge of the sign shall measure five feet. If a new sign or a replacement sign
designating a special parking location is posted on or after October 14, 1999,
there also shall be affixed upon the surface of that sign or affixed next to
the designating sign a notice that states the fine applicable for the offense
of parking a motor vehicle in the special designated parking location if the
motor vehicle is not legally entitled to be parked in that location.
   (f)   (1)   No person shall stop, stand, or park any motor vehicle at
special parking locations provided under division (e) of this section, or at
special clearly marked parking locations provided in or on privately owned
parking lots, parking garages, or other parking areas and designated in
accordance with that division, unless one of the following applies:
         A.   The motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of a
person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to walk and is
displaying a valid removable windshield placard or special license plates; or
         B.   The motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of a
disabled person and is displaying a parking card or special disabled license
plates.
      (2)   Any motor vehicle that is parked in a special marked parking
location in violation of division (f)(1)A. or (f)(1)B. of this section may be
towed or otherwise removed from the parking location by the law enforcement
agency of the Municipality. A motor vehicle that is so towed or removed shall
not be released to its owner until the owner presents proof of ownership of the
motor vehicle and pays all towing and storage fees normally imposed by the
Municipality for towing and storing motor vehicles. If the motor vehicle is a
leased vehicle, it shall not be released to the lessee until the lessee
presents proof that that person is the lessee of the motor vehicle and pays all
towing and storage fees normally imposed by the Municipality for towing and
storing motor vehicles.
      (3)   If a person is charged with a violation of division (f)(1)A. or (f)
(1)B. of this section, it is an affirmative defense to the charge that the
person suffered an injury not more than 72 hours prior to the time the person
was issued the ticket or citation and that, because of the injury, the person
meets at least one of the criteria contained in Ohio R.C. 4503.44(A)(1).
   (g)   When a motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of a
person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to walk and is
displaying a removable windshield placard or a temporary removable windshield
placard or special license plates, or when a motor vehicle is being operated by
or for the transport of a disabled person, and is displaying a parking card or
special disability license plates, the motor vehicle is permitted to park for a
period of two hours in excess of the legal parking period permitted by local
authorities, except where local ordinances or police rules provide otherwise or
where the vehicle is parked in such a manner as to be clearly a traffic hazard.
   (h)   No owner of an office, facility, or parking garage where special
parking locations are required to be designated in accordance with division (e)
of this section shall fail to properly mark the special parking locations in
accordance with that division or fail to maintain the markings of the special
locations, including the erection and maintenance of the fixed or movable
signs.
   (i)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require a person or
organization to apply for a removable windshield placard or special license
plates if the parking card or special license plates issued to the person or
organization under prior law have not expired or been surrendered or revoked.
   (j)   As used in this section:
      (1)   DISABLED PERSON. Any person who has lost the use of one or both
legs or one or both arms, who is blind, deaf, or so severely disabled as to be
unable to move without the aid of crutches or a wheelchair, or whose mobility
is restricted by a permanent cardiovascular, pulmonary, or other disabling
condition.
      (2)   PERSON WITH A DISABILITY THAT LIMITS OR IMPAIRS THE ABILITY TO
WALK. The same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4503.44.
      (3)   SPECIAL LICENSE PLATES and REMOVABLE WINDSHIELD PLACARD. Any
license plates or removable windshield placard or temporary removable
windshield placard issued under Ohio R.C. 4503.41 or 4503.44, and also means
any substantially equivalent license plates or removable windshield placard or
temporary removable windshield placard issued by a state, district, country, or
sovereignty.
   (k)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates division (a) or (c) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   A.   Whoever violates division (f)(1)A. or B. of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in division (k)(2)A.
and B. of this section. Except as otherwise provided in division (k)(2)A. of
this section, an offender who violates division (f)(1)A. or B. of this section
shall be fined not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00). An offender who violates division (f)(1)A. or
B. of this section shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00)
if the offender, prior to sentencing, proves either of the following to the
satisfaction of the court:
            1.   At the time of the violation of division (f)(1)A. of this
section, the offender or the person for whose transport the motor vehicle was
being operated had been issued a removable windshield placard that then was
valid or special license plates that then were valid but the offender or the
person neglected to display the placard or license plates as described in
division (f)(1)A. of this section.
            2.   At the time of the violation of division (f)(1)B. of this
section, the offender or the person for whose transport the motor vehicle was
being operated had been issued a parking card that then was valid or special
disability license plates that then were valid but the offender or the person
neglected to display the card or license plates as described in division (f)
(1)B. of this section.
         B.   In no case shall an offender who violates division (f)(1)A. or B.
be sentenced to any term of imprisonment.
         C.   An arrest or conviction for a violation of division (f)(1)A. or
B. of this section does not constitute a criminal record and need not be
reported by the person so arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries
contained in any application for employment, license, or other right or
privilege, or made in connection with the person’s appearance as a witness.
         D.   The Clerk of the Court shall pay every fine collected under
division (k)(2) of this section to the Municipality. Except as provided in
division (k)(2) of this section, the Municipality shall use the fine moneys it
receives under division (k)(2) of this section to pay the expenses it incurs in
complying with the signage and notice requirements contained in division (e) of
this section. The Municipality may use up to 50 percent of each fine it
receives under division (k)(2) of this section to pay the costs of educational,
advocacy, support, and assistive technology programs for persons with
disabilities, and for public improvements within the Municipality that benefit
or assist persons with disabilities, if governmental agencies or nonprofit
organizations offer the programs.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (h) of this section shall be punished as
follows:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (k)(3) of this section,
the offender shall be issued a warning.
         B.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (h) of this section or of a municipal
ordinance that is substantially equivalent to that division, the offender shall
not be issued a warning but shall be fined not more than twenty-five dollars
($25.00) for each parking location that is not properly marked or whose
markings are not properly maintained.
(Ord. 06-2006, passed 3-28-2006)
§ 452.05 WILLFULLY LEAVING VEHICLES ON PRIVATE OR PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (a)   The Police Chief, upon notification to the Police Chief of such action
and of the location of the place of storage, may order into storage any motor
vehicle, including an abandoned junk motor vehicle as defined in R.C. §
4513.63, that:
      (1)   Has come into the possession of the Police chief as a result of the
performance of the Police Chief’s duties; or
      (2)   Has been left on a public street or other property open to the
public for purposes of vehicular travel, or upon or within the right-of-way of
any road or highway, for 48 hours or longer without notification to the Police
Chief of the reasons for leaving the motor vehicle in such place. However, when
such a motor vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic it may be ordered
into storage immediately unless either of the following applies:
         A.   The vehicle was involved in an accident and is subject to R.C. §
4513.66, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
         B.   The vehicle is a commercial motor vehicle. If the vehicle is a
commercial motor vehicle, the Police Chief shall allow the owner or operator of
the vehicle the opportunity to arrange for the removal of the motor vehicle
within a period of time specified by the Police Chief. If the Police Chief
determines that the vehicle cannot be removed within the specified period of
time, the Police Chief shall order the removal of the vehicle.
      (3)   Subject to division (c) of this section, the Police Chief shall
designate the place of storage of any motor vehicle so ordered removed.
   (b)   If the Police Chief issues an order under division (a) of this section
and arranges for the removal of a motor vehicle by a towing service, the towing
service shall deliver the motor vehicle to the location designated by the
Police Chief not more than two hours after the time it is removed.
   (c)   (1)   The Police Chief shall cause a search to be made of the records
of an applicable entity listed in R.C. § 4513.601(F)(1) to ascertain the
identity of the owner and any lienholder of a motor vehicle ordered into
storage by the Police Chief within five business days of the removal of the
vehicle. Upon obtaining such identity, the Police Chief shall send or cause to
be sent to the owner and any lienholder at the owner’s and any lienholder’s
last known address by certified or express mail with return receipt requested,
by certified mail with electronic tracking, or by a commercial carrier service
utilizing any form of delivery requiring a signed receipt. The notice shall
inform the owner and any lienholder that the motor vehicle will be declared a
nuisance and disposed of if not claimed within ten days of the date of the
sending of the notice.
      (2)   A.   The owner or lienholder of the motor vehicle is responsible
for payment of any expenses or charges incurred in its removal and storage and
may reclaim the motor vehicle upon payment of those expenses or charges, and
presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced by a certificate of
title or memorandum certificate of title to the motor vehicle, a certificate of
registration for the motor vehicle, or a lease agreement. Upon presentation of
proof of ownership evidenced as provided above, the owner of the motor vehicle
also may retrieve any personal items from the vehicle without retrieving the
vehicle and without paying any fee. However, a towing service or storage
facility may charge an after-hours retrieval fee established by the Public
Utilities Commission in rules adopted under R.C. § 4921.25 if the owner
retrieves the personal items after hours, unless the towing service or storage
facility fails to provide the notice required under R.C. § 4513.69(B)(3), if
applicable. However, the owner shall not do either of the following:
            1.   Retrieve any personal item that has been determined by the
Police Chief to be necessary to a criminal investigation;
            2.   Retrieve any personal item from a vehicle if it would endanger
the safety of the owner, unless the owner agrees to sign a waiver of liability.
         B.   For purposes of division (c)(2) of this section, “personal items”
do not include any items that are attached to the vehicle.
      (3)   If the owner or lienholder of the motor vehicle reclaims it after a
search of the applicable records has been conducted and after notice has been
sent to the owner and any lienholder as described in this section, and the
search was conducted by the place of storage, and the notice was sent to the
motor vehicle owner by the place of storage, the owner or lienholder shall pay
to the place of storage a processing fee of $25, in addition to any expenses or
charges incurred in the removal and storage of the vehicle.
   (d)   If the owner or lienholder makes no claim to the motor vehicle within
ten days of the date of sending the notice, and if the vehicle is to be
disposed of at public auction as provided in R.C. § 4513.62 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the Police Chief, without charge
to any party, shall file with the clerk of courts of the county in which the
place of storage is located an affidavit showing compliance with the
requirements of this section. Upon presentation of the affidavit, the clerk,
without charge, shall issue a salvage certificate of title, free and clear of
all liens and encumbrances, to the Police Chief. If the vehicle is to be
disposed of to a motor vehicle salvage dealer or other facility as provided in
R.C. § 4513.62 or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the Police
Chief shall execute in triplicate an affidavit, as prescribed by the Registrar
of Motor Vehicles, describing the motor vehicle and the manner in which it was
disposed of, and that all requirements of this section have been complied with.
The Police Chief shall retain the original of the affidavit for the Police
Chief’s records, and shall furnish two copies to the motor vehicle salvage
dealer or other facility. Upon presentation of a copy of the affidavit by the
motor vehicle salvage dealer, the clerk of courts, within 30 days of the
presentation, shall issue a salvage certificate of title, free and clear of all
liens and encumbrances.
   (e)   Whenever a motor vehicle salvage dealer or other facility receives an
affidavit for the disposal of a motor vehicle as provided in this section, the
dealer or facility shall not be required to obtain an Ohio certificate of title
to the motor vehicle in the dealer's or facility's own name if the vehicle is
dismantled or destroyed and both copies of the affidavit are delivered to the
clerk of courts.
   (f)   No towing service or storage facility shall fail to comply with this
section.
(R.C. § 4513.61)
   (g)   Abandonment of junk motor vehicle prohibited.
      (1)   A.   No person shall willfully leave an abandoned junk motor
vehicle, as defined in R.C. § 4513.63, on private property for more than 72
hours without the permission of the person having the right to the possession
of the property, or on a public street or other property open to the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or parking, or upon or within the right-of-way of
any road or highway for 48 hours or longer without notification to the Police
Chief of the reason for leaving the motor vehicle in that place.
         B.   For purposes of this division (g)(1), the fact that a motor
vehicle has been so left without permission or notification is prima facie
evidence of abandonment.
         C.   Nothing contained in this section and R.C. §§ 4513.60, 4513.61
and 4513.63 shall invalidate or prevent the enactment of further provisions of
municipal ordinances regulating or prohibiting the abandonment of motor
vehicles on streets, highways, public property or private property within the
municipality.
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (g) is guilty of a minor misdemeanor
and shall also be assessed any costs incurred by the municipality in disposing
of the abandoned junk motor vehicle, less any money accruing to the
municipality from the disposal.
(R.C. § 4513.64)
§ 452.055 PARKING PROHIBITIONS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY; PRIVATE TOW-AWAY ZONES.
   (a)   (1)   The chief of a law enforcement agency of the municipal
corporation, upon complaint of any person adversely affected, may order into
storage any motor vehicle, other than an abandoned junk motor vehicle as
defined in R.C. § 4513.63, that has been left on private residential or private
agricultural property for at least four hours without the permission of the
person having the right to the possession of the property. The chief, upon
complaint of a repair garage or place of storage, may order into storage any
motor vehicle, other than an abandoned junk motor vehicle, that has been left
at the garage or place of storage for a longer period than that agreed upon.
When ordering a motor vehicle into storage pursuant to this division, the chief
may arrange for the removal of the motor vehicle by a towing service and shall
designate a storage facility.
      (2)   A towing service towing a motor vehicle under division (a)(1) of
this section shall remove the motor vehicle in accordance with that division.
The towing service shall deliver the motor vehicle to the location designated
by the chief not more than two hours after the time it is removed from the
private property, unless the towing service is unable to deliver the motor
vehicle within two hours due to an uncontrollable force, natural disaster, or
other event that is not within the power of the towing service.
      (3)   Subject to division (b) of this section, the owner of a motor
vehicle that has been removed pursuant to this division may recover the vehicle
only in accordance with division (d) of this section.
      (4)   As used in this section, “private residential property” means
private property on which is located one or more structures that are used as a
home, residence, or sleeping place by one or more persons, if no more than
three separate households are maintained in the structure or structures. The
phrase does not include any private property on which is located one or more
structures that are used as a home, residence, or sleeping place by two or more
persons, if more than three separate households are maintained in the structure
or structures.
   (b)   (1)   If the owner or operator of a motor vehicle that has been
ordered into storage pursuant to division (a)(1) of this section arrives after
the motor vehicle has been prepared for removal, but prior to its actual
removal from the property, the towing service shall give the owner or operator
oral or written notification at the time of such arrival that the vehicle owner
or operator may pay a fee of not more than one-half of the fee for the removal
of the motor vehicle established by the Public Utilities Commission in rules
adopted under R.C. § 4921.25, in order to obtain release of the motor vehicle.
However, if the vehicle is within a municipal corporation and the municipal
corporation has established a vehicle removal fee, the towing service shall
give the owner or operator oral or written notification that the owner or
operator may pay not more than one-half of that fee to obtain release of the
motor vehicle. That fee may be paid by use of a major credit card unless the
towing service uses a mobile credit card processor and mobile service is not
available at the time of the transaction.
      (2)   Upon payment of the applicable fee, the towing service shall give
the vehicle owner or operator a receipt showing both the full amount normally
assessed and the actual amount received and shall release the motor vehicle to
the owner or operator. Upon its release, the owner or operator immediately
shall move it so that it is not on the private residential or private
agricultural property without the permission of the person having the right to
possession of the property, or is not at the garage or place of storage without
the permission of the owner, whichever is applicable.
   (c)   (1)   The chief of a law enforcement agency in the municipal
corporation shall maintain a record of motor vehicles that the chief orders
into storage pursuant to division (a)(1) of this section. The record shall
include an entry for each such motor vehicle that identifies the motor
vehicle's license number, make, model, and color, the location from which it
was removed, the date and time of its removal, the telephone number of the
person from whom it may be recovered, and the address of the place to which it
has been taken and from which it may be recovered. The chief shall provide any
information in the record that pertains to a particular motor vehicle to any
person who, either in person or pursuant to a telephone call, identifies self
as the owner or operator of the motor vehicle and requests information
pertaining to its location.
      (2)   Any person who registers a complaint that is the basis of the
chief's order for the removal and storage of a motor vehicle under division (a)
(1) of this section shall provide the identity of the law enforcement agency
with which the complaint was registered to any person who identifies self as
the owner or operator of the motor vehicle and requests information pertaining
to its location.
   (d)   (1)   The owner or lienholder of a motor vehicle that is ordered into
storage pursuant to division (a)(1) of this section may reclaim it upon both of
the following:
         A.   Payment of all applicable fees established by the Public
Utilities Commission in rules adopted under R.C. § 4921.25 or, if the vehicle
was towed within a municipal corporation that has established fees for vehicle
removal and storage, payment of all applicable fees established by the
municipal corporation.
         B.   Presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced by a
certificate of title to the motor vehicle, a certificate of registration for
the motor vehicle, or a lease agreement.
      (2)   When the owner of a vehicle towed under this section retrieves the
vehicle, the towing service or storage facility in possession of the vehicle
shall give the owner written notice that if the owner disputes that the motor
vehicle was lawfully towed, the owner may be able to file a civil action under
R.C. § 4513.611.
      (3)   Upon presentation of proof of ownership as required under division
(d)(1)B. of this section, the owner of a motor vehicle that is ordered into
storage under division (a)(1) of this section may retrieve any personal items
from the motor vehicle without retrieving the vehicle and without paying any
fee. However, a towing service or storage facility may charge an after-hours
retrieval fee established by the Public Utilities Commission in rules adopted
under R.C. § 4921.25 if the owner retrieves the personal items after hours,
unless the towing service or storage facility fails to provide the notice
required under R.C. § 4513.69(B)(3), if applicable. The owner of a motor
vehicle shall not do either of the following:
         A.   Retrieve any personal item that has been determined by the chief
to be necessary to a criminal investigation;
         B.   Retrieve any personal item from a vehicle if it would endanger
the safety of the owner, unless the owner agrees to sign a waiver of liability.
      (4)   For purposes of division (d)(3) of this section, “personal items”
do not include any items that are attached to the motor vehicle.
      (5)   If a motor vehicle that is ordered into storage pursuant to
division (a)(1) of this section remains unclaimed by the owner for 30 days, the
procedures established by R.C. §§ 4513.61 and 4513.62 apply.
   (e)   (1)   No person shall remove, or cause the removal of, any motor
vehicle from any private residential or private agricultural property other
than in accordance with division (a)(1) of this section or R.C. §§ 4513.61 to
4513.65.
      (2)   No towing service or storage facility shall fail to comply with the
requirements of this section.
   (f)   This section does not apply to any private residential or private
agricultural property that is established as a private tow-away zone in
accordance with division (h) of this section or R.C. § 4513.601.
   (g)   Whoever violates division (e) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.60)
   (h)   Private Tow-away Zones.
      (1)   The owner of a private property may establish a private tow-away
zone, but may do so only if all of the following conditions are satisfied:
         A.   The owner of the private property posts on the property a sign,
that is at least 18 inches by 24 inches in size, that is visible from all
entrances to the property, and that includes all of the following information:
            1.   A statement that the property is a tow-away zone;
            2.   A description of persons authorized to park on the property.
If the property is a residential property, the owner of the private property
may include on the sign a statement that only tenants and guests may park in
the private tow-away zone, subject to the terms of the property owner. If the
property is a commercial property, the owner of the private property may
include on the sign a statement that only customers may park in the private
tow-away zone. In all cases, if it is not apparent which persons may park in
the private tow-away zone, the owner of the private property shall include on
the sign the address of the property on which the private tow- away zone is
located or the name of the business that is located on the property designated
as a private tow-away zone.
            3.   If the private tow-away zone is not enforceable at all times,
the times during which the parking restrictions are enforced;
            4.   The telephone number and the address of the place from which a
towed vehicle may be recovered at any time during the day or night;
            5.   A statement that the failure to recover a towed vehicle may
result in the loss of title to the vehicle as provided in R.C. § 4505.101(B).
            6.   In order to comply with the requirements of division (h)(1)A.
of this section, the owner of a private property may modify an existing sign by
affixing to the existing sign stickers or an addendum in lieu of replacing the
sign.
         B.   A towing service ensures that a vehicle towed under this division
(h) is taken to a location from which it may be recovered that complies with
all of the following:
            1.   It is located within 25 linear miles of the location of the
private tow-away zone, unless it is not practicable to take the vehicle to a
place of storage within 25 linear miles.
            2.   It is well-lighted.
            3.   It is on or within a reasonable distance of a regularly
scheduled route of one or more modes of public transportation, if any public
transportation is available in the municipal corporation or township in which
the private tow-away zone is located.
      (2)   A.   If a vehicle is parked on private property that is established
as a private tow-away zone in accordance with division (h)(1) of this section,
without the consent of the owner of the private property or in violation of any
posted parking condition or regulation, the owner of the private property may
cause the removal of the vehicle by a towing service. The towing service shall
remove the vehicle in accordance with this division (h). The vehicle owner and
the operator of the vehicle are considered to have consented to the removal and
storage of the vehicle, to the payment of the applicable fees established by
the Public Utilities Commission in rules adopted under R.C. § 4921.25, and to
the right of a towing service to obtain title to the vehicle if it remains
unclaimed as provided in R.C. § 4505.101. The owner or lienholder of a vehicle
that has been removed under this division (h), subject to division (h)(3) of
this section, may recover the vehicle in accordance with division (h)(7) of
this section.
         B.   If a municipal corporation requires tow trucks and tow truck
operators to be licensed, no owner of a private property located within the
municipal corporation shall cause the removal and storage of any vehicle
pursuant to division (h)(2) of this section by an unlicensed tow truck or
unlicensed tow truck operator.
         C.   No towing service shall remove a vehicle from a private tow-away
zone except pursuant to a written contract for the removal of vehicles entered
into with the owner of the private property on which the private tow-away zone
is located.
      (3)   If the owner or operator of a vehicle that is being removed under
authority of division (h)(2) of this section arrives after the vehicle has been
prepared for removal, but prior to its actual removal from the property, the
towing service shall give the vehicle owner or operator oral or written
notification at the time of such arrival that the vehicle owner or operator may
pay a fee of not more than one-half of the fee for the removal of the vehicle
established by the Public Utilities Commission in rules adopted under R.C. §
4921.25 in order to obtain release of the vehicle. That fee may be paid by use
of a major credit card unless the towing service uses a mobile credit card
processor and mobile service is not available at the time of the transaction.
Upon payment of that fee, the towing service shall give the vehicle owner or
operator a receipt showing both the full amount normally assessed and the
actual amount received and shall release the vehicle to the owner or operator.
Upon its release, the owner or operator immediately shall move the vehicle so
that the vehicle is not parked on the private property established as a private
tow-away zone without the consent of the owner of the private property or in
violation of any posted parking condition or regulation.
      (4)   A.   Prior to towing a vehicle under division (h)(2) of this
section, a towing service shall make all reasonable efforts to take as many
photographs as necessary to evidence that the vehicle is clearly parked on
private property in violation of a private tow-away zone established under
division (h)(1) of this section. The towing service shall record the time and
date of the photographs taken under this division (h). The towing service shall
retain the photographs and the record of the time and date, in electronic or
printed form, for at least 30 days after the date on which the vehicle is
recovered by the owner or lienholder or at least two years after the date on
which the vehicle was towed, whichever is earlier.
         B.   A towing service shall deliver a vehicle towed under division (h)
(2) of this section to the location from which it may be recovered not more
than two hours after the time it was removed from the private tow-away zone,
unless the towing service is unable to deliver the motor vehicle within two
hours due to an uncontrollable force, natural disaster, or other event that is
not within the power of the towing service.
      (5)   A.   If an owner of a private property that is established as a
private tow-away zone in accordance with division (H)(1) of this section causes
the removal of a vehicle from that property by a towing service under division
(H)(2) of this section, the towing service, within two hours of removing the
vehicle, shall provide notice to the law enforcement agency of the municipal
corporation concerning all of the following:
            1.   The vehicle’s license number, make, model, and color;
            2.   The location from which the vehicle was removed;
            3.   The date and time the vehicle was removed;
            4.   The telephone number of the person from whom the vehicle may
be recovered;
            5.   The address of the place from which the vehicle may be
recovered.
         B.   The chief of a law enforcement agency of the municipal
corporation shall maintain a record of any vehicle removed from private
property in the chief's jurisdiction that is established as a private tow-away
zone of which the chief has received notice under this division (h). The record
shall include all information submitted by the towing service. The chief shall
provide any information in the record that pertains to a particular vehicle to
a person who, either in person or pursuant to a telephone call, identifies self
as the owner, operator, or lienholder of the vehicle and requests information
pertaining to the vehicle.
      (6)   A.   When a vehicle is removed from private property in accordance
with this section, within three business days of the removal, the towing
service or storage facility from which the vehicle may be recovered shall cause
a search to be made of either of the following to ascertain the identity of the
owner and any lienholder of the vehicle:
            1.   The records of the Bureau of Motor Vehicles;
            2.   The records of any vendor or vendors, approved by the
Registrar of Motor Vehicles, that are capable of providing real-time access to
owner and lienholder information.
         B.   The towing service or storage facility may search the National
Motor Vehicle Title Information System in order to determine the state in which
the vehicle is titled. The entity that provides the record of the owner and any
lienholder under this division shall ensure that such information is provided
in a timely manner.
         C.   Subject to division (h)(6)F. of this section, the towing service
or storage facility shall send notice to the vehicle owner and any known
lienholder as follows:
            1.   Within five business days after the applicable entity provides
the identity of the owner and any lienholder of the motor vehicle, if the
vehicle remains unclaimed, to the owner's and lienholder's last known address
by certified or express mail with return receipt requested, by certified mail
with electronic tracking, or by a commercial carrier service utilizing any form
of delivery requiring a signed receipt;
            2.   If the vehicle remains unclaimed 30 days after the first
notice is sent, in the manner required under division (h)(6)C.1. of this
section.
         D.   Sixty days after any notice sent pursuant to division (h)(6)C. of
this section is received, as evidenced by a receipt signed by any person, or
the towing service or storage facility has been notified that delivery was not
possible, the towing service or storage facility, if authorized under R.C. §
4505.101(B), may initiate the process for obtaining a certificate of title to
the motor vehicle as provided in that section.
         E.   A towing service or storage facility that does not receive a
signed receipt of notice, or a notification that delivery was not possible,
shall not obtain, and shall not attempt to obtain, a certificate of title to
the motor vehicle under R.C. § 4505.101(B).
         F.   With respect to a vehicle concerning which a towing service or
storage facility is not eligible to obtain title under R.C. § 4505.101, the
towing service or storage facility need only comply with the initial notice
required under division (h)(6)C.1. of this section.
      (7)   A.   The owner or lienholder of a vehicle that is removed under
division (h)(2) of this section may reclaim it upon both of the following:
            1.   Presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced by
a certificate of title to the vehicle, a certificate of registration for the
motor vehicle, or a lease agreement;
            2.   Payment of the following fees:
               a.   All applicable fees established by the Public Utilities
Commission in rules adopted under R.C. § 4921.25, except that the lienholder of
a vehicle may retrieve the vehicle without paying any storage fee for the
period of time that the vehicle was in the possession of the towing service or
storage facility prior to the date the lienholder received the notice sent
under division (h)(6)A.1. of this section;
               b.   If notice has been sent to the owner and lienholder as
described in division (h)(6) of this section, a processing fee of $25.
         B.   A towing service or storage facility in possession of a vehicle
that is removed under authority of division (h)(2) of this section shall show
the vehicle owner, operator, or lienholder who contests the removal of the
vehicle all photographs taken under division (h)(4) of this section. Upon
request, the towing service or storage facility shall provide a copy of all
photographs in the medium in which the photographs are stored, whether paper,
electronic, or otherwise.
         C.   When the owner of a vehicle towed under this section retrieves
the vehicle, the towing service or storage facility in possession of the
vehicle shall give the owner written notice that if the owner disputes that the
motor vehicle was lawfully towed, the owner may be able to file a civil action
under R.C. § 4513.611.
         D.   Upon presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced
by a certificate of title to the vehicle, a certificate of registration for the
motor vehicle, or a lease agreement, the owner of a vehicle that is removed
under authority of division (h)(2) of this section may retrieve any personal
items from the vehicle without retrieving the vehicle and without paying any
fee. The owner of the vehicle shall not retrieve any personal items from a
vehicle if it would endanger the safety of the owner, unless the owner agrees
to sign a waiver of liability. For purposes of division (h)(7)D. of this
section, “personal items” do not include any items that are attached to the
vehicle.
      (8)   No person shall remove, or cause the removal of, any vehicle from
private property that is established as a private tow-away zone under this
division (h) or store such a vehicle other than in accordance with this
division (h), or otherwise fail to comply with any applicable requirement of
this division (h).
      (9)   This section does not affect or limit the operation of divisions
(a) through (g) of this section, R.C. § 4513.60 or R.C. §§ 4513.61 to 4613.65
as they relate to property other than private property that is established as a
private tow-away zone under division (h)(1) of this section.
      (10)   Whoever violates division (h)(8) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
      (11)   As used in this section, “owner of a private property” or “owner
of the private property” includes, with respect to a private property, any of
the following:
         A.   Any person who holds title to the property;
         B.   Any person who is a lessee or sublessee with respect to a lease
or sublease agreement for the property;
         C.   A person who is authorized to manage the property;
         D.   A duly authorized agent of any person listed in divisions (h)
(11)A. to (h)(11)C. of this section.
(R.C. § 4513.601)
   (i)   If an owner of private property posts on the property in a conspicuous
manner a prohibition against parking on the property or conditions and
regulations under which parking is permitted, no person shall do either of the
following:
      (1)   Park a vehicle on the property without the owner’s consent;
      (2)   Park a vehicle on the property in violation of any condition or
regulation posted by the owner.
   (j)   Whoever violates division (i) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.681)
§ 452.06 UNATTENDED VEHICLES; DUTY TO LOCK IGNITION, REMOVE KEY, SET BRAKE,
ETC.
   (a)   (1)   No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit
it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition,
removing the key from the ignition, effectively setting the parking brake, and,
when the motor vehicle is standing upon any grade, turning the front wheels to
the curb or side of the highway.
      (2)   The requirements of this section relating to the stopping of the
engine, locking of the ignition, and removing the key from the ignition of a
motor vehicle do not apply to any of the following:
         A.   A motor vehicle that is parked on residential property;
         B.   A motor vehicle that is locked, regardless of where it is parked;
         C.   An emergency vehicle;
         D.   A public safety vehicle.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.661)
§ 452.07 OPENING DOORS ON SIDE AVAILABLE TO TRAFFIC.
   (a)   No person shall open the door of a vehicle on the side available to
moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, and can be done
without interfering with the movement of other traffic, nor shall any person
leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic for a
period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.70)
§ 452.08 SELLING, WASHING OR REPAIRING VEHICLE UPON ROADWAY.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle upon any roadway for the
principal purpose of:
   (a)   Displaying such vehicle for sale; or
   (b)   Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except repairs
necessitated by an emergency.
§ 452.09 TRUCK LOADING ZONES.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of
time, other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and
loading of materials, in any place marked as a truck loading zone during hours
when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case shall
the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes.
§ 452.10 BUS STOPS AND TAXICAB STANDS.
   (a)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a
bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, when any such stop or
stand has been officially designated and appropriately posted, except that the
driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of,
and while actually engaged in, loading or unloading passengers when such
stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about
to enter such zone, and then only for a period not to exceed three minutes, if
such stopping is not prohibited therein by posted signs.
   (b)   No operator of a bus shall stop, stand or park such vehicle upon any
street or other public way at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading
passengers or their baggage other than at a bus stop so designated and posted
as such, except in case of an emergency.
   (c)   No operator of a bus shall fail to enter a bus stop on a street or
other public way in such a manner that the bus when stopped to load or unload
passengers or baggage is in a position with the right front wheel of such
vehicle not further than 18 inches from the curb and the bus approximately
parallel to the curb so as not to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular
traffic.
   (d)   No operator of a taxicab shall stand or park such vehicle upon any
street or other public way at any place other than in a taxicab stand so
designated and posted as such. This provision shall not prevent the operator of
a taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or
parking provisions at any place for the purpose of, and while actually engaged
in, the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers.
§ 452.11 PARKING IN ALLEYS AND NARROW STREETS; EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street, other
than an alley, in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available
less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular
traffic, except that a driver may stop temporarily during the actual loading or
unloading of passengers or when directed to by a police officer or traffic
control signal.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided by law, no person shall stop, stand or
park a vehicle within an alley except while actually loading and unloading, and
then only for a period not to exceed 30 minutes.
§ 452.12 PARKING IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS GENERALLY.
   (a)   All parking in residential districts shall be on hard-paved areas.
   (b)   All off-street parking areas in residential districts shall be
surfaced with a pavement of bituminous-bound macadam, water-bound macadam,
asphaltic concrete, cement concrete, decorative brick pavers or other special
paving units.
   (c)   As used in this section, “residential district” means any district in
the Village defined as a residential district in the Zoning Code.
§ 452.13 PARKING OF COMMERCIAL AND HEAVY VEHICLES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   (a)   No person shall park or store a bus, commercial tractor, agricultural
tractor, semitrailer, load packer, pole trailer, moving van or any vehicle
licensed as a truck in excess of one-ton capacity on public or private property
in a residential district in the Village.
   (b)   As used in this section, RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT means any district in
the Village defined as a residential district in the Zoning Code.
   (c)   This section shall not apply to vehicles licensed as trucks up to one-
ton capacity and not used for commercial purposes, nor to commercial vehicles
on service calls or making deliveries.
(Ord. 19-1973, passed 9-25-1973)
§ 452.14 REGISTERED OWNER PRIMA FACIE LIABLE FOR UNLAWFUL PARKING.
   In any hearing on a charge of illegally parking a motor vehicle, testimony
that a vehicle bearing a certain license plate was found unlawfully parked as
prohibited by the provisions of this Traffic Code, and further testimony that
the record of the Ohio Registrar of Motor Vehicles shows that the license plate
was issued to the defendant, shall be prima facie evidence that the vehicle
which was unlawfully parked, was so parked by the defendant. A certified
registration copy, showing such fact, from the Registrar shall be proof of such
ownership.
§ 452.15 WAIVER.
   Any person charged with a violation of any provision of this chapter for
which payment of a prescribed fine may be made, may pay such sum in the manner
prescribed on the issued traffic ticket. Such payment shall be deemed a plea of
guilty, waiver of court appearance and acknowledgment of conviction of the
alleged offense and may be accepted in full satisfaction of the prescribed
penalty for such alleged violation. Payment of the prescribed fine need not be
accepted when laws prescribe that a certain number of such offenses shall
require court appearance.
§ 452.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
TITLE TEN: BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES AND SNOWMOBILES
CHAPTER 474: BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES GENERALLY
474.01   Code application to bicycles and motorized bicycles.
474.02   Riding upon seats; carrying packages; motorcycle handle bars; helmets
and glasses.
474.03   Attaching bicycles, motorized bicycles and motorcycles to other
vehicles.
474.04   Riding on right side of roadway; riding abreast.
474.05   Lights, signal devices and brakes on bicycles and motorized bicycles.
474.06   Riding bicycles upon sidewalks. (Reserved)
474.07   Safe riding regulations for bicycles and motorized bicycles.
474.08   Parking; locks.
474.09   Operation of motorized bicycles.
474.10   Operation of motorized bicycles on public and private property.
474.11   Parent’s responsibility.
474.12   Suspension of riding privileges; impounding of bicycles and motorized
bicycles.
474.13   Electric bicycles.
474.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar State law
   Bicycle defined - see TRAF.
402.05
   Motorcycle defined - see TRAF.
402.21
   Bicycles prohibited on freeways - see TRAF.
412.05
   Operation of vehicles on bicycle paths - see TRAF.
432.39
   Motorcycle operator’s license required - see TRAF.
436.01
   Motorcycle headlight - see TRAF.
438.03
   Motorcycle brakes - see TRAF.
438.19
   Off-highway motorcycles - see TRAF. Ch.
476
   Bicycles in parks - see S.U. & P.S.
1062.04
§ 474.01 CODE APPLICATION TO BICYCLES AND MOTORIZED BICYCLES.
   (a)   The provisions of this Traffic Code which are applicable to bicycles
and electric bicycles apply whenever a bicycle or electric bicycle is operated
upon any street or upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
   (b)   Except as provided in division (d) of this section, a bicycle operator
or electric bicycle operator who violates any provisions of this Traffic Code
described in division (a) of this section that is applicable to bicycles or
electric bicycles may be issued a ticket, citation, or summons by a law
enforcement officer for the violation in the same manner as the operator of a
motor vehicle would be cited for the same violation. A person who commits any
such violation while operating a bicycle or electric bicycle shall not have any
points assessed against the person’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, or probationary license under Ohio R.C.
4510.036.
   (c)   Except as provided in division (d) of this section, in the case of a
violation of any provision of this Traffic Code described in division (a) of
this section by a bicycle operator, electric bicycle operator, or motor vehicle
operator when the trier of fact finds that the violation by the motor vehicle
operator endangered the lives of bicycle riders or electric bicycle riders at
the time of the violation, the court, notwithstanding any provision of the Ohio
Revised Code to the contrary, may require the bicycle operator, electric
bicycle operator, or motor vehicle operator to take and successfully complete a
bicycling skills course approved by the court in addition to or in lieu of any
penalty otherwise prescribed by this Traffic Code or the Ohio Revised Code for
that violation.
   (d)   Divisions (b) and (c) of this section do not apply to violations of
Ohio R.C. 4511.19, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(ORC 4511.52)
   (e)   Every person operating a bicycle or motorized bicycle shall obey the
instructions of official traffic control devices and signals applicable to
vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
§ 474.02 RIDING UPON SEATS; CARRYING PACKAGES; MOTORCYCLE HANDLE BARS; HELMETS
AND GLASSES.
   (a)   For purposes of this section, SNOWMOBILE has the same meaning as given
that term in R.C. § 4519.01.
   (b)   (1)   No person operating a bicycle or electric bicycle shall ride
other than upon or astride the permanent and regular seat attached thereto or
carry any other person upon the bicycle or electric bicycle other than upon a
firmly attached and regular seat thereon, and no person shall ride upon a
bicycle or electric bicycle other than upon such a firmly attached and regular
seat.
      (2)   No person operating a motorcycle shall ride other than upon or
astride the permanent and regular seat or saddle attached thereto, or carry any
other person upon the motorcycle other than upon a firmly attached and regular
seat or saddle thereon, and no person shall ride upon a motorcycle other than
upon such a firmly attached and regular seat or saddle.
      (3)   No person shall ride upon a motorcycle that is equipped with a
saddle other than while sitting astride the saddle, facing forward, with one
leg on each side of the motorcycle.
      (4)   No person shall ride upon a motorcycle that is equipped with a seat
other than while sitting upon the seat.
      (5)   No person operating a bicycle or electric bicycle shall carry any
package, bundle or article that prevents the driver from keeping at least one
hand upon the handlebars.
      (6)   No bicycle, electric bicycle, or motorcycle shall be used to carry
more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped.
No motorcycle shall be operated on a highway when the handlebars rise higher
than the shoulders of the operator when the operator is seated in the
operator’s seat or saddle.
   (c)   (1)   Except as provided in division (c)(3) of this section, no person
shall operate or be a passenger on a snowmobile or motorcycle without using
safety glasses or other protective eye device. Except as provided in division
(c)(3) of this section, no person who is under the age of 18 years, or who
holds a motorcycle operator’s endorsement or license bearing a “novice”
designation that is currently in effect as provided in R.C. § 4507.13, shall
operate a motorcycle on a highway, or be a passenger on a motorcycle, unless
wearing a protective helmet on the person’s head, and no other person shall be
a passenger on a motorcycle operated by such a person unless similarly wearing
a protective helmet. The helmet, safety glasses, or other protective eye device
shall conform with rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety. The
provisions of this paragraph or a violation thereof shall not be used in the
trial of any civil action.
      (2)   A.   Except as provided in division (c)(3) of this section, no
person shall operate a motorcycle with a valid temporary instruction permit and
temporary instruction permit identification card issued by the Registrar of
Motor Vehicles pursuant to R.C. § 4507.05 unless the person, at the time of
such operation, is wearing on the person’s head a protective helmet that
conforms with rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety.
         B.   No person shall operate a motorcycle with a valid temporary
instruction permit and temporary instruction permit identification card issued
by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles pursuant to R.C. § 4507.05 in any of the
following circumstances:
            1.   At any time when lighted lights are required by R.C. § 4513.03
(A)(1);
            2.   While carrying a passenger;
            3.   On any limited access highway or heavily congested roadway.
      (3)   Divisions (c)(1) and (c)(2)A. of this section do not apply to a
person who operates or is a passenger in an autocycle or cab-enclosed
motorcycle when the occupant compartment top is in place enclosing the
occupants.
   (d)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the carrying
of a child in a seat or trailer that is designed for carrying children and is
firmly attached to the bicycle or electric bicycle.
   (e)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (b) or (c)(1) or (c)(2) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates division (b) or (c)(1) or (c)(2) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates division (b) or (c)(1) or
(c)(2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.53)
§ 474.03 ATTACHING BICYCLES, MOTORIZED BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES TO OTHER
VEHICLES.
   (a)   No person riding upon any motorcycle, bicycle, motorized bicycle,
coaster, roller skates, sled or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself to
any vehicle upon a roadway.
   (b)   No operator shall knowingly permit any person riding upon any
motorcycle, bicycle, motorized bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled or toy
vehicle to attach the same or himself to any vehicle while it is moving upon a
roadway. This section does not apply to the towing of a disabled vehicle.
§ 474.04 RIDING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY; RIDING ABREAST.
   (a)   Every person operating a bicycle or electric bicycle or motorized
bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to the right side of the roadway as
practicable, obeying all traffic rules applicable to vehicles and exercising
due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same
direction.
   (b)   Persons riding bicycles, motorized bicycles, electric bicycles, or
motorcycles upon a roadway shall ride not more than two abreast in a single
lane, except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of
bicycles, electric bicycles, motorized bicycles or motorcycles.
   (c)   This section does not require a person operating a bicycle or electric
bicycle to ride at the edge of the roadway when it is unreasonable or unsafe to
do so. Conditions that may require riding away from the edge of the roadway
include when necessary to avoid fixed or moving objects, parked or moving
vehicles, surface hazards, or if it otherwise is unsafe or impracticable to do
so, including if the lane is too narrow for the bicycle or electric bicycle and
an overtaking vehicle to travel safely side by side within the lane.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (e)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.55)
§ 474.05 LIGHTS, SIGNAL DEVICES AND BRAKES ON BICYCLES AND MOTORIZED BICYCLES.
   (a)   Every bicycle, when in use at the times specified in §
438.02, shall be equipped with a lamp on the front that shall emit a white
light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front and with a red
reflector on the rear of a type approved by the Ohio Director of Public Safety
that shall be visible from all distances from 100 feet to 600 feet to the rear
when directly in front of lawful lower beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle
and a lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear
shall be used in addition to the red reflector. Lights for motorized bicycles
shall be as provided in Section 438.02(a).
   (b)   No person shall operate a bicycle or motorized bicycle unless it is
equipped with a bell or other device capable of giving a signal audible for a
distance of at least 100 feet, except that a bicycle or motorized bicycle shall
not be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a bicycle or motorized
bicycle any siren or whistle.
   (c)   Every bicycle shall be equipped with an adequate brake when used on a
street or highway. Brakes for motorized bicycles shall be as provided in §
438.19.
§ 474.06 (RESERVED)
§ 474.07 SAFE RIDING REGULATIONS FOR BICYCLES AND MOTORIZED BICYCLES.
   (a)   Whenever a person is riding a bicycle or motorized bicycle upon a
sidewalk or street, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian
and shall give an audible signal before attempting to overtake and pass a
pedestrian or another bicycle or motorized bicycle. This audible signal must be
given only by bell or other warning device capable of giving an audible signal
and shall be given at such a distance and in such a manner as not to startle
the person being overtaken and passed.
   (b)   No person shall ride a bicycle or motorized bicycle across or through
any intersection involving a through street. Such intersections are to be
crossed by walking the bicycle or motorized bicycle across or through the
intersection.
   (c)   Whenever a person is riding a bicycle or motorized bicycle upon a
sidewalk, the person, before overtaking and passing a blind person carrying a
white or metallic cane, shall dismount and overtake or pass on foot.
   (d)   When a bicycle or motorized bicycle is operated on the street, the
operator shall give hand signals before turning, changing lanes or stopping.
Such signals shall conform with §
432.14.
   (e)   Every rider of a bicycle or motorized bicycle shall exercise due care
to avoid colliding with any pedestrian or any vehicle upon any roadway,
sidewalk or bicycle or motorized bicycle path, or endangering the life, limb or
property of any person while in the lawful use of the streets, sidewalks or any
other private or public property.
   (f)   No person shall operate a bicycle or motorized bicycle at a speed
greater than is reasonable and proper under the conditions then existing.
   (g)   The operator of a bicycle or motorized bicycle emerging from or
turning into an alley, driveway or building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk
or the sidewalk area extending across any alley, driveway or building, yield
the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on such sidewalk area. Upon
entering the street, such operator shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles
approaching on such street.
   (h)   No person shall engage in trick riding or operate a bicycle or
motorized bicycle without both hands upon the handle grips except when
necessary to give the hand signals required herein.
§ 474.08 PARKING; LOCKS.
   (a)   No person shall park a bicycle or motorized bicycle upon a sidewalk in
such a manner as to interfere with pedestrian traffic or damage the property of
another.
   (b)   No person shall park a bicycle or motorized bicycle upon a roadway in
such a manner as to interfere with vehicular traffic.
   (c)   No bicycle or motorized bicycle shall remain unlocked when parked upon
any public way or place.
§ 474.09 OPERATION OF MOTORIZED BICYCLES.
   (a)   No person shall operate a motorized bicycle upon a highway or any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking, unless all of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The person is 14 or 15 years of age and holds a valid probationary
motorized bicycle license issued after the person has passed the test provided
for in this section, or the person is 16 years of age or older and holds either
a valid commercial driver’s license issued under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4506 or a
driver’s license issued under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4507 or a valid motorized
bicycle license issued after the person has passed the test provided for in
this section, except that if a person is 16 years of age, has a valid
probationary motorized bicycle license and desires a motorized bicycle license,
the person is not required to comply with the testing requirements provided for
in this section.
      (2)   The motorized bicycle is equipped in accordance with the rules
adopted under division (b) of this section and is in proper working order.
      (3)   The person, if under 18 years of age, is wearing a protective
helmet on the person’s head with the chin strap properly fastened and the
motorized bicycle is equipped with a rearview mirror.
      (4)   The person operates the motorized bicycle when practicable within
three feet of the right edge of the roadway obeying all traffic rules
applicable to vehicles.
   (b)   The Director of Public Safety, subject to Ohio R.C. Chapter 119, shall
adopt and promulgate rules concerning protective helmets, the equipment of
motorized bicycles, and the testing and qualifications of persons who do not
hold a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license. The test shall be as near
as practicable to the examination required for a motorcycle operator’s
endorsement under Ohio R.C. 4507.11. The test shall also require the operator
to give an actual demonstration of the operator’s ability to operate and
control a motorized bicycle by driving one under the supervision of an
examining officer.
   (c)   Every motorized bicycle license expires on the birthday of the
applicant in the fourth or eighth year after the date it is issued, based on
the period of renewal requested by the applicant. No motorized bicycle license
shall be issued for a period longer than eight years. A person who is 65 years
of age or older may only apply for a motorized bicycle license that expires on
the birthday of the applicant in the fourth year after the date it is issued.
   (d)   No person operating a motorized bicycle shall carry another person
upon the motorized bicycle.
   (e)   The protective helmet and rearview mirror required by division (a)(3)
of this section shall, on and after January 1, 1985, conform with rules adopted
by the Director under division (b) of this section.
(ORC 4511.521)
Statutory reference:
   Suspension of probationary motorized bicycle license by the State, see Ohio
R.C. 4510.34
§ 474.10 OPERATION OF MOTORIZED BICYCLES ON PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   No person shall operate a motorized bicycle:
   (a)   On sidewalks or park land; or
   (b)   On private property, without the written consent of the legal occupier
of such private property unless the operator, a parent or legal guardian owns
or legally controls such private property.
(Ord. 48-1980, passed 1-13-1981)
§ 474.11 PARENT’S RESPONSIBILITY.
   (a)   No parent of any child or guardian of any ward shall authorize or
knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of
this chapter.
(Adopting Ordinance)
   (b)   The parent, legal guardian or any other person permitting a violation
of or noncompliance with any of the provisions of this chapter by a juvenile
shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor as an aider and abettor of such
violation or noncompliance and shall be charged as a principal offender. Notice
of this section shall be prima-facie knowledge.
(Ord. 48-1980, passed 1-13-1981)
§ 474.12 SUSPENSION OF RIDING PRIVILEGES; IMPOUNDING OF BICYCLES AND MOTORIZED
BICYCLES.
   In addition to the penalties provided in §§
408.01 and
408.02, a court may prohibit any person who violates or fails to comply with
any of the provisions of this chapter relating to bicycles or motorized
bicycles from riding a bicycle or motorized bicycle for a period not to exceed
three months. In addition, any person violating or failing to comply with any
of the provisions of this chapter relating to bicycles or motorized bicycles
may be punished by having his or her bicycle or motorized bicycle impounded for
a period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 474.13 ELECTRIC BICYCLES.
   (a)   (1)   On and after January 1, 2020, manufacturers and distributors of
electric bicycles shall permanently affix a label, in a prominent location, to
each electric bicycle. The label shall specify whether the electric bicycle is
a class 1, class 2, or class 3 electric bicycle, the top assisted speed that
the electric bicycle is capable of reaching, and the motor wattage of the
electric bicycle.
      (2)   No person shall modify an electric bicycle in a manner that changes
the top assisted speed that the electric bicycle is capable of reaching unless
the person also modifies the label required under division (a)(1) of this
section to reflect the modification.
   (b)   (1)   The manufacturer of an electric bicycle shall ensure that the
electric bicycle complies with the equipment and manufacturing requirements for
bicycles established by the consumer product safety commission under 16 C.F.R.
§§ 1512 et seq.
      (2)   The manufacturer shall manufacture all class 1 electric bicycles
and class 3 electric bicycles so that when the rider ceases pedaling the
electric motor ceases to provide assistance. The manufacturer shall manufacture
all class 2 electric bicycles so that when the rider applies the brakes or
releases or activates a switch or similar mechanism the electric motor ceases
to provide assistance.
      (3)   All class 3 electric bicycles shall be equipped with a speedometer
that displays the speed of the electric bicycle in miles per hour.
   (c)   (1)   The operation of a class 1 electric bicycle and a class 2
electric bicycle is permitted on a path set aside for the exclusive use of
bicycles or on a shared-use path, unless the county, township, municipal
corporation, other local authority, or state agency as defined in R.C. § 1.60
with control over the path by resolution, ordinance, or rule prohibits the use
of a class 1 electric bicycle or class 2 electric bicycle on such a path.
      (2)   No person shall operate a class 3 electric bicycle on a path set
aside for the exclusive use of bicycles or a shared-use path unless that path
is within or adjacent to a highway or the county, township, municipal
corporation, or local authority, or state agency as defined in R.C. § 1.60 with
control over the path by resolution, ordinance, or rule authorizes the use of a
class 3 electric bicycle on such a path.
      (3)   No person shall operate a class 1 electric bicycle, a class 2
electric bicycle, or a class 3 electric bicycle on a path that is intended to
be used primarily for mountain biking, hiking, equestrian use, or other similar
uses, or any other single track or natural surface trail that has historically
been reserved for non-motorized use, unless the county, township, municipal
corporation, other local authority, or state agency as defined in R.C. § 1.60
with control over the path by resolution, ordinance, or rule authorizes the use
of a class 1 electric bicycle, a class 2 electric bicycle, or a class 3
electric bicycle on such a path.
      (4)   Divisions (c)(2) and (c)(3) of this section do not apply to a law
enforcement officer, or other person sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic
laws of the state, using an electric bicycle while in the performance of the
officer's duties.
   (d)   (1)   No person under 16 years of age shall operate a class 3 electric
bicycle; however, a person under 16 years of age may ride as a passenger on a
class 3 electric bicycle that is designed to accommodate passengers.
      (2)   No person shall operate or be a passenger on a class 3 electric
bicycle unless the person is wearing a protective helmet that meets the
standards established by the Consumer Product Safety Commission or the American
Society for Testing and Materials.
   (e)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever operates
an electric bicycle in a manner that is prohibited under division (c) of this
section and whoever violates division (d) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been
convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   The offenses established under division (e)(1) of this section are
strict liability offenses and strict liability is a culpable mental state for
purposes of R.C. § 2901.20. The designation of these offenses as strict
liability offenses shall not be construed to imply that any other offense, for
which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict liability
offense.
(R.C. § 4511.522)
§ 474.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.)
CHAPTER 476: SNOWMOBILES, OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLES AND ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLES
476.01   Definitions.
476.02   Equipment.
476.03   Code application; prohibited operation.
476.04   Permitted operation.
476.05   Licensing requirements of operator.
476.06   Accident reports.
476.07   Local control within police power.
476.08   Registration of vehicles.
476.09   Operation of off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle without
certificate of title; failure to surrender.
476.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar State law
   Power of court to impound registration certificates for certain violations -
see Ohio R.C. 4519.47
   Street or highway defined - see TRAF.
402.48
   Operation on bicycle paths - see TRAF.
432.41
   Bicycles and motorcycles generally - see TRAF. Ch.
444
   Required usage of helmets and safety glasses - see TRAF.
444.02
§ 476.01 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLE. Any self- propelled vehicle designed primarily
for cross- country travel on land and water, or on more than one type of
terrain, and steered by wheels or caterpillar treads, or any combination
thereof, including vehicles that operate on a cushion of air, vehicles commonly
known as all-terrain vehicles, all season vehicles, mini-bikes and trail bikes.
The term does not include a utility vehicle as defined in Ohio R.C. 4501.01 or
any vehicle principally used in playing golf, any motor vehicle or aircraft
required to be registered under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4503 or Ohio R.C. Chapter
4561, and any vehicle excepted from definition as a motor vehicle by Ohio R.C.
4501.01(B).
   (b)   DEALER. Any person or firm engaged in the business of manufacturing or
selling snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, or all- purpose vehicles at
wholesale or retail, or who rents, leases or otherwise furnishes snowmobiles,
off- highway motorcycles, or all-purpose vehicles for hire.
   (c)   ELECTRONIC and ELECTRONIC RECORD. Have the same meanings as in Ohio
R.C. 4501.01.
   (d)   ELECTRONIC DEALER. A dealer whom the Registrar of Motor Vehicles
designates under Ohio R.C. 4519.511.
   (e)   INTERSTATE HIGHWAY. Any part of the interstate system of highways as
defined in division (e), 90 Stat. 431 (1976), 23 U.S.C. 103, as amended.
   (f)   LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAY OR FREEWAY. Have the same meanings as in Ohio
R.C. 5511.02.
   (g)   MINI-TRUCK. A vehicle that has four wheels, is propelled by an
electric motor with a rated power of 7,500 watts or less or an internal
combustion engine with a piston displacement capacity of 660 cubic centimeters
or less, has a total dry weight of 900 to 2,200 pounds, contains an enclosed
cabin and a seat for the vehicle operator, resembles a pickup truck or van with
a cargo area or bed located at the rear of the vehicle, and was not originally
manufactured to meet federal motor vehicle safety standards.
   (h)   OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLE. Every motorcycle, as defined in Ohio R.C.
4511.01, that is designed to be operated primarily on lands other than a street
or highway.
   (i)   OPERATOR. Any person who operates or is in actual physical control of
a snowmobile, off- highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle.
   (j)   OWNER. Any person or firm, other than a lienholder or dealer, having
title to a snowmobile, off- highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle, or
other right to the possession thereof.
   (k)   PROOF OF FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
4509.01.
   (l)   SNOWMOBILE. Any self-propelled vehicle designed primarily for use on
snow or ice, and steered by skis, runners or caterpillar treads.
   (m)   STATE HIGHWAY and STATE ROUTE. Have the same meaning as in R.C. §
4511.01.
   (n)   STREET or HIGHWAY. Have the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4511.01.
(R.C. § 4519.01)
§ 476.02 EQUIPMENT.
   (a)   In addition to any rules or regulations promulgated by the Ohio
Director of Public Safety pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4519.20 and Ohio R.C. Chapter
119, equipment of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, and all-purpose
vehicles shall include but not necessarily be limited to requirements for the
following items of equipment:
      (1)   At least one headlight having a minimum candlepower of sufficient
intensity to reveal persons and objects at a distance of at least 100 feet
ahead under normal atmospheric conditions during hours of darkness;
      (2)   At least one red tail light having a minimum candlepower of
sufficient intensity to be plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet to the
rear under normal atmospheric conditions during hours of darkness;
      (3)   Every snowmobile, while traveling on packed snow, shall be capable
of carrying a driver who weighs 175 pounds or more, and, while carrying such
driver, be capable of stopping in no more than 40 feet from an initial steady
speed of 20 miles per hour, or locking its traction belt; and
      (4)   A muffler system capable of precluding the emission of excessive
smoke or exhaust fumes, and of limiting the engine noise of vehicles. On
snowmobiles manufactured after January 1, 1973, such requirement shall include
sound dampening equipment such that noise does not exceed 82 decibels on the
“A” scale at 50 feet as measured according to SAE J192 (September 1970).
   (b)   No person shall operate any snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or
all-purpose vehicle in violation of this section, except that equipment
specified in division (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this section shall not be required
on snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, or all-purpose vehicles operated
during the daylight hours.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (b) of this section shall be fined not more than fifty dollars
($50.00). If the offender within the preceding year previously has committed a
violation of division (b) of this section or of Ohio R.C. 4519.20(B), whoever
violates division (b) of this section shall be fined not less than fifteen
dollars ($15.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), imprisoned not
more than three days, or both.
(R.C. § 4519.20)
§ 476.03 CODE APPLICATION; PROHIBITED OPERATION.
   (a)   The applicable provisions of this traffic code apply to the operation
of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, and all-purpose vehicles, except that
no person shall operate a snowmobile, off- highway motorcycle, or all-purpose
vehicle as follows:
      (1)   On any state highway, including a limited access highway or freeway
or the right-of-way thereof, except for emergency travel during such time and
in such manner as the Ohio Director of Public Safety designates or except as
authorized by R.C. § 4519.41(F);
      (2)   On any private property, or in any nursery or planting area,
without the permission of the owner or other person having the right to
possession of the property;
      (3)   On any land or waters controlled by the State, except at those
locations where a sign has been posted permitting such operation;
      (4)   On the tracks or right-of-way of any operating railroad;
      (5)   While transporting any firearm, bow or other implement for hunting
that is not unloaded and securely encased;
      (6)   For the purpose of chasing, pursuing, capturing or killing any
animal or wild fowl; or
      (7)   During the time from sunset to sunrise, unless displaying lighted
lights as required by Ohio R.C. 4519.20 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisoned
not less than three nor more than 30 days, or both.
(R.C. § 4519.40)
§ 476.04 PERMITTED OPERATION.
   Snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, and all- purpose vehicles may be
operated as follows:
   (a)   To make a crossing of a highway, other than a highway as designated in
Ohio R.C. 4519.40(A)(1) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
whenever the crossing can be made in safety and will not interfere with the
movement of vehicular traffic approaching from any direction on the highway,
and provided that the operator yields the right-of-way to any approaching
traffic that presents an immediate hazard;
   (b)   On highways in the county or township road systems whenever the local
authority having jurisdiction over such highways so permits;
   (c)   Off and alongside street or highway for limited distances from the
point of unloading from a conveyance to the point at which the snowmobile, off-
highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle is intended and authorized to be
operated;
   (d)   On the berm or shoulder of a highway, other than a highway as
designated in Ohio R.C. 4519.40(A)(1) or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, when the terrain permits such operation to be undertaken safely and
without the necessity of entering any traffic lane;
   (e)   On the berm or shoulder of a county or township road, while traveling
from one area of operation of the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-
purpose vehicle to another such area.
   (f)   For snowmobiles without metal studded tracks and all-purpose vehicles,
on state highways located on an island in Lake Erie, including limited access
highways and freeways, between the first day of November and the thirtieth day
of April, provided that all of the following conditions apply:
      (1)   The operator has a valid driver’s license as required under R.C. §
4519.44.
      (2)   The snowmobile or all- purpose vehicle is in compliance with rules
governing safety equipment adopted under R.C. § 4519.20.
      (3)   The owner of the snowmobile or all-purpose vehicle maintains proof
of financial responsibility for both on-road and off-road use of the snowmobile
or all-purpose vehicle.
      (4)   The operator obeys all traffic rules and regulations.
(R.C. § 4519.41)
§ 476.05 LICENSING REQUIREMENTS OF OPERATOR.
   (a)   No person who does not hold a valid, current motor vehicle driver’s or
commercial driver’s license, motorcycle operator’s endorsement or probationary
license, issued under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4506 or Ohio R.C. Chapter 4507 or a
valid, current driver’s license issued by another jurisdiction, shall operate a
snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all- purpose vehicle on any street or
highway in this Municipality, on any portion of the right-of-way thereof, or on
any public land or waters.
   (b)   No person who is less than 16 years of age shall operate a snowmobile,
off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle on any land or waters other than
private property or waters owned by or leased to the person’s parent or
guardian, unless accompanied by another person who is 18 years of age or older,
and who holds a license as provided in division (a) of this section, except
that the Ohio Department of Natural Resources may permit such operation on
State controlled land under its jurisdiction when such person is less than 16
years of age but is 12 years of age or older and is accompanied by a parent or
guardian who is a licensed driver 18 years of age or older.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisoned
not less than three nor more than 30 days, or both.
(ORC 4519.44)
§ 476.06 ACCIDENT REPORTS.
   (a)   The operator of a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose
vehicle involved in any accident resulting in bodily injury to or death of any
person or damage to the property of any person in excess of one hundred dollars
($100.00) shall report the accident within 48 hours to the Chief of Police, and
within 30 days shall forward a written report of the accident to the Ohio
Registrar of Motor Vehicles on a form prescribed by the Registrar. If the
operator is physically incapable of making the reports and there is another
participant in the accident not so incapacitated, the participant shall make
the reports. In the event there is no other participant, and the operator is
other than the owner, the owner, within the prescribed periods of time, shall
make the reports.
   (b)   Any law enforcement officer or other person authorized by Ohio R.C.
4519.42 and 4519.43 who investigates or receives information of an accident
involving a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle shall
forward to the Registrar a written report of the accident within 48 hours.
(ORC 4519.46)
§ 476.07 LOCAL CONTROL WITHIN POLICE POWER.
   Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the Municipality from
regulating the operation of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycle, and all-
purpose vehicles on streets and highways and other public property under
municipal jurisdiction, and within the reasonable exercise of the police power,
except that no registration or licensing of any snowmobile, off-highway
motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle required to be registered or titled under
Ohio R.C. Chapter 4519 shall be required.
(ORC 4519.48)
§ 476.08 REGISTRATION OF VEHICLES.
   (a)   (1)   Except as provided in division (b), (c) and (d) of this section,
no person shall operate any snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle within this municipality unless the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle
or all-purpose vehicle is registered and numbered in accordance with R.C. §§
4519.03 and 4519.04.
      (2)   Except as provided in R.C. § 4511.215 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, no registration is required for a mini-truck that is
operated within this state. A mini-truck may be operated only in accordance
with R.C. § 4511.215 and R.C. § 4519.401, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
   (b)   (1)   No registration is required for a snowmobile or off-highway
motorcycle that is operated exclusively upon lands owned by the owner of the
snowmobile or off-highway motorcycle, or on lands to which the owner of the
snowmobile or off- highway motorcycle has a contractual right.
      (2)   No registration is required for an all- purpose vehicle that is
used primarily for agricultural purposes when the owner qualifies for the
current agricultural use valuation tax credit, unless it is to be used on any
public land, trail, or right-of-way.
      (3)   Any all-purpose vehicle exempted from registration under division
(b)(2) of this section and operated for agricultural purposes may use public
roads and rights-of-way when traveling from one farm field to another, when
such use does not violate R.C. § 4519.41.
      (4)   No registration is required for a snowmobile or all-purpose vehicle
that is operated on a state highway as authorized by R.C. § 4519.41(F).
   (c)   No registration is required for a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle
or all-purpose vehicle owned and used in this state by a resident of another
state whenever that state has in effect a registration law similar to R.C.
Chapter 4519 and the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle
is properly registered under that state’s law. Any snowmobile, off-highway
motorcycle or all- purpose vehicle owned and used in this state by a resident
of a state not having a registration law similar to R.C. Chapter 4519 shall
comply with R.C. § 4519.09.
   (d)   No registration is required for a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle
or all-purpose vehicle owned and used in this municipality by the United
States, another state or a political subdivision thereof, but the snowmobile,
off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle shall display the name of the
owner thereon.
   (e)   The owner or operator of any all-purpose vehicle operated or used upon
the waters in this municipality shall comply with R.C. Chapters 1547 and 1548
relative to the operation of watercraft.
   (f)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section shall be fined not less
than $50 nor more than $100.
(R.C. § 4519.02)
Statutory reference:
   Destruction or disposal of vehicle; transfer of ownership; change of
address; loss of certificate, see Ohio R.C. 4519.05 Registration of emergency
vehicles, see Ohio R.C. 4519.08
   Registration procedure, see Ohio R.C. 4519.03
   Temporary license placards and fees, see Ohio R.C. 4519.10
   Temporary operating permit for certain nonresidents, see Ohio R.C. 4519.09
§ 476.09 OPERATION OF OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLE OR ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLE WITHOUT
CERTIFICATE OF TITLE; FAILURE TO SURRENDER.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Operate in this State an off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle without having a certificate of title for the off-highway motorcycle or
all-purpose vehicle if such a certificate is required by Ohio R.C. Chapter 4519
to be issued for the off- highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle, or, if a
physical certificate of title has not been issued for it, operate an off-
highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle knowing that the ownership
information related to the motorcycle or vehicle has not been entered into the
automated title processing system by a Clerk of a Court of Common Pleas.
      (2)   Operate in this Municipality an off- highway motorcycle or all-
purpose vehicle if a certificate of title to the off-highway motorcycle or all-
purpose vehicle has been issued and then has been canceled.
      (3)   Fail to surrender any certificate of title upon cancellation of it
by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles and notice of the cancellation as prescribed
in Ohio R.C. Chapter 4519.
      (4)   Fail to surrender the certificate of title to a Clerk of a Court of
Common Pleas as provided in Ohio R.C. Chapter 4519, in case of the destruction
or dismantling of, or change in, the off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle described in the certificate of title.
      (5)   Violate any provision of Ohio R.C. 4519.51 to 4519.70 for which no
penalty is otherwise provided or any lawful rules adopted pursuant to those
sections.
      (6)   Operate in this State an off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle knowing that the certificate of title to or ownership of the motorcycle
or vehicle as otherwise reflected in the automated title processing system has
been canceled.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than two hundred
dollars ($200.00), or imprisoned not more than 90 days, or both.
(ORC 4519.66)
§ 476.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
PART SIX: GENERAL OFFENSES CODE
         
Chap. 606. General Provisions; Administration and Enforcement.
         
Chap. 612. Alcoholic Beverages.
         
Chap. 618. Animals.
         
Chap. 624. Drugs.
         
Chap. 630. Gambling.
         
Chap. 636. Offenses Relating to Persons.
         
Chap. 642. Offenses Relating to Property.
         
Chap. 648. Peace Disturbances.
         
Chap. 654. Railroads.
         
Chap. 660. Safety, Sanitation and Health.
         
Chap. 666. Sex Related Offenses.
         
Chap. 668. Trees, Weeds and Grass.
         
Chap. 672. Weapons and Explosives.
         
Chap. 698. Penalties and Sentencing.
CHAPTER 606: GENERAL PROVISIONS; ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
606.01   Definitions.
606.02   Culpable mental states.
606.03   Classification of offenses.
606.04   Offenses defined.
606.05   Rules of construction.
606.055   Criminal law jurisdiction.
606.06   Limitation on criminal prosecutions.
606.07   Requirements for criminal liability; voluntary intoxication.
606.08   Organizational criminal liability.
606.09   Personal accountability for organizational conduct.
606.10   Falsification.
606.105   False report of child abuse or neglect.
606.11   Compounding a crime.
606.12   Failure to report a crime or death.
606.13   Failure to aid a law enforcement officer.
606.14   Obstructing official business.
606.15   Obstructing justice.
606.16   Resisting arrest.
606.165   Compliance with lawful order of police officer; fleeing.
606.17   Having an unlawful interest in a public contract.
606.18   Soliciting or receiving improper compensation.
606.19   Dereliction of duty.
606.20   Interfering with civil rights.
606.21   Attempts.
606.22   Complicity.
606.23   Detention of shoplifters and those committing motion picture piracy;
protection of institutional property.
606.24   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property held by police
division.
606.25   Impersonating an officer.
606.26   Display of law enforcement agency emblem.
606.27   Misrepresenting private publications as official; soliciting
advertising.
606.28   Using sham legal process.
606.29   Failure to disclose personal information.
606.30   Misuse of 9-1-1 system.
606.31   Self defense: limitations on duty to retreat prior to using force.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar State law
   Definition of “imprisoned” - see Ohio R.C. 1.05
   Statute of limitations for income tax violations - see Ohio R.C. 718.06
   Burden and degree of proof - see Ohio R.C. 2901.05
   Venue - see Ohio R.C. 2901.12, 2931.29 et seq.
   Arrest without warrant for misdemeanor - see Ohio R.C. 2935.03
   Procedure on affidavit or complaint; withdrawal of unexecuted warrants - see
Ohio R.C. 2935.10
   Right of trial by jury - see Ohio R.C. 2945.17
   Time within which hearing or trial must be held - see Ohio R.C. 2945.71
   Trials - see Ohio R.C. 2945.71 et seq.
       Satisfaction of fine; credit for time served - see Ohio R.C. 2947.14
   Registration of sex offenders in cities and counties - see Ohio R.C. 2950.01
et seq.
   Criteria for probation; conditions of probation - see Ohio R.C. 2951.02    
   Treatment of drug dependent persons in lieu of conviction - see Ohio R.C.
2951.041
   Cordoning off riot areas; prohibiting sales of firearms and explosives - see
Ohio R.C. 3761.16
   Municipal Probation Service Fund - see ADM.
290.03
   Inspections for stolen vehicles and vehicle parts - see TRAF.
404.06
   Reports of vehicle accidents - see TRAF.
436.11 et seq.,
476.06
   Registration of dogs - see GEN. OFF.
618.08
   Rabies quarantine - see GEN. OFF.
618.11
   Justifiable use of force to suppress riot - see GEN. OFF.
648.03
   Misconduct at an emergency - see GEN. OFF.
648.06
   Making false alarms - see GEN. OFF.
648.08
   Rules of evidence in sex related offenses - see GEN. OFF.
666.10
   Declaratory judgment in sex related offenses - see GEN. OFF.
666.15
   Injunction and abatement of nuisance in sex related offenses - see GEN. OFF.
666.16
   License or permit to possess dangerous ordnance - see GEN. OFF.
672.07 
   Penalties and sentencing - see GEN. OFF. Ch.
698
§ 606.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   CAMPAIGN COMMITTEE, CONTRIBUTION, LEGISLATIVE CAMPAIGN FUND, POLITICAL
ACTION COMMITTEE, POLITICAL CONTRIBUTING ENTITY, and POLITICAL PARTY. The same
meanings as in Ohio R.C. 3517.01.
   (b)   CONTRABAND. Any property that is illegal for a person to acquire or
possess under a statute, ordinance, or rule, or that a trier of fact lawfully
determines to be illegal to possess by reason of the property’s involvement in
an offense. CONTRABAND includes, but is not limited to, all of the following:
      (1)   Any controlled substance, as defined in Ohio R.C. 3719.01, or any
device or paraphernalia related thereto;
      (2)   Any unlawful gambling device or paraphernalia;
      (3)   Any dangerous ordnance or obscene material.
   (c)   DEADLY FORCE. Any force that carries a substantial risk that it will
proximately result in the death of any person.
   (d)   DETENTION. Arrest; confinement in any vehicle subsequent to an arrest;
confinement in any public or private facility for custody of persons charged
with or convicted of crime in this State or another State or under the laws of
the United States or alleged or found to be a delinquent child or unruly child
in this State or another State or under the laws of the United States;
hospitalization, institutionalization, or confinement in any public or private
facility that is ordered pursuant to or under the authority of Ohio R.C.
2945.37, 2945.371, 2945.38, 2945.39, 2945.40, 2945.401 or 2945.402; confinement
in any vehicle for transportation to or from any facility of any of those
natures; detention for extradition or deportation; except as provided in this
division, supervision by any employee of any facility of any of those natures
that is incidental to hospitalization, institutionalization, or confinement in
the facility but that occurs outside the facility; supervision by an employee
of the Department of Rehabilitation and Correction of a person on any type of
release from a State correctional institution; or confinement in any vehicle,
airplane, or place while being returned from outside of this State into this
State by a private person or entity pursuant to a contract entered into under
Ohio R.C. 311.29(E) or Ohio R.C. 5149.03(B). For a person confined in a county
jail who participates in a county jail industry program pursuant to Ohio R.C.
5147.30, DETENTION includes time spent at an assigned work site and going to
and from the work site.
   (e)   DETENTION FACILITY. Any public or private place used for the
confinement of a person charged with or convicted of any crime in this State or
another State or under the laws of the United States or alleged or found to be
a delinquent child or an unruly child in this State or another State or under
the laws of the United States.
   (f)   FORCE. Any violence, compulsion, or constraint physically exerted by
any means upon or against a person or thing.
   (g)   LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any of the following:
      (1)   A sheriff, deputy sheriff, constable, police officer of a township
or joint police district, marshal, deputy marshal, municipal police officer,
member of a police force employed by a metropolitan housing authority under
Ohio R.C. 3735.31(D) or State highway patrol trooper.
      (2)   An officer, agent, or employee of the State or any of its agencies,
instrumentalities, or political subdivisions, upon whom, by statute, a duty to
conserve the peace or to enforce all or certain laws is imposed and the
authority to arrest violators is conferred, within the limits of such statutory
duty and authority.
      (3)   The Mayor, in a capacity as chief conservator of the peace within
the Municipality.
      (4)   A member of an auxiliary police force organized by the county,
township, or municipal law enforcement authorities, within the scope of the
member’s appointment or commission.
      (5)   A person lawfully called pursuant to Ohio R.C. 311.07 to aid a
sheriff in keeping the peace, for the purposes and during the time when the
person is called.
      (6)   A person appointed by a Mayor pursuant to Ohio R.C. 737.10 as a
special patrolling officer during a riot or emergency, for the purposes and
during the time when the person is appointed.
      (7)   A member of the organized militia of this State or the armed forces
of the United States, lawfully called to duty to aid civil authorities in
keeping the peace or protect against domestic violence.
      (8)   A prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, secret
service officer, or municipal prosecutor.
      (9)   A veterans’ home police officer appointed under Ohio R.C. 5907.02.
      (10)   A member of a police force employed by a regional transit
authority under Ohio R.C. 306.35(Y).
      (11)   A special police officer employed by a port authority under Ohio
R.C. 4582.04 or 4582.28.
      (12)   The House of Representatives Sergeant at Arms if the House of
Representatives Sergeant at Arms has arrest authority pursuant to Ohio R.C.
101.311(E)(1) and an Assistant House of Representatives Sergeant at Arms.
      (13)   The Senate Sergeant at Arms and an Assistant Senate Sergeant at
Arms.
      (14)   A special police officer employed by a municipal corporation at a
municipal airport, or other municipal air navigation facility, that has
scheduled operations, as defined in 14 C.F.R. 119.3, as amended, and that is
required to be under a security program and is governed by aviation security
rules of the Transportation Security Administration of the United States
Department of Transportation as provided in 49 C.F.R. Parts 1542 and 1544, as
amended.
   (h)   NOT GUILTY BY REASON OF INSANITY. A person is NOT GUILTY BY REASON OF
INSANITY relative to a charge of an offense only if the person proves, in the
manner specified in Ohio R.C. 2901.05, that at the time of the commission of
the offense, he or she did not know, as a result of a severe mental disease or
defect, the wrongfulness of his or her acts.
   (i)   OFFENSE OF VIOLENCE.
      (1)   A violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.01, 2903.02, 2903.03, 2903.04,
2903.11, 2903.12, 2903.13, 2903.15, 2903.18, 2903.21, 2903.211, 2903.22,
2905.01, 2905.02, 2905.11, 2905.32, 2907.02, 2907.03, 2907.05, 2909.02,
2909.03, 2909.24, 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2917.01, 2917.02, 2917.03,
2917.31, 2917.321, 2919.25, 2921.03, 2921.04, 2921.34, or 2923.161, of division
(A)(1) of R.C. § 2903.34, of division (A)(1), (2) or (3) of Ohio R.C. 2911.12,
or of division (B)(1), (2), (3) or (4) of Ohio R.C. 2919.22, or felonious
sexual penetration in violation of former Ohio R.C. 2907.12;
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other State or of the United States, substantially equivalent to
any section, division or offense listed in division (1) of this definition;
      (3)   An offense, other than a traffic offense, under an existing or
former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other State or of the United
States, committed purposely or knowingly, and involving physical harm to
persons or a risk of serious physical harm to persons;
      (4)   A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in committing, any
offense under division (1), (2), or (3) of this definition;
      (5)   A violation of division (C) of R.C. § 959.131.
   (j)   OFFICIAL PROCEEDING. Any proceeding before a legislative, judicial,
administrative, or other governmental agency or official authorized to take
evidence under oath, and includes any proceeding before a referee, hearing
examiner, commissioner, notary, or other person taking testimony or a
deposition in connection with an official proceeding.
   (k)   PARTY OFFICIAL. Any person who holds an elective or appointive post in
a political party in the United States or this State, by virtue of which he or
she directs, conducts, or participates in directing or conducting party affairs
at any level of responsibility.
   (l)   PERSON.
      (1)   A.   Subject to division (2) of this definition, as used in any
section contained in this General Offenses Code that sets forth a criminal
offense, PERSON includes all of the following:
            1.   An individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership and association.
            2.   An unborn human who is viable.
         B.   As used in any section contained in this General Offenses Code
that does not set forth a criminal offense, PERSON includes an individual,
corporation, business trust, estate, partnership and association.
         C.   As used in division (1)A.2. of this definition, UNBORN HUMAN
means an individual organism of the species Homo sapiens from fertilization
until live birth. VIABLE means the stage of development of a human fetus at
which there is a realistic probability of maintaining and nourishing of a life
outside the womb with or without temporary artificial life-sustaining support.
      (2)   Notwithstanding division (1)A. of this definition, in no case shall
the portion of the definition of the term PERSON that is set forth in division
(1)A.2. of this definition be applied or construed in any section contained in
this General Offenses Code that sets forth a criminal offense in any of the
following manners:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (2)A. of this
definition, in a manner so that the offense prohibits or is construed as
prohibiting any pregnant woman or her physician from performing an abortion
with the consent of the pregnant woman, with the consent of the pregnant woman
implied by law in a medical emergency, or with the approval of one otherwise
authorized by law to consent to medical treatment on behalf of the pregnant
woman. An abortion that violates the conditions described in the immediately
preceding sentence may be punished as a violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.01,
2903.02, 2903.03, 2903.04, 2903.05, 2903.06, 2903.08, 2903.11, 2903.12,
2903.13, 2903.14, 2903.21 or 2903.22, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, as applicable. An abortion that does not violate the conditions
described in the second immediately preceding sentence but that does violate
Ohio R.C. 2919.12, 2919.13(B), 2919.15, 2919.151, 2919.17 or 2919.18, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, may be punished as a violation of
such section, as applicable. Consent is sufficient under this division if it is
of the type otherwise adequate to permit medical treatment to the pregnant
woman, even if it does not comply with Ohio R.C. 2919.12.
         B.   In a manner so that the offense is applied or is construed as
applying to a woman based on an act or omission of the woman that occurs while
she is or was pregnant and that results in any of the following:
            1.   Her delivery of a stillborn baby.
            2.   Her causing, in any other manner, the death in utero of a
viable, unborn human that she is carrying.
            3.   Her causing the death of her child who is born alive but who
dies from one or more injuries that are sustained while the child is a viable,
unborn human.
            4.   Her causing her child who is born alive to sustain one or more
injuries while the child is a viable, unborn human.
            5.   Her causing, threatening to cause, or attempting to cause, in
any other manner, an injury, illness, or other psychological illness or
condition, regardless of its duration or gravity, to a viable, unborn human
that she is carrying.
   (m)   PHYSICAL HARM TO PERSONS. Any injury, illness, or other physiological
impairment, regardless of its gravity or duration.
   (n)   PHYSICAL HARM TO PROPERTY. Any tangible or intangible damage to
property that, in any degree, results in loss to its value or interferes with
its use or enjoyment. PHYSICAL HARM TO PROPERTY does not include wear and tear
occasioned by normal use.
   (o)   PRIVILEGE. An immunity, license, or right conferred by law, or
bestowed by express or implied grant, or arising out of status, position,
office, or relationship, or growing out of necessity.
   (p)   PROPERTY.
      (1)   Any property, real or personal, tangible or intangible, and any
interest or license in that property. PROPERTY includes, but is not limited to,
cable television service, other telecommunications service, telecommunications
devices, information service, computers, data, computer software, financial
instruments associated with computers, other documents associated with
computers, or copies of the documents, whether in machine or human-readable
form, trade secrets, trademarks, copyrights, patents, and property protected by
a trademark, copyright or patent. FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS ASSOCIATED WITH
COMPUTERS include, but are not limited to, checks, drafts, warrants, money
orders, notes of indebtedness, certificates of deposit, letters of credit,
bills of credit or debit cards, financial transaction authorization mechanisms,
marketable securities, or any computer system representations of any of them.
      (2)   As used in this definition, TRADE SECRET has the same meaning as in
Ohio R.C. 1333.61, and TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE and INFORMATION SERVICE have
the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 2913.01.
      (3)   As used in this definition and in the definition of CONTRABAND in
this section, CABLE TELEVISION SERVICE, COMPUTER, COMPUTER NETWORK, COMPUTER
SOFTWARE, COMPUTER SYSTEM, DATA and TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE have the same
meanings as in Ohio R.C. 2913.01.
   (q)   PROVIDER AGREEMENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5164.01.
   (r)   PUBLIC OFFICIAL. Any elected or appointed officer, employee or agent
of the state or any political subdivision thereof, whether in a temporary or
permanent capacity, and includes but is not limited to legislators, judges and
law enforcement officers. The term does not include an employee, officer, or
governor-appointed member of the board of directors of the nonprofit
corporation formed under R.C. § 187.01.
   (s)   PUBLIC SERVANT. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any of the following:
         A.   Any public official.
         B.   Any person performing ad hoc a governmental function, including
but not limited to a juror, member of a temporary commission, master,
arbitrator, advisor or consultant.
         C.   A person who is a candidate for public office, whether or not he
or she is elected or appointed to the office for which he or she is a
candidate. A person is a candidate for purposes of this division if he or she
has been nominated according to law for election or appointment to public
office, or if he or she has filed a petition or petitions as required by law to
have his or her name placed on the ballot in a primary, general or special
election, or if he or she campaigns as a write-in candidate in any primary,
general or special election.
      (2)   The term does not include an employee, officer, or governor-
appointed member of the board of directors of the nonprofit corporation formed
under R.C. § 187.01.
   (t)   RISK. A significant possibility, as contrasted with a remote
possibility, that a certain result may occur or that certain circumstances may
exist.
   (u)   SCHOOL, SCHOOL BUILDING and SCHOOL PREMISES. Have the same meanings as
in Ohio R.C. 2925.01.
   (v)   SCHOOL ACTIVITY. Any activity held under the auspices of a board of
education of a city, local, exempted village, joint vocational or cooperative
education school district; a governing authority of a community school
established under R.C. Chapter 3314; a governing board of an educational
service center; or the governing body of a nonpublic school for which the
Director of Education and Workforce prescribes minimum standards under R.C. §
3301.07.
   (w)   SCHOOL BUS. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4511.01.
   (x)   SCHOOL SAFETY ZONE. Consists of a school, school building, school
premises, school activity, and school bus.
   (y)   SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM TO PERSONS. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any mental illness or condition of such gravity as would normally
require hospitalization or prolonged psychiatric treatment;
      (2)   Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk of death;
      (3)   Any physical harm that involves some permanent incapacity, whether
partial or total, or that involves some temporary, substantial incapacity;
      (4)   Any physical harm that involves some permanent disfigurement, or
that involves some temporary, serious disfigurement;
      (5)   Any physical harm that involves acute pain of such duration as to
result in substantial suffering, or that involves any degree of prolonged or
intractable pain.
   (z)   SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM TO PROPERTY. Any physical harm to property that
does either of the following:
      (1)   Results in substantial loss to the value of the property, or
requires a substantial amount of time, effort, or money to repair or replace;
      (2)   Temporarily prevents the use or enjoyment of the property, or
substantially interferes with its use or enjoyment for an extended period of
time.
   (aa)   SUBSTANTIAL RISK. A strong possibility, as contrasted with a remote
or significant possibility, that a certain result may occur or that certain
circumstances may exist.
   (bb)   VALUABLE THING or VALUABLE BENEFIT. Includes, but is not limited to,
a contribution. This inclusion does not indicate or imply that a contribution
was not included in those terms before September 17, 1986.
(ORC 2901.01, 2921.01)
§ 606.02 CULPABLE MENTAL STATES.
   (a)   A person acts purposely when it is the person’s specific intention to
cause a certain result, or, when the gist of the offense is a prohibition
against conduct of a certain nature, regardless of what the offender intends to
accomplish thereby, it is the offender’s specific intention to engage in
conduct of that nature.
   (b)   A person acts knowingly, regardless of purpose, when the person is
aware that the person’s conduct will probably cause a certain result or will
probably be of a certain nature. A person has knowledge of circumstances when
the person is aware that such circumstances probably exist. When knowledge of
the existence of a particular fact is an element of an offense, such knowledge
is established if a person subjectively believes that there is a high
probability of its existence and fails to make inquiry or acts with a conscious
purpose to avoid learning the fact.
   (c)   A person acts recklessly when, with heedless indifference to the
consequences, the person disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk that
the person’s conduct is likely to cause a certain result or is likely to be of
a certain nature. A person is reckless with respect to circumstances when, with
heedless indifference to the consequences, the person disregards a substantial
and unjustifiable risk that such circumstances are likely to exist.
   (d)   A person acts negligently when, because of a substantial lapse from
due care, the person fails to perceive or avoid a risk that the person’s
conduct may cause a certain result or may be of a certain nature. A person is
negligent with respect to circumstances when, because of a substantial lapse
from due care, the person fails to perceive or avoid a risk that such
circumstances may exist.
   (e)   When the section defining an offense provides that negligence suffices
to establish an element thereof, then recklessness, knowledge or purpose is
also sufficient culpability for that element. When recklessness suffices to
establish an element of an offense, then knowledge or purpose is also
sufficient culpability for that element. When knowledge suffices to establish
an element of an offense, then purpose is also sufficient culpability for that
element.
(R.C. § 2901.22)
§ 606.03 CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENSES.
   As used in this General Offenses Code:
   (a)   Offenses include misdemeanors of the first, second, third, and fourth
degree, minor misdemeanors, and offenses not specifically classified.
   (b)   Regardless of the penalty that may be imposed, any offense
specifically classified as a misdemeanor is a misdemeanor.
   (c)   Any offense not specifically classified is a misdemeanor if
imprisonment for not more than one year may be imposed as a penalty.
   (d)   Any offense not specifically classified is a minor misdemeanor if the
only penalty that may be imposed is one of the following:
      (1)   For an offense committed prior to January 1, 2004, a fine not
exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00);
      (2)   For an offense committed on or after January 1, 2004, a fine not
exceeding one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), community service under Ohio
R.C. 2929.27(D), or a financial sanction other than a fine under Ohio R.C.
2929.28.
(ORC 2901.02)
§ 606.04 OFFENSES DEFINED.
   (a)   No conduct constitutes a criminal offense against the Municipality
unless it is defined as an offense in this General Offenses Code.
   (b)   An offense is defined when one or more sections of this General
Offenses Code state a positive prohibition or enjoin a specific duty, and
provide a penalty for violation of such prohibition or failure to meet such
duty.
   (c)   This section does not affect the power of a court to punish for
contempt or to employ any sanction authorized by law to enforce an order, civil
judgment or decree.
(ORC 2901.03)
§ 606.05 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (c) or (d) of this section,
sections of this General Offenses Code defining offenses or penalties shall be
strictly construed against the Municipality and liberally construed in favor of
the accused.
   (b)   Rules of criminal procedure and sections of this General Offenses Code
providing for criminal procedure shall be construed so as to effect the fair,
impartial, speedy, and sure administration of justice.
   (c)   Any provision of a section of this General Offenses Code that refers
to a previous conviction of or plea of guilty to a violation of a section of
this General Offenses Code, the Ohio Revised Code or a division of a section of
this General Offenses Code or the Ohio Revised Code shall be construed to also
refer to a previous conviction of or plea of guilty to a substantially
equivalent offense under an existing or former law of this Municipality, State,
another State, or the United States or under an existing or former municipal
ordinance.
   (d)   Any provision of this Code that refers to a section, or to a division
of a section, of this Code that defines or specifies a criminal offense shall
be construed to also refer to an existing or former law of this State, another
state, or the United States, to an existing or former municipal ordinance, or
to an existing or former division of any such existing or former law or
ordinance that defines or specifies, or that defined or specified, a
substantially equivalent offense.
(ORC 2901.04)
§ 606.055 CRIMINAL LAW JURISDICTION.
   (a)   A person is subject to criminal prosecution and punishment in this
Municipality if any of the following occur:
      (1)   The person commits an offense under the laws of this Municipality,
any element of which takes place in this Municipality;
      (2)   While in this Municipality, the person attempts to commit, or is
guilty of complicity in the commission of, an offense in another jurisdiction,
which offense is an offense under both the laws of this Municipality and the
other jurisdiction, or, while in this Municipality, the person conspires to
commit an offense in another jurisdiction, which offense is an offense under
both the laws of this Municipality and the other jurisdiction, and a
substantial overt act in furtherance of the conspiracy is undertaken in this
Municipality by the person or another person involved in the conspiracy,
subsequent to the person’s entrance into the conspiracy. In any case in which a
person attempts to commit, is guilty of complicity in the commission of, or
conspires to commit an offense in another jurisdiction as described in this
division, the person is subject to criminal prosecution and punishment in this
Municipality for the attempt, complicity, or conspiracy, and for any resulting
offense that is committed or completed in the other jurisdiction;
      (3)   While out of this Municipality, the person conspires or attempts to
commit, or is guilty of complicity in the commission of, an offense in this
Municipality;
      (4)   While out of this Municipality, the person omits to perform a legal
duty imposed by the laws of this Municipality, which omission affects a
legitimate interest of the Municipality in protecting, governing or regulating
any person, property, thing, transaction, or activity in this Municipality;
      (5)   While out of this Municipality, the person unlawfully takes or
retains property and subsequently brings any of the unlawfully taken or
retained property into this Municipality;
      (6)   While out of this Municipality, the person unlawfully takes or
entices another person and subsequently brings the other person into this
Municipality;
      (7)   The person, by means of a computer, computer system, computer
network, telecommunication, telecommunications device, telecommunications
service, or information service, causes or knowingly permits any writing, data,
image or other telecommunication to be disseminated or transmitted into this
Municipality in violation of the law of this State or Municipality.
   (b)   In homicide, the element referred to in division (a)(1) of this
section includes the act that causes death, the physical contact that causes
death, the death itself, or any other element that is set forth in the offense
in question. If any part of the body of a homicide victim is found in this
Municipality, the death is presumed to have occurred within this Municipality.
   (c)   (1)   This Municipality includes the land and water within its
boundaries and the air space above that land and water, with respect to which
this Municipality has either exclusive or concurrent legislative jurisdiction.
Where the boundary between this Municipality and another jurisdiction is
disputed, the disputed territory is conclusively presumed to be within this
Municipality for purposes of this section.
      (2)   The courts of common pleas of Adams, Athens, Belmont, Brown,
Clermont, Columbiana, Gallia, Hamilton, Jefferson, Lawrence, Meigs, Monroe,
Scioto, and Washington counties have jurisdiction beyond the north or northwest
shore of the Ohio river extending to the opposite shore line, between the
extended boundary lines of any adjacent counties or adjacent state. Each of
those courts of common pleas has concurrent jurisdiction on the Ohio river with
any adjacent court of common pleas that borders on that river and with any
court of Kentucky or of West Virginia that borders on the Ohio river and that
has jurisdiction on the Ohio river under the law of Kentucky or the law of West
Virginia, whichever is applicable, or under federal law.
   (d)   When an offense is committed under the laws of this Municipality, and
it appears beyond a reasonable doubt that the offense or any element of the
offense took place either in this Municipality or in another jurisdiction or
jurisdictions, but it cannot reasonably be determined in which it took place,
the offense or element is conclusively presumed to have taken place in this
Municipality for purposes of this section.
   (e)   When a person is subject to criminal prosecution and punishment in
this Municipality for an offense committed or completed outside this
Municipality, the person is subject to all specifications for that offense that
would be applicable if the offense had been committed within this Municipality.
   (f)   Any act, conduct, or element that is a basis of a person being subject
under this section to criminal prosecution and punishment in this Municipality
need not be committed personally by the person as long as it is committed by
another person who is in complicity or conspiracy with the person.
   (g)   This section shall be liberally construed, consistent with
constitutional limitations, to allow this Municipality the broadest possible
jurisdiction over offenses and persons committing offenses in, or affecting,
this Municipality.
   (h)   For purposes of division (a)(2) of this section, an overt act is
substantial when it is of a character that manifests a purpose on the part of
the actor that the object of the conspiracy should be completed.
   (i)   As used in this section, COMPUTER, COMPUTER SYSTEM, COMPUTER NETWORK,
INFORMATION SERVICE, TELECOMMUNICATION, TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE,
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE, DATA and WRITING have the same meanings as in Ohio
R.C. 2913.01.
(ORC 2901.11)
§ 606.06 LIMITATION ON CRIMINAL PROSECUTIONS.
   (a)   (1)   Except as provided in division (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4), (a)(5),
or (a)(6) of this section or as otherwise provided in this section, a
prosecution shall be barred unless it is commenced within the following periods
after an offense is committed:
         A.   For a felony, six years;
         B.   For a misdemeanor other than a minor misdemeanor, two years;
         C.   For a minor misdemeanor, six months.
      (2)   There is no period of limitation for the prosecution of a violation
of R.C. § 2903.01 or 2903.02 or for the prosecution of a conspiracy to commit,
attempt to commit, or complicity in committing a violation of R.C. § 2903.01 or
R.C. § 2903.02.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (b) to (j) of this
section, a prosecution of any of the following offenses shall be barred unless
it is commenced within 20 years after the offense is committed:
         A.   A violation of R.C. § 2903.03, 2903.04, 2905.01, 2905.32,
2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.21, 2909.02, 2909.22, 2909.23, 2909.24, 2909.26,
2909.27, 2909.28, 2909.29, 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2911.12 or 2917.02, a
violation of R.C. § 2903.11 or 2903.12 if the victim is a peace officer, a
violation of R.C. § 2903.13 that is a felony, or a violation of former R.C. §
2907.12.
         B.   A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing a violation set forth in division (a)(3)A. of this section.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (d) to (l) of this
section, a prosecution of a violation of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.03 or a
conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in committing a
violation of either section shall be barred unless it is commenced within 25
years after the offense is committed.
      (5)   A.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (a)(5)B. and (e) to
(i) of this section, a prosecution of a violation of R.C. § 2907.13 shall be
barred unless it is commenced within five years after the offense is committed.
         B.   Prosecution that would otherwise be barred under division (a)
(5)A. of this section may be commenced within five years after the date of the
discovery of the offense by either an aggrieved person or the aggrieved
person's legal representative who is not a party to the offense.
         C.   As used in division (a)(5)B. of this section, "aggrieved person"
includes any of the following individuals with regard to a violation of R.C. §
2907.13:
            1.   A patient who was the victim of the violation;
            2.   The spouse or surviving spouse of a patient who was the victim
of the violation;
            3.   Any child born as a result of the violation.
      (6)   A prosecution for a violation of R.C. § 2151.421(A)(1) or (A)(4),
which is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, or a misdemeanor of the first
degree under circumstances specified in R.C. § 2151.99, is barred unless it is
commenced within four years after the violation is committed.
   (b)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(2) of this section,
if the period of limitation provided in division (a)(1) or (a)(3) of this
section has expired, prosecution shall be commenced for an offense of which an
element is fraud or breach of fiduciary duty within one year after discovery of
the offense either by an aggrieved person or by the aggrieved person’s legal
representative who is not a party to the offense.
      (2)   If the period of limitation provided in division (a)(1) or (a)(3)
of this section has expired, prosecution for a violation of R.C. § 2913.49
shall be commenced within five years after discovery of the offense either by
an aggrieved person or the aggrieved person’s legal representative who is not a
party to the offense.
   (c)   (1)   If the period of limitation provided in division (a)(1) or (a)
(3) of this section has expired, prosecution shall be commenced for the
following offenses during the following specified periods of time:
         A.   For an offense involving misconduct in office by a public servant
at any time while the accused remains a public servant, or within two years
thereafter;
         B.   For an offense by a person who is not a public servant but whose
offense is directly related to the misconduct in office of a public servant, at
any time while that public servant remains a public servant, or within two
years thereafter.
      (2)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         A.   OFFENSE IS DIRECTLY RELATED TO THE MISCONDUCT IN OFFICE OF A
PUBLIC SERVANT. The phrase includes but is not limited to a violation of R.C. §
101.71, 101.91, 121.61 or 2921.13, 102.03(F) or (H), 2921.02(A), 2921.43(A) or
(B), or 3517.13(F) or (G), that is directly related to an offense involving
misconduct in office of a public servant, or a violation of any municipal
ordinance substantially equivalent to those Ohio Revised Code sections listed
in this division (c)(2)A.
         B.   PUBLIC SERVANT has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2921.01.
   (d)   (1)   If a DNA record made in connection with the criminal
investigation of the commission of a violation of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.03 is
determined to match another DNA record that is of an identifiable person and if
the time of the determination is later than 25 years after the offense is
committed, prosecution of that person for a violation of the section may be
commenced within five years after the determination is complete.
      (2)   If a DNA record made in connection with the criminal investigation
of the commission of a violation of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.03 is determined to
match another DNA record that is of an identifiable person and if the time of
the determination is within 25 years after the offense is committed,
prosecution of that person for a violation of the section may be commenced
within the longer of 25 years after the offense is committed or five years
after the determination is complete.
      (3)   As used in this division, “DNA record” has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 109.573.
   (e)   An offense is committed when every element of the offense occurs. In
the case of an offense of which an element is a continuing course of conduct,
the period of limitation does not begin to run until the course of conduct or
the accused’s accountability for it terminates, whichever occurs first.
   (f)   A prosecution is commenced on the date an indictment is returned or an
information filed, or on the date a lawful arrest without a warrant is made, or
on the date a warrant, summons, citation or other process is issued, whichever
occurs first. A prosecution is not commenced by the return of an indictment or
the filing of an information unless reasonable diligence is exercised to issue
and execute process on the same. A prosecution is not commenced upon issuance
of a warrant, summons, citation or other process unless reasonable diligence is
exercised to execute the same.
   (g)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time when the corpus
delicti remains undiscovered.
   (h)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time when the
accused purposely avoids prosecution. Proof that the accused departed this
municipality or conceals the accused’s identity or whereabouts is prima facie
evidence of the accused’s purpose to avoid prosecution.
   (i)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time a prosecution
against the accused based on the same conduct is pending in this state, even
though the indictment, information or process that commenced the prosecution is
quashed or the proceedings on the indictment, information or process are set
aside or reversed on appeal.
   (j)   The period of limitation for a violation of this Part 6 or Title XXIX
of the Ohio Revised Code that involves a physical or mental wound, injury,
disability or condition of a nature that reasonably indicates abuse or neglect
of a child under 18 years of age or of a child with a developmental disability
or physical impairment under 21 years of age shall not begin to run until
either of the following occurs:
      (1)   The victim of the offense reaches the age of majority.
      (2)   A public children services agency, or a municipal or county peace
officer that is not the parent or guardian of the child, in the county in which
the child resides or in which the abuse or neglect is occurring or has occurred
has been notified that abuse or neglect is known, suspected or believed to have
occurred.
   (k)   As used in this section, PEACE OFFICER has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 2935.01.
   (l)   (1)   The amendments to divisions (a) and (d) of this section that
took effect on July 16, 2015, apply to a violation of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.03
committed on and after July 16, 2015, and apply to a violation of either of
those sections committed prior to July 16, 2015, if prosecution for that
violation was not barred under this section as it existed on July 16, 2015.
      (2)   The amendment to division (a)(2) of this section that took effect
on April 4, 2023, applies to a conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or
complicity in committing a violation of R.C. § 2903.01 or R.C. § 2903.02 if the
conspiracy, attempt, or complicity is committed on or after April 4, 2023, and
applies to a conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing a violation of either of those sections if the conspiracy, attempt,
or complicity was committed prior to April 4, 2023, and prosecution for that
conspiracy, attempt, or complicity was not barred under this section as it
existed on the day prior to April 4, 2023.
(R.C. § 2901.13)
§ 606.07 REQUIREMENTS FOR CRIMINAL LIABILITY; VOLUNTARY INTOXICATION.
   (a)   Except as provided in division (b) of this section, a person is not
guilty of an offense unless both of the following apply:
      (1)   The person’s liability is based on conduct that includes either a
voluntary act, or an omission to perform an act or duty that the person is
capable of performing;
      (2)   The person has the requisite degree of culpability for each element
as to which a culpable mental state is specified by the language defining the
offense.
   (b)   When the language defining an offense does not specify any degree of
culpability, and plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict criminal
liability for the conduct described in the section, then culpability is not
required for a person to be guilty of the offense. The fact that one division
of a section plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict liability for an
offense defined in that division does not by itself plainly indicate a purpose
to impose strict criminal liability for an offense defined in other divisions
of the section that do not specify a degree of culpability.
   (c)   (1)   When language defining an element of an offense that is related
to knowledge or intent or to which mens rea could fairly be applied neither
specifies culpability nor plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict
liability, the element of the offense is established only if a person acts
recklessly.
      (2)   Division (c)(1) of this section does not apply to offenses defined
in R.C. Title XLV.
      (3)   Division (c)(1) of this section does not relieve the prosecution of
the burden of proving the culpable mental state required by any definition
incorporated into the offense.
   (d)   Voluntary intoxication may not be taken into consideration in
determining the existence of a mental state that is an element of a criminal
offense. Voluntary intoxication does not relieve a person of a duty to act if
failure to act constitutes a criminal offense. Evidence that a person was
voluntarily intoxicated may be admissible to show whether or not the person was
physically capable of performing the act with which the person is charged.
   (e)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   CULPABILITY. Purpose, knowledge, recklessness or negligence, as
defined in R.C. § 2901.22.
      (2)   INTOXICATION. Includes but is not limited to intoxication resulting
from the ingestion of alcohol, a drug, or alcohol and a drug.
      (3)   INVOLUNTARY ACTS. Reflexes, convulsions, body movements during
unconsciousness or sleep, and body movements that are not otherwise a product
of the actor’s volition are “involuntary acts.”
      (4)   POSSESSION. A voluntary act if the possessor knowingly procured or
received the thing possessed, or was aware of the possessor’s control of the
thing possessed for a sufficient time to have ended possession.
(R.C. § 2901.21)
§ 606.08 ORGANIZATIONAL CRIMINAL LIABILITY.
   (a)   An organization may be convicted of an offense under any of the
following circumstances:
      (1)   The offense is a minor misdemeanor committed by an officer, agent
or employee of the organization acting in its behalf and within the scope of
the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s office or employment, except that if the
section defining the offense designates the officers, agents or employees for
whose conduct the organization is accountable or the circumstances under which
it is accountable, those provisions shall apply.
      (2)   A purpose to impose organizational liability plainly appears in the
section defining the offense, and the offense is committed by an officer, agent
or employee of the organization acting in its behalf and within the scope of
the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s office or employment, except that if the
section defining the offense designates the officers, agents or employees for
whose conduct the organization is accountable or the circumstances under which
it is accountable, those provisions shall apply.
      (3)   The offense consists of an omission to discharge a specific duty
imposed by law on the organization.
      (4)   If, acting with the kind of culpability otherwise required for the
commission of the offense, its commission was authorized, requested, commanded,
tolerated or performed by the board of directors, trustees, partners, or by a
high managerial officer, agent or employee acting in behalf of the organization
and within the scope of such a board’s or person’s office or employment.
   (b)   If strict liability is imposed for the commission of an offense, a
purpose to impose organizational liability shall be presumed, unless the
contrary plainly appears.
   (c)   In a prosecution of an organization for an offense other than one for
which strict liability is imposed, it is a defense that the high managerial
officer, agent or employee having supervisory responsibility over the subject
matter of the offense exercised due diligence to prevent its commission. This
defense is not available if it plainly appears inconsistent with the purpose of
the section defining the offense.
   (d)   As used in this section, ORGANIZATION means a corporation for profit
or not for profit, partnership, limited partnership, joint venture,
unincorporated nonprofit association, estate, trust or other commercial or
legal entity. ORGANIZATION does not include an entity organized as or by a
governmental agency for the execution of a governmental program.
(ORC 2901.23)
§ 606.09 PERSONAL ACCOUNTABILITY FOR ORGANIZATIONAL CONDUCT.
   (a)   An officer, agent, or employee of an organization, as defined in Ohio
R.C. 2901.23, may be prosecuted for an offense committed by such organization,
if he or she acts with the kind of culpability required for the commission of
the offense, and any of the following apply:
      (1)   In the name of the organization or in its behalf, he or she engages
in conduct constituting the offense, or causes another to engage in such
conduct, or tolerates such conduct when it is of a type for which he or she has
direct responsibility;
      (2)   He or she has primary responsibility to discharge a duty imposed on
the organization by law, and such duty is not discharged.
   (b)   When a person is convicted of an offense by reason of this section, he
or she is subject to the same penalty as if he or she had acted in his or her
own behalf.
(ORC 2901.24)
§ 606.10 FALSIFICATION.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly make a false statement, or knowingly swear
or affirm the truth of a false statement previously made, when any of the
following applies:
      (1)   The statement is made in any official proceeding.
      (2)   The statement is made with purpose to incriminate another.
      (3)   The statement is made with purpose to mislead a public official in
performing his or her official function.
      (4)   The statement is made with purpose to secure the payment of
unemployment compensation; Ohio Works First; prevention, retention and
contingency benefits and services; disability financial assistance; retirement
benefits or health care coverage from a state retirement system; economic
development assistance as defined in R.C. § 9.66; or other benefits
administered by a governmental agency or paid out of a public treasury.
      (5)   The statement is made with purpose to secure the issuance by a
governmental agency of a license, permit, authorization, certificate,
registration, release or provider agreement.
      (6)   The statement is sworn or affirmed before a notary public or
another person empowered to administer oaths.
      (7)   The statement is in writing on or in connection with a report or
return that is required or authorized by law.
      (8)   The statement is in writing, and is made with purpose to induce
another to extend credit to or employ the offender, or to confer any degree,
diploma, certificate of attainment, award of excellence or honor on the
offender, or to extend to or bestow upon the offender any other valuable
benefit or distinction, when the person to whom the statement is directed
relies upon it to his or her detriment.
      (9)   The statement is made with purpose to commit or facilitate the
commission of a theft offense.
      (10)   The statement is knowingly made to a probate court in connection
with any action, proceeding or other matter within its jurisdiction, either
orally or in a written document, including but not limited to an application,
petition, complaint or other pleading, or an inventory, account or report.
      (11)   The statement is made on an account, form, record, stamp, label or
other writing that is required by law.
      (12)   The statement is made in connection with the purchase of a
firearm, as defined in R.C. § 2923.11, and in conjunction with the furnishing
to the seller of the firearm of a fictitious or altered driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit, a fictitious or altered identification card, or any
other document that contains false information about the purchaser’s identity.
      (13)   The statement is made in a document or instrument of writing that
purports to be a judgment, lien or claim of indebtedness and is filed or
recorded with the Secretary of State, a County Recorder, or the clerk of a
court of record.
      (14)   The statement is made in an application filed with a county
sheriff pursuant to R.C. § 2923.125 in order to obtain or renew a concealed
handgun license or is made in an affidavit submitted to a county sheriff to
obtain a concealed handgun license on a temporary emergency basis under R.C. §
2923.1213.
      (15)   The statement is required under R.C. § 5743.71 in connection with
the person’s purchase of cigarettes or tobacco products in a delivery sale.
   (b)   No person, in connection with the purchase of a firearm as defined in
R.C. § 2923.11, shall knowingly furnish to the seller of the firearm a
fictitious or altered driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit, a
fictitious or altered identification card, or any other document that contains
false information about the purchaser’s identity.
   (c)   No person, in an attempt to obtain a concealed handgun license under
R.C. § 2923.125, shall knowingly present to a sheriff a fictitious or altered
document that purports to be certification of the person’s competence in
handling a handgun as described in division (B)(3) of that section.
   (d)   It is no defense to a charge under division (a)(6) of this section
that the oath or affirmation was administered or taken in an irregular manner.
   (e)   If contradictory statements relating to the same fact are made by the
offender within the period of the statute of limitations for falsification, it
is not necessary for the prosecution to prove which statement was false, but
only that one or the other was false.
   (f)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4), (a)
(5), (a)(6), (a)(7), (a)(8), (a)(10), (a)(11), (a)(13) or (a)(15) of this
section is guilty of falsification. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, falsification is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (a)(9) of this section is guilty of
falsification in a theft offense. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, falsification in a theft offense is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the value of the property or services stolen is $1,000 or more,
falsification in a theft offense is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (a)(12) or (b) of this section is guilty
of falsification to purchase a firearm, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (a)(14) or (c) of this section is guilty
of falsification to obtain a concealed handgun license, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section in removal
proceedings under R.C. § 319.26, 321.37, 507.13 or 733.78 is guilty of
falsification regarding a removal proceeding, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.13)
   (g)   (1)   No person who has knowingly failed to maintain proof of
financial responsibility in accordance with R.C. § 4509.101 shall produce any
document or present to a peace officer an electronic wireless communications
device that is displaying any text or images with the purpose to mislead a
peace officer upon the request of a peace officer for proof of financial
responsibility made in accordance with R.C. § 4509.101(D)(2).
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (g) is guilty of falsification, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4509.102)
Statutory reference:
   Civil liability for violations of this section, see
    R.C. § 2921.13(G)
§ 606.105 FALSE REPORT OF CHILD ABUSE OR NEGLECT.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly make or cause another person to make a false
report under Ohio R.C. 2151.421(B) alleging that any person has committed an
act or omission that resulted in a child being an abused child as defined in
Ohio R.C. 2151.031 or a neglected child as defined in Ohio R.C. 2151.03.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making or causing a false
report of child abuse or child neglect, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 2921.14)
§ 606.11 COMPOUNDING A CRIME.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly demand, accept, or agree to accept anything
of value in consideration of abandoning or agreeing to abandon a pending
criminal prosecution.
   (b)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section when both
of the following apply:
      (1)   The pending prosecution involved is for a violation of Ohio R.C.
2913.02, 2913.11, 2913.21(B)(2), or 2913.47, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, of which the actor under this section was the victim.
      (2)   The thing of value demanded, accepted, or agreed to be accepted, in
consideration of abandoning or agreeing to abandon the prosecution, did not
exceed an amount that the actor reasonably believed due him or her as
restitution for the loss caused him or her by the offense.
   (c)   When a prosecuting witness abandons or agrees to abandon a prosecution
under division (b) of this section, the abandonment or agreement in no way
binds the State to abandoning the prosecution.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of compounding a crime, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 2921.21)
§ 606.12 FAILURE TO REPORT A CRIME OR DEATH.
   (a)   (1)   Except as provided in division (a)(2) of this section, no
person, knowing that a felony has been or is being committed, shall knowingly
fail to report the information to law enforcement authorities.
      (2)   No person, knowing that a violation of R.C. § 2913.04(B) has been
or is being committed or that the person has received information derived from
such a violation, shall knowingly fail to report the violation to law
enforcement authorities.
   (b)   Except for conditions that are within the scope of division (e) of
this section, no person giving aid to a sick or injured person shall
negligently fail to report to law enforcement authorities any gunshot or stab
wound treated or observed by the person, or any serious physical harm to
persons that the person knows or has reasonable cause to believe resulted from
an offense of violence.
   (c)   No person who discovers the body or acquires the first knowledge of
the death of a person shall fail to report the death immediately to a physician
or advanced practice registered nurse whom the person knows to be treating the
deceased for a condition from which death at such time would not be unexpected,
or to a law enforcement officer, an ambulance service, an emergency squad, or
the coroner in a political subdivision in which the body is discovered, the
death is believed to have occurred, or knowledge concerning the death is
obtained. For purposes of this division, “advanced practice registered nurse”
does not include a certified registered nurse anesthetist.
   (d)   No person shall fail to provide upon request of the person to whom a
report required by division (c) of this section was made, or to any law
enforcement officer who has reasonable cause to assert the authority to
investigate the circumstances surrounding the death, any facts within his or
her knowledge that may have a bearing on the investigation of the death.
   (e)   (1)   As used in this section, “burn injury” means any of the
following:
         A.   Second or third degree burns;
         B.   Any burns to the upper respiratory tract or laryngeal edema due
to the inhalation of super-heated air;
         C.   Any burn injury or wound that may result in death.
      (2)   No physician, nurse, physician assistant, or limited practitioner
who, outside a hospital, sanitarium or other medical facility, attends or
treats a person who has sustained a burn injury inflicted by an explosion or
other incendiary device, or that shows evidence of having been inflicted in a
violent, malicious or criminal manner, shall fail to report the burn injury
immediately to the local arson bureau, if there is such a bureau in the
jurisdiction in which the person is attended or treated, or otherwise to local
law enforcement authorities.
      (3)   No manager, superintendent or other person in charge of a hospital,
sanitarium or other medical facility in which a person is attended or treated
for any burn injury inflicted by an explosion or other incendiary device, or
that shows evidence of having been inflicted in a violent, malicious or
criminal manner, shall fail to report the burn injury immediately to the local
arson bureau, if there is such a bureau in the jurisdiction in which the person
is attended or treated, or otherwise to local law enforcement authorities.
      (4)   No person who is required to report any burn injury under division
(e)(2) or (e)(3) of this section shall fail to file, within three working days
after attending or treating the victim, a written report of the burn injury
with the office of the State Fire Marshal. The report shall be made on a form
provided by the State Fire Marshal.
      (5)   Anyone participating in the making of reports under division (e) of
this section or anyone participating in a judicial proceeding resulting from
the reports is immune from any civil or criminal liability that otherwise might
be incurred or imposed as a result of such actions. Notwithstanding R.C. §
4731.22, the physician-patient relationship or advanced practice registered
nurse-patient relationship is not a ground for excluding evidence regarding a
person’s burn injury or the cause of the burn injury in any judicial proceeding
resulting from a report submitted under division (e) of this section.
   (f)   (1)   No person who knows that a licensed medical professional has
committed an offense under R.C. Chapter 2907, a violation of a municipal
ordinance that is substantially equivalent to such offense, or a substantially
equivalent criminal offense in another jurisdiction, against a patient of the
licensed medical professional shall fail to report such knowledge to law
enforcement authorities within 30 days of obtaining the knowledge.
      (2)   Except for a self-report or participation in the offense or
violation being reported, any person who makes a report within the 30-day
period provided in division (f)(1) of this section or any person who
participates in a judicial proceeding that results from such report is immune
from civil or criminal liability that otherwise might be incurred or imposed as
a result of making that report or participating in that proceeding so long as
the person is acting in good faith without fraud or malice.
      (3)   The physician-patient relationship or physician assistant-patient
relationship is not a ground for excluding evidence regarding the person’s
knowledge of a licensed medical professional’s commission of an offense or
violation reported under division (f)(1) of this section, against that licensed
medical professional in any judicial proceeding resulting from a report made
under that division.
      (4)   As used in division (f) of this section, “licensed medical
professional” has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.01.
   (g)   (1)   Any doctor of medicine or osteopathic medicine, hospital intern
or resident, nurse, psychologist, social worker, independent social worker,
social work assistant, licensed professional clinical counselor, licensed
professional counselor, independent marriage and family therapist, or marriage
and family therapist who knows or has reasonable cause to believe that a
patient or client has been the victim of domestic violence, as defined in R.C.
§ 3113.31, shall note that knowledge or belief and the basis for it in the
patient’s or client’s records.
      (2)   Notwithstanding R.C. § 4731.22, the physician-patient privilege or
advanced practice registered nurse-patient privilege shall not be a ground for
excluding any information regarding the report containing the knowledge or
belief noted under division (g)(1) of this section, and the information may be
admitted as evidence in accordance with the Rules of Evidence.
   (h)   Division (a) or (d) of this section does not require disclosure of
information, when any of the following applies:
      (1)   The information is privileged by reason of the relationship between
attorney and client; physician and patient; advanced practice registered nurse
and patient; licensed psychologist or licensed school psychologist and client;
licensed professional clinical counselor, licensed professional counselor,
independent social worker, social worker, independent marriage and family
therapist, or marriage and family therapist and client; member of the clergy,
rabbi, minister, or priest and any person communicating information
confidentially to the member of the clergy, rabbi, minister, or priest for a
religious counseling purpose of a professional character; husband and wife; or
a communications assistant and those who are a party to a telecommunications
relay service call.
      (2)   The information would tend to incriminate a member of the actor’s
immediate family.
      (3)   Disclosure of the information would amount to revealing a news
source, privileged under R.C. § 2739.04 or 2739.12.
      (4)   Disclosure of the information would amount to disclosure by a
member of the ordained clergy of an organized religious body of a confidential
communication made to that member of the clergy in that member's capacity as a
member of the clergy by a person seeking the aid or counsel of that member of
the clergy.
      (5)   Disclosure would amount to revealing information acquired by the
actor in the course of the actor's duties in connection with a bona fide
program of treatment or services for persons with drug dependencies or persons
in danger of drug dependence, which program is maintained or conducted by a
hospital, clinic, person, agency, or community addiction services provider
whose alcohol and drug addiction services are certified pursuant to R.C. §
5119.36.
      (6)   Disclosure would amount to revealing information acquired by the
actor in the course of the actor's duties in connection with a bona fide
program for providing counseling services to victims of crimes that are
violations of R.C. § 2907.02 or R.C. § 2907.05 or to victims of felonious
sexual penetration in violation of former R.C. § 2907.12. As used in this
division, "counseling services" include services provided in an informal
setting by a person who, by education or experience, is competent to provide
those services.
   (i)   No disclosure of information pursuant to this section gives rise to
any liability or recrimination for a breach of privilege or confidence.
   (j)   Whoever violates division (a), (b), or (f)(1) of this section is
guilty of failure to report a crime. Violation of division (a)(1) or (f)(1) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Violation of division (a)
(2) or (b) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (k)   Whoever violates division (c) or (d) of this section is guilty of
failure to report knowledge of a death, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (l)   (1)   Whoever negligently violates division (e) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   Whoever knowingly violates division (e) of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (m)   As used in this section, NURSE includes an advanced practice
registered nurse, registered nurse, and licensed practical nurse.
(R.C. § 2921.22)
§ 606.13 FAILURE TO AID A LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   (a)   No person shall negligently fail or refuse to aid a law enforcement
officer, when called upon for assistance in preventing or halting the
commission of an offense, or in apprehending or detaining an offender, when the
aid can be given without a substantial risk of physical harm to the person
giving it.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to aid a law
enforcement officer, a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 2921.23)
§ 606.14 OBSTRUCTING OFFICIAL BUSINESS.
   (a)   No person, without privilege to do so and with purpose to prevent,
obstruct, or delay the performance by a public official of any authorized act
within the public official’s official capacity, shall do any act that hampers
or impedes a public official in the performance of the public official’s lawful
duties.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of obstructing official
business. Except as otherwise provided in this division, obstructing official
business is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If a violation of this section
creates a risk of physical harm to any person, obstructing official business is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate State law.
(ORC 2921.31)
§ 606.15 OBSTRUCTING JUSTICE.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to hinder the discovery, apprehension,
prosecution, conviction, or punishment of another for crime, or to assist
another to benefit from the commission of a crime, and no person, with purpose
to hinder the discovery, apprehension, prosecution, adjudication as a
delinquent child, or disposition of a child for an act that if committed by an
adult would be a crime or to assist a child to benefit from the commission of
an act that if committed by an adult would be a crime, shall do any of the
following:
      (1)   Harbor or conceal the other person or child.
      (2)   Provide the other person or child with money, transportation, a
weapon, a disguise, or other means of avoiding discovery or apprehension.
      (3)   Warn the other person or child of impending discovery or
apprehension.
      (4)   Destroy or conceal physical evidence of the crime or act, or induce
any person to withhold testimony or information or to elude legal process
summoning him or her to testify or supply evidence.
      (5)   Communicate false information to any person.
      (6)   Prevent or obstruct any person, by means of force, intimidation, or
deception, from performing any act to aid in the discovery, apprehension, or
prosecution of the other person or child.
   (b)   A person may be prosecuted for, and may be convicted of or adjudicated
a delinquent child for committing, a violation of division (a) of this section
regardless of whether the person or child aided ultimately is apprehended for,
is charged with, is convicted of, pleads guilty to, or is adjudicated a
delinquent child for committing the crime or act the person or child aided
committed. The crime or act the person or child aided committed shall be used
under division (c) of this section in determining the penalty for violation of
division (a) of this section, regardless of whether the person or child aided
ultimately is apprehended for, is charged with, is convicted of, pleads guilty
to, or is adjudicated a delinquent child for committing the crime or act the
person or child aided committed.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of obstructing justice.
      (1)   If the crime committed by the person aided is a misdemeanor or if
the act committed by the child aided would be a misdemeanor if committed by an
adult, obstructing justice is a misdemeanor of the same degree as the crime
committed by the person aided or a misdemeanor of the same degree that the act
committed by the child aided would be if committed by an adult.
      (2)   If the crime committed by the person aided is a felony or if the
act committed by the child aided would be a felony if committed by an adult, or
if the crime or act committed by the person or child aided is an act of
terrorism, obstructing justice is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
State law.
   (d)   As used in this section:
      (1)   ACT OF TERRORISM. The same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2909.21.
      (2)   ADULT and CHILD. The same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2151.011.
      (3)   DELINQUENT CHILD. The same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2152.02.
(ORC 2921.32)
§ 606.16 RESISTING ARREST.
   (a)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a
lawful arrest of himself, herself or another.
   (b)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a
lawful arrest of the person or another person and, during the course of or as a
result of the resistance or interference, cause physical harm to a law
enforcement officer.
   (c)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a
lawful arrest of the person or another person if either of the following
applies:
      (1)   The offender, during the course of or as a result of the resistance
or interference, recklessly causes physical harm to a law enforcement officer
by means of a deadly weapon; or
      (2)   The offender, during the course of the resistance or interference,
brandishes a deadly weapon.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of resisting arrest. A
violation of division (a) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second
degree. A violation of division (b) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. A violation of division (c) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate State law.
   (e)   As used in this section, DEADLY WEAPON has the same meaning as in Ohio
R.C. 2923.11.
(ORC 2921.33)
Statutory reference:
   Unlawful taking of deadly weapon from law enforcement officer, felony, see
Ohio R.C. 2911.01
§ 606.165 COMPLIANCE WITH LAWFUL ORDER OF POLICE OFFICER; FLEEING.
   (a)   No person shall fail to comply with any lawful order or direction of
any police officer invested with authority to direct, control, or regulate
traffic.
   (b)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle so as willfully to elude or
flee a police officer after receiving a visible or audible signal from a police
officer to bring the person’s motor vehicle to a stop.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to comply
with an order or signal of a police officer.
      (2)   A violation of division (a) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
      (3)   Except as provided in divisions (c)(4) and (c)(5) of this section,
a violation of division (b) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (4)   A violation of division (b) of this section is a felony and shall
be prosecuted under appropriate state law if the jury or judge as trier of fact
finds by proof beyond a reasonable doubt that in committing the offense, the
offender was fleeing immediately after the commission of a felony.
      (5)   A.   A violation of division (b) of this section is a felony and
shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law if the jury or judge as trier
of fact finds any of the following by proof beyond a reasonable doubt:
            1.   The operation of the motor vehicle by the offender was a
proximate cause of serious physical harm to persons or property.
            2.   The operation of the motor vehicle by the offender caused a
substantial risk of serious physical harm to persons or property.
         B.   If a police officer pursues an offender who is violating division
(b) of this section and division (c)(5)A. of this section applies, the
sentencing court, in determining the seriousness of an offender’s conduct for
purposes of sentencing the offender for a violation of division (b) of this
section, shall consider, along with the factors set forth in Ohio R.C. 2929.12
and 2929.13 that are required to be considered, all of the following:
            1.   The duration of the pursuit;
            2.   The distance of the pursuit;
            3.   The rate of speed at which the offender operated the motor
vehicle during the pursuit;
            4.   Whether the offender failed to stop for traffic lights or stop
signs during the pursuit;
            5.   The number of traffic lights or stop signs for which the
offender failed to stop during the pursuit;
            6.   Whether the offender operated the motor vehicle during the
pursuit without lighted lights during a time when lighted lights are required;
            7.   Whether the offender committed a moving violation during the
pursuit;
            8.   The number of moving violations the offender committed during
the pursuit;
            9.   Any other relevant factors indicating that the offender’s
conduct is more serious than conduct normally constituting the offense.
   (d)   In addition to any other sanction imposed for a violation of division
(a) of this section, the court shall impose a class five suspension from the
range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(5). If the offender previously has been
found guilty of an offense under this section or under R.C. § 2921.331 or any
other substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, in addition to any other
sanction imposed for the offense, the court shall impose a class one suspension
as described in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(1). The court may grant limited driving
privileges to the offender on a suspension imposed for a misdemeanor violation
of this section as set forth in R.C. § 4510.021. No judge shall suspend any
portion of the suspension under a class one suspension of an offender’s
license, permit, or privilege required by this division.
   (e)   As used in this section:
      (1)   MOVING VIOLATION. The same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2743.70.
      (2)   POLICE OFFICER. The same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4511.01.
(ORC 2921.331(A) - (C), (E), (F))
§ 606.17 HAVING AN UNLAWFUL INTEREST IN A PUBLIC CONTRACT.
   (a)   No public official shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Authorize or employ the authority of the public official’s office
to secure authorization of any public contract in which the public official, a
member of the public official’s family, or any of the public official’s
business associates has an interest.
      (2)   Authorize or employ the authority or influence of the public
official’s office to secure the investment of public funds in any share, bond,
mortgage, or other security with respect to which the public official, a member
of the public official’s family, or any of the public official’s business
associates either has an interest, is an underwriter, or receives any
brokerage, origination, or servicing fees.
      (3)   During the public official’s term of office or within one year
thereafter, occupy any position of profit in the prosecution of a public
contract authorized by the public official or by a legislative body,
commission, or board of which the public official was a member at the time of
authorization, unless the contract was let by competitive bidding to the lowest
and best bidder.
      (4)   Have an interest in the profits or benefits of a public contract
entered into by or for the use of the political subdivision or governmental
agency or instrumentality with which the public official is connected.
      (5)   Have an interest in the profits or benefits of a public contract
that is not let by competitive bidding when required by law, and that involves
more than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
   (b)   In the absence of bribery or a purpose to defraud, a public official,
member of a public official’s family, or any of a public official’s business
associates shall not be considered as having an interest in a public contract
or the investment of public funds, if all of the following apply:
      (1)   The interest of that person is limited to owning or controlling
shares of the corporation, or being a creditor of the corporation or other
organization, that is the contractor on the public contract involved, or that
is the issuer of the security in which public funds are invested.
      (2)   The shares owned or controlled by that person do not exceed 5
percent of the outstanding shares of the corporation, and the amount due that
person as creditor does not exceed 5 percent of the total indebtedness of the
corporation or other organization.
      (3)   That person, prior to the time the public contract is entered into,
files with the political subdivision or governmental agency or instrumentality
involved, an affidavit giving that person’s exact status in connection with the
corporation or other organization.
   (c)   This section does not apply to a public contract in which a public
official, member of a public official’s family, or one of a public official’s
business associates has an interest, when all of the following apply:
      (1)   The subject of the public contract is necessary supplies or
services for the political subdivision or governmental agency or
instrumentality involved.
      (2)   The supplies or services are unobtainable elsewhere for the same or
lower cost, or are being furnished to the political subdivision or governmental
agency or instrumentality as part of a continuing course of dealing established
prior to the public official’s becoming associated with the political
subdivision or governmental agency or instrumentality involved.
      (3)   The treatment accorded the political subdivision or governmental
agency or instrumentality is either preferential to or the same as that
accorded other customers or clients in similar transactions.
      (4)   The entire transaction is conducted at arm’s length, with full
knowledge by the political subdivision or governmental agency or
instrumentality involved, of the interest of the public official, member of the
public official’s family, or business associate, and the public official takes
no part in the deliberations or decision of the political subdivision or
governmental agency or instrumentality with respect to the public contract.
   (d)   Division (a)(4) of this section does not prohibit participation by a
public employee in any housing program funded by public monies if the public
employee otherwise qualifies for the program and does not use the authority or
influence of the public official’s office or employment to secure benefits from
the program and if the monies are to be used on the primary residence of the
public employee. Such participation does not constitute an unlawful interest in
a public contract in violation of this section.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of having an unlawful interest
in a public contract. Violation of division (a)(1) or (2) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate State law. Violation of division (a)
(3), (4), or (5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (f)   It is not a violation of this section for a prosecuting attorney to
appoint assistants and employees in accordance with Ohio R.C. 309.06 and
2921.421, or for a chief legal officer of a municipality or an official
designated as prosecutor in a municipality to appoint assistants and employees
in accordance with Ohio R.C. 733.621 and 2921.421, or for a township law
director appointed under Ohio R.C. 504.15 to appoint assistants and employees
in accordance with Ohio R.C. 504.151 and 2921.421.
   (g)   Any public contract in which a public official, a member of the public
official’s family, or any of the public official’s business associates has an
interest in violation of this section is void and unenforceable. Any contract
securing the investment of public funds in which a public official, a member of
the public official’s family, or any of the public official’s business
associates has an interest, is an underwriter, or receives any brokerage,
origination or servicing fees and that was entered into in violation of this
section is void and unenforceable.
   (h)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   CHIEF LEGAL OFFICER. The same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 733.621.
      (2)   PUBLIC CONTRACT. Any of the following:
         A.   The purchase or acquisition, or a contract for the purchase or
acquisition, of property or services by or for the use of the State or any of
its political subdivisions, or any agency or instrumentality of either,
including the employment of an individual by the State, any of its political
subdivisions, or any agency or instrumentality of either.
         B.   A contract for the design, construction, alteration, repair, or
maintenance of any public property.
(ORC 2921.42)
§ 606.18 SOLICITING OR RECEIVING IMPROPER COMPENSATION.
   (a)   No public servant shall knowingly solicit or accept and no person
shall knowingly promise or give to a public servant either of the following:
      (1)   Any compensation, other than as allowed by Ohio R.C. 102.03(G),
(H), (I), or other provisions of law, to perform the public servant’s official
duties, to perform any other act or service in the public servant’s public
capacity, for the general performance of the duties of the public servant’s
public office or public employment, or as a supplement to the public servant’s
public compensation.
      (2)   Additional or greater fees or costs than are allowed by law to
perform the public servant’s official duties.
   (b)   No public servant for the public servant’s own personal or business
use and no person for the person’s own personal or business use or for the
personal or business use of a public servant or party official, shall solicit
or accept anything of value in consideration of either of the following:
      (1)   Appointing or securing, maintaining, or renewing the appointment of
any person to any public office, employment, or agency.
      (2)   Preferring, or maintaining the status of, any public employee with
respect to compensation, duties, placement, location, promotion, or other
material aspects of employment.
   (c)   No person for the benefit of a political party, campaign committee,
legislative campaign fund, political action committee or political contributing
entity shall coerce any contribution in consideration of either of the
following:
      (1)   Appointing or securing, maintaining, or renewing the appointment of
any person to any public office, employment, or agency.
      (2)   Preferring, or maintaining the status of, any public employee with
respect to compensation, duties, placement, location, promotion, or other
material aspects of employment.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of soliciting improper
compensation, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (e)   A public servant who is convicted of a violation of this section is
disqualified from holding any public office, employment, or position of trust
in this State for a period of seven years from the date of conviction.
   (f)   Divisions (a), (b), and (c) of this section do not prohibit any person
from making voluntary contributions to a political party, campaign committee,
legislative campaign fund, political action committee or political contributing
entity or prohibit a political party, campaign committee, legislative campaign
fund, political action committee or political contributing entity from
accepting voluntary contributions.
(ORC 2921.43)
§ 606.19 DERELICTION OF DUTY.
   (a)   No law enforcement officer shall negligently do any of the following:
      (1)   Fail to serve a lawful warrant without delay.
      (2)   Fail to prevent or halt the commission of an offense or to
apprehend an offender, when it is in the law enforcement officer’s power to do
so alone or with available assistance.
   (b)   No law enforcement, ministerial, or judicial officer shall negligently
fail to perform a lawful duty in a criminal case or proceeding.
   (c)   No officer, having charge of a detention facility, shall negligently
do any of the following:
      (1)   Allow the detention facility to become littered or unsanitary.
      (2)   Fail to provide persons confined in the detention facility with
adequate food, clothing, bedding, shelter, and medical attention.
      (3)   Fail to control an unruly prisoner, or to prevent intimidation of
or physical harm to a prisoner by another.
      (4)   Allow a prisoner to escape.
      (5)   Fail to observe any lawful and reasonable regulation for the
management of the detention facility.
   (d)   No public official shall recklessly create a deficiency, incur a
liability, or expend a greater sum than is appropriated by the Council for the
use in any one year of the department, agency, or institution with which the
public official is connected.
   (e)   No public servant shall recklessly fail to perform a duty expressly
imposed by law with respect to the public servant’s office, or recklessly do
any act expressly forbidden by law with respect to the public servant’s office.
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of dereliction of duty, a
misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (g)   Except as otherwise provided by law, a public servant who is a county
treasurer; county auditor; township fiscal officer; city auditor; city
treasurer; village fiscal officer; village clerk-treasurer; village clerk; in
the case of a municipal corporation having a charter that designates an officer
who, by virtue of the charter, has duties and functions similar to those of the
city or village officers referred to in this section, the officer so designated
by the charter; school district treasurer; fiscal officer of a community school
established under R.C. Chapter 3314; treasurer of a science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics school established under R.C. Chapter 3326; or
fiscal officer of a college-preparatory boarding school established under R.C.
Chapter 3328 and is convicted of or pleads guilty to dereliction of duty is
disqualified from holding any public office, employment, or position of trust
in this state for four years following the date of conviction or of entry of
the plea, and is not entitled to hold any public office until any repayment or
restitution required by the court is satisfied.
   (h)   As used in this section, PUBLIC SERVANT includes the following:
      (1)   An officer or employee of a contractor as defined in R.C. § 9.08;
      (2)   A fiscal officer employed by the operator of a community school
established under R.C. Chapter 3314 or by the operator of a college-
preparatory boarding school established under R.C. Chapter 3328.
(ORC 2921.44)
§ 606.20 INTERFERING WITH CIVIL RIGHTS.
   (a)   No public servant, under color of the public servant's office,
employment, or authority, shall knowingly deprive, or conspire or attempt to
deprive any person of a constitutional or statutory right.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interfering with civil
rights, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2921.45)
Statutory reference:
   Restraining or confining pregnant children or pregnant women, see R.C. §
2152.75(B) and R.C. § 2901.10
§ 606.21 ATTEMPTS.
   (a)   No person, purposely or knowingly, and when purpose or knowledge is
sufficient culpability for the commission of an offense, shall engage in
conduct that, if successful, would constitute or result in the offense.
   (b)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that, in retrospect,
commission of the offense that was the object of the attempt was either
factually or legally impossible under the attendant circumstances, if that
offense could have been committed had the attendant circumstances been as the
actor believed them to be.
   (c)   No person who is convicted of committing a specific offense, of
complicity in the commission of an offense, or of conspiracy to commit an
offense, shall be convicted of an attempt to commit the same offense in
violation of this section.
   (d)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that the
actor abandoned his or her effort to commit the offense or otherwise prevented
its commission, under circumstances manifesting a complete and voluntary
renunciation of his or her criminal purpose.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of an attempt to commit an
offense. An attempt to commit aggravated murder, murder, or an offense for
which the maximum penalty is imprisonment for life is a felony of the first
degree, to be prosecuted under appropriate State law. An attempt to commit a
drug abuse offense for which the penalty is determined by the amount or number
of unit doses of the controlled substance involved in the drug abuse offense is
an offense of the same degree as the drug abuse offense attempted would be if
that drug abuse offense had been committed and had involved an amount or number
of unit doses of the controlled substance that is within the next lower range
of controlled substance amounts than was involved in the attempt. An attempt to
commit any other offense is an offense of the next lesser degree than the
offense attempted. In the case of an attempt to commit an offense other than a
violation of Ohio R.C. Chapter 3734 that is not specifically classified, an
attempt is a misdemeanor of the first degree if the offense attempted is a
felony, and a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if the offense attempted is a
misdemeanor. In the case of an attempt to commit a violation of any provision
of Ohio R.C. Chapter 3734, other than Ohio R.C. 3734.18, that relates to
hazardous wastes, an attempt is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
State law. An attempt to commit a minor misdemeanor, or to engage in
conspiracy, is not an offense under this section.
   (f)   As used in this section:
      (1)   DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2925.01.
      (2)   MOTOR VEHICLE has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4501.01.
(ORC 2923.02)
§ 606.22 COMPLICITY.
   (a)   No person, acting with the kind of culpability required for the
commission of an offense, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Solicit or procure another to commit the offense;
      (2)   Aid or abet another in committing the offense;
      (3)   Conspire with another to commit the offense in violation of Ohio
R.C. 2923.01;
      (4)   Cause an innocent or irresponsible person to commit the offense.
   (b)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that no person with
whom the accused was in complicity has been convicted as a principal offender.
   (c)   No person shall be convicted of complicity under this section unless
an offense is actually committed, but a person may be convicted of complicity
in an attempt to commit an offense in violation of Ohio R.C. 2923.02 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (d)   If an alleged accomplice of the defendant testifies against the
defendant in a case in which the defendant is charged with complicity in the
commission of or an attempt to commit an offense, an attempt to commit an
offense, or an offense, the court shall charge the jury in accordance with Ohio
R.C. 2923.03(D).
   (e)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that,
prior to the commission of or attempt to commit the offense, the actor
terminated his or her complicity, under circumstances manifesting a complete
and voluntary renunciation of his or her criminal purpose.
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of complicity in the
commission of an offense, and shall be prosecuted and punished as if he or she
were a principal offender. A charge of complicity may be stated in terms of
this section, or in terms of the principal offense.
(ORC 2923.03)
§ 606.23 DETENTION OF SHOPLIFTERS AND THOSE COMMITTING MOTION PICTURE PIRACY;
PROTECTION OF INSTITUTIONAL PROPERTY.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply.
      (1)   ARCHIVAL INSTITUTION. Any public or private building, structure, or
shelter in which are stored historical documents, devices, records,
manuscripts, or items of public interest, which historical materials are stored
to preserve the materials or the information in the materials, to disseminate
the information contained in the materials, or to make the materials available
for public inspection or for inspection by certain persons who have a
particular interest in, use for, or knowledge concerning the materials.
      (2)   AUDIOVISUAL RECORDING FUNCTION AND FACILITY. The same meaning as in
Ohio R.C. 2913.07.
      (3)   MUSEUM. Any public or private nonprofit institution that is
permanently organized for primarily educational or aesthetic purposes, owns or
borrows objects or items of public interest, and cares for and exhibits to the
public the objects or items.
      (4)   PRETRIAL DIVERSION PROGRAM. Means a rehabilitative, educational
program designed to reduce recidivism and promote personal responsibility that
is at least four hours in length and that has been approved by any court in
this state.
   (b)   A merchant, or an employee or agent of a merchant, who has probable
cause to believe that things offered for sale by a mercantile establishment
have been unlawfully taken by a person, may, for the purposes set forth in
division (d) below, detain the person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable
length of time within the mercantile establishment or its immediate vicinity.
   (c)   Any officer, employee, or agent of a library, museum, or archival
institution may, for the purposes set forth in division (d) below or for the
purpose of conducting a reasonable investigation of a belief that the person
has acted in a manner described in divisions (c)(1) and (2) below, detain a
person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable length of time within, or in the
immediate vicinity of, the library, museum, or archival institution, if the
officer, employee, or agent has probable cause to believe that the person has:
      (1)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly moved, defaced, damaged,
destroyed, or otherwise improperly tampered with property owned by or in the
custody of the library, museum, or archival institution; or
      (2)   With purpose to deprive the library, museum, or archival
institution of property owned by it or in its custody, knowingly obtained or
exerted control over the property without the consent of the owner or person
authorized to give consent, beyond the scope of the express or implied consent
of the owner or person authorized to give consent, by deception, or by threat.
   (d)   An officer, agent, or employee of a library, museum, or archival
institution pursuant to division (c) above or a merchant or an employee or
agent of a merchant pursuant to division (b) above may detain another person
for any of the following purposes:
      (1)   To recover the property that is the subject of the unlawful taking,
criminal mischief, or theft;
      (2)   To cause an arrest to be made by a peace officer;
      (3)   To obtain a warrant of arrest;
      (4)   To offer the person, if the person is suspected of the unlawful
taking, criminal mischief, or theft and notwithstanding any other provision of
this Code or the Ohio Revised Code, an opportunity to complete a pretrial
diversion program and to inform the person of the other legal remedies
available to the library, museum, archival institution, or merchant.
   (e)   The owner or lessee of a facility in which a motion picture is being
shown, or the owner’s or lessee’s employee or agent, who has probable cause to
believe that a person is or has been operating an audiovisual recording
function of a device in violation of Ohio R.C. 2917.07 may, for the purpose of
causing an arrest to be made by a peace officer or of obtaining an arrest
warrant, detain the person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable length of
time within the facility or its immediate vicinity.
   (f)   The officer, agent, or employee of the library, museum, or archival
institution, the merchant or an employee or agent of a merchant, or the owner,
lessee, employee, or agent of the facility acting under divisions (b), (c) or
(e) above shall not search the person detained, search or seize any property
belonging to the person detained without the person’s consent, or use undue
restraint upon the person detained.
   (g)   Any peace officer may arrest without a warrant any person that the
officer has probable cause to believe has committed any act described in
division (c)(1) or (2) above, that the officer has probable cause to believe
has committed an unlawful taking in a mercantile establishment, or that the
officer has reasonable cause to believe has committed an act prohibited by Ohio
R.C. 2913.07. An arrest under this division shall be made within a reasonable
time after the commission of the act or unlawful taking.
(ORC 2935.041)
§ 606.24 DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED OR FORFEITED PROPERTY HELD BY POLICE
DIVISION.
   (a)   Safekeeping of property in custody.
      (1)   A.   Any property that has been lost, abandoned, stolen, seized
pursuant to a search warrant, or otherwise lawfully seized or forfeited and
that is in the custody of the Police Department shall be kept safely by the
Police Department, pending the time it no longer is needed as evidence or for
another lawful purpose, and shall be disposed of pursuant to this section or
R.C. §§ 2981.12 and 2981.13.
         B.   This section does not apply to the custody and disposal of any of
the following:
            1.   Vehicles subject to forfeiture under R.C. Title 45, except as
provided in division (b)(1)F. of this section;
            2.   Abandoned junk motor vehicles or other property of negligible
value;
            3.   Property held by a department of rehabilitation and correction
institution that is unclaimed, that does not have an identified owner, that the
owner agrees to dispose of or that is identified by the Department as having
little value;
            4.   Animals taken, and devices used in unlawfully taking animals,
under R.C. § 1531.20;
            5.   Controlled substances sold by a peace officer in the
performance of the officer’s official duties under R.C. § 3719.141;
            6.   Property recovered by a township law enforcement agency under
R.C. §§ 505.105 to 505.109;
            7.   Property held and disposed of under an ordinance of the
municipality or under R.C. §§ 737.29 to 737.33, except that if the municipality
has received notice of a citizens’ reward program as provided in division (b)
(5) of this section and disposes of property under an ordinance shall pay 25%
of any moneys acquired from any sale or auction to the citizens’ reward
program.
      (2)   A.   The Police Department shall adopt and comply with a written
internal control policy that does all of the following:
            1.   Provides for keeping detailed records as to the amount of
property acquired by the Police Department and the date property was acquired;
            2.   Provides for keeping detailed records of the disposition of
the property, which shall include but not be limited to both of the following:
               a.   The manner in which it was disposed, the date of
disposition, detailed financial records concerning any property sold and the
name of any person who received the property. The record shall not identify or
enable identification of the individual officer who seized any item of
property.
               b.   An itemized list of the specific expenditures made with
amounts that are gained from the sale of the property and that are retained by
the agency, including the specific amount expended on each expenditure, except
that the policy shall not provide for or permit the identification of any
specific expenditure that is made in an ongoing investigation.
            3.   Complies with R.C. § 2981.13 if the Police Department has a
law enforcement trust fund or similar fund created under that section.
         B.   The records kept under the internal control policy shall be open
to public inspection during the Police Department’s regular business hours. The
policy adopted under this section is a public record open for inspection under
R.C. § 149.43.
      (3)   A.   The Police Department, with custody of property to be disposed
of under this section or R.C. § 2981.12 or 2981.13, shall make a reasonable
effort to locate persons entitled to possession of the property, to notify them
of when and where it may be claimed, and to return the property to them at the
earliest possible time. In the absence of evidence identifying persons entitled
to possession, it is sufficient notice to advertise using at least one of the
following methods:
            1.   In the print or digital edition of a newspaper of general
circulation in the county;
            2.   On the official public notice web site established under R.C.
§ 125.182;
            3.   On the web site and social media account of the county.
         B.   The notices shall briefly describe the nature of the property in
custody and inviting persons to view and establish their right to it.
      (4)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         A.   CITIZENS’ REWARD PROGRAM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 9.92.
         B.   LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. Includes correctional institutions.
         C.   TOWNSHIP LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. An organized police department
of a township, a township police district, a joint police district, or the
office of a township constable.
(R.C. § 2981.11)
   (b)   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property.
      (1)   Unclaimed or forfeited property in the custody of the Police
Department, other than property described in division (a)(1)B. of this section,
shall be disposed of by order of any court of record that has territorial
jurisdiction over the municipality, as follows:
         A.   Drugs shall be disposed of pursuant to R.C. § 3719.11 or placed
in the custody of the Secretary of the Treasury of the United States for
disposal or use for medical or scientific purposes under applicable federal
law.
         B.   Firearms and dangerous ordnance suitable for police work may be
given to a law enforcement agency for that purpose. Firearms suitable for
sporting use or as museum pieces or collectors’ items may be sold at public
auction pursuant to division (b)(2) of this section. The Police Department may
sell other firearms and dangerous ordnance to a federally licensed firearms
dealer in a manner that the court considers proper. The Police Department shall
destroy any firearms or dangerous ordnance not given to a law enforcement
agency or sold or shall send them to the Bureau of Criminal Identification and
Investigation for destruction by the Bureau.
         C.   Obscene materials shall be destroyed.
         D.   Beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol seized from a person who
does not hold a permit issued under R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303 or otherwise
forfeited to the state for an offense under R.C. § 4301.45 or 4301.53 shall be
sold by the Division of Liquor Control if the Division determines that it is
fit for sale or shall be placed in the custody of the Investigations Unit in
the Ohio Department of Public Safety and be used for training relating to law
enforcement activities. The Ohio Department of Public Safety, with the
assistance of the Division of Liquor Control, shall adopt rules in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 119 to provide for the distribution to state or local law
enforcement agencies upon their request. If any tax imposed under R.C. Title 43
has not been paid in relation to the beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol, any
moneys acquired from the sale shall first be used to pay the tax. All other
money collected under this division (b)(1)D. shall be paid into the State
Treasury. Any beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol that the Division
determines to be unfit for sale shall be destroyed.
         E.   Money received by an inmate of a correctional institution from an
unauthorized source or in an unauthorized manner shall be returned to the
sender, if known, or deposited in the inmates’ industrial and entertainment
fund of the institution if the sender is not known.
         F.   1.   Any mobile instrumentality forfeited under R.C. Chapter 2981
may be given to the law enforcement agency that initially seized the mobile
instrumentality for use in performing its duties, if the agency wants the
mobile instrumentality. The agency shall take the mobile instrumentality
subject to any security interest or lien on the mobile instrumentality.
            2.   Vehicles and vehicle parts forfeited under R.C. §§ 4549.61 to
4549.63 may be given to a law enforcement agency for use in performing its
duties. Those parts may be incorporated into any other official vehicle. Parts
that do not bear vehicle identification numbers or derivatives of them may be
sold or disposed of as provided by rules of the Director of Public Safety.
Parts from which a vehicle identification number or derivative of it has been
removed, defaced, covered, altered or destroyed and that are not suitable for
police work or incorporation into an official vehicle shall be destroyed and
sold as junk or scrap.
         G.   Computers, computer networks, computer systems and computer
software suitable for police work may be given to a law enforcement agency for
that purpose or disposed of under division (b)(2) of this section.
         H.   Money seized in connection with a violation of R.C. § 2905.32,
2907.21, or 2907.22 shall be deposited in the Victims of Human Trafficking Fund
created by R.C. § 5101.87.
      (2)   Unclaimed or forfeited property that is not described in division
(b)(1) of this section or division (a)(1)B. of this section, with court
approval, may be used by the law enforcement agency in possession of it. If it
is not used by the agency, it may be sold without appraisal at a public auction
to the highest bidder for cash or disposed of in another manner that the court
considers proper.
      (3)   Except as provided in divisions (b)(1) and (b)(5) of this section
and after compliance with division (b)(4) of this section when applicable, any
moneys acquired from the sale of property disposed of pursuant to this section
shall be placed in the General Revenue Fund of the state, or the General Fund
of the municipality.
      (4)   If the property was in the possession of the Police Department in
relation to a delinquent child proceeding in a juvenile court, 10% of any
moneys acquired from the sale of property disposed of under this section shall
be applied to one or more community addiction services provider, as defined in
R.C. § 5119.01. A juvenile court shall not specify a services provider, except
as provided in this division, unless the services provider is in the same
county as the court or in a contiguous county. If no services provider is
located in any of those counties, the juvenile court may specify a services
provider anywhere in Ohio. The remaining 90% of the proceeds or cash shall be
applied as provided in division (b)(3) of this section.
      (5)   A.   If the Board of County Commissioners recognizes a citizens’
reward program under R.C. § 9.92, the Board shall notify the Police Department
of the recognition by filing a copy of its resolution conferring that
recognition with the Police Department. When the Board recognizes a citizens’
reward program and the county includes a part, but not all, of the territory of
the municipality, the Board shall so notify the Police Department of the
recognition of the citizens’ reward program only if the county contains the
highest percentage of the municipality’s population.
         B.   Upon being so notified, the Police Department shall pay 25% of
any forfeited proceeds or cash derived from each sale of property disposed of
pursuant to this section to the citizens’ reward program for use exclusively to
pay rewards. No part of the funds may be used to pay expenses associated with
the program. If a citizens’ reward program that operates in more than one
county or in another state in addition to this state receives funds under this
section, the funds shall be used to pay rewards only for tips and information
to law enforcement agencies concerning offenses committed in the county from
which the funds were received.
      (6)   Any property forfeited under R.C. Chapter 2981 not be used to pay
any fine imposed upon a person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to an
underlying criminal offense or a different offense arising out of the same
facts and circumstances.
      (7)   Any moneys acquired from the sale of personal effects, tools, or
other property seized because the personal effects, tools, or other property
were used in the commission of a violation of R.C. § 2905.32, 2907.21, or
2907.22 or derived from the proceeds of the commission of a violation of R.C. §
2905.32, 2907.21, or 2907.22 and disposed of pursuant to this division (b)
shall be placed in the Victims of Human Trafficking Fund created by R.C. §
5101.87.
(R.C. § 2981.12)
   (c)   Disposition of contraband, proceeds, or instrumentalities. Except as
otherwise provided in R.C. § 2981.13, property ordered forfeited as contraband,
proceeds, or an instrumentality pursuant to R.C. Chapter 2981 shall be disposed
of, used or sold pursuant to division (b) of this section or R.C. § 2981.12. If
the property is to be sold under division (b) of this section or R.C. §
2981.12, the prosecutor shall cause notice of the proposed sale to be given in
accordance with law.
(R.C. § 2981.13(A))
Statutory reference:
   Forfeiture of property generally, see R.C. Chapter 2981
§ 606.25 IMPERSONATING AN OFFICER.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   FEDERAL LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. An employee of the United States
who serves in a position the duties of which are primarily the investigation,
apprehension or detention of individuals suspected or convicted of offenses
under the criminal laws of the United States.
      (2)   IMPERSONATE. To act the part of, assume the identity of, wear the
uniform or any part of the uniform of, or display the identification of a
particular person or of a member of a class of persons with purpose to make
another person believe that the actor is that particular person or is a member
of that class of persons.
      (3)   INVESTIGATOR OF THE BUREAU OF CRIMINAL IDENTIFICATION AND
INVESTIGATION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2903.11.
      (4)   PEACE OFFICER. A Sheriff, Deputy Sheriff, Marshal, Deputy Marshal,
member of the organized police department of a municipal corporation or
township constable, who is employed by a political subdivision of this state; a
member of a police force employed by a metropolitan housing authority under
R.C. § 3735.31(D); a member of a police force employed by a regional transit
authority under R.C. § 306.35(Y); a state university law enforcement officer
appointed under R.C. § 3345.04; a veterans’ home police officer appointed under
R.C. § 5907.02; a special police officer employed by a port authority under
R.C. § 4582.04 or 4582.28; an officer, agent or employee of the state or any of
its agencies, instrumentalities or political subdivisions, upon whom, by
statute, a duty to conserve the peace or to enforce all or certain laws is
imposed and the authority to arrest violators is conferred, within limits of
that statutory duty and authority; or a State Highway Patrol trooper whose
primary duties are to preserve the peace, to protect life and property and to
enforce the laws, ordinances or rules of the state or any of its political
subdivisions.
      (5)   PRIVATE POLICE OFFICER. Any security guard, special police officer,
private detective or other person who is privately employed in a police
capacity.
   (b)   No person shall impersonate a peace officer, private police officer,
investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation or
federal law enforcement officer.
   (c)   No person, by impersonating a peace officer, private police officer,
investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation or
federal law enforcement officer, shall arrest or detain any person, search any
person or search the property of any person.
   (d)   No person, with purpose to commit or facilitate the commission of an
offense, shall impersonate a peace officer, private police officer, federal law
enforcement officer, an officer, agent or employee of the municipality or the
state, or investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and
Investigation.
   (e)   No person shall commit a felony while impersonating a peace officer,
private police officer, federal law enforcement officer, an officer, agent or
employee of the municipality or of the state or investigator of the Bureau of
Criminal Identification and Investigation.
   (f)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (b) of this
section that the impersonation of the peace officer, private police officer,
federal law enforcement officer, an officer, agent or employee of the
municipality or of the state, or investigator of the Bureau of Criminal
Identification and Investigation was for a lawful purpose.
   (g)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Whoever violates division (c) or (d) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the purpose of a
violation of division (d) of this section is to commit or facilitate the
commission of a felony, a violation of division (d) is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. Whoever violates division
(e) of this section is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(ORC 2921.51)
§ 606.26 DISPLAY OF LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY EMBLEM.
   (a)   No person who is not entitled to do so shall knowingly display on a
motor vehicle the emblem of a law enforcement agency or an organization of law
enforcement officers.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of the unlawful display of the
emblem of a law enforcement agency or an organization of law enforcement
officers, a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 2913.441)
§ 606.27 MISREPRESENTING PRIVATE PUBLICATIONS AS OFFICIAL; SOLICITING
ADVERTISING.
   (a)   No person shall designate any privately published pamphlet, manual or
other publication as an official publication of the Village or any department,
subdepartment or officer thereof, or, by display of the seal of the Village or
otherwise, make any private publication appear to have official authorization
of the Village or any department, subdepartment or officer thereof. No person
shall solicit an advertisement or contribution for any such unlawful
publication.
(Ord. 2540, passed 9-12-1945)
   (b)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
§ 606.28 USING SHAM LEGAL PROCESS.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply:
      (1)   LAWFULLY ISSUED. Adopted, issued, or rendered in accordance with
the United States Constitution, the constitution of a State, and the applicable
statutes, rules, regulations and ordinances of the United States, a State, and
the political subdivisions of a State.
      (2)   POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS. Municipal corporations, townships,
counties, school districts, and all other bodies corporate and politic that are
organized under State law and are responsible for governmental activities only
in geographical areas smaller than that of a State.
      (3)   SHAM LEGAL PROCESS. An instrument that meets all of the following
conditions:
         A.   It is not lawfully issued.
         B.   It purports to do any of the following:
            1.   To be a summons, subpoena, judgment, or order of a court, a
law enforcement officer, or a legislative, executive or administrative body.
            2.   To assert jurisdiction over or determine the legal or
equitable status, rights, duties, powers, or privileges of any person or
property.
            3.   To require or authorize the search, seizure, indictment,
arrest, trial, or sentencing of any person or property.
         C.   It is designed to make another person believe that it is lawfully
issued.
      (4)   STATE. A State of the United States, including without limitation
the State legislature, the highest court of the State that has Statewide
jurisdiction, the offices of all elected State officers, and all departments,
boards, offices, commissions, agencies, institutions, and other
instrumentalities of the State. STATE does not include the political
subdivisions of the State.
   (b)   No person shall, knowing the sham legal process to be a sham legal
process, do any of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly issue, display, deliver, distribute, or otherwise use
sham legal process;
      (2)   Knowingly use sham legal process to arrest, detain, search or seize
any person or the property of another person;
      (3)   Knowingly commit or facilitate the commission of an offense using
sham legal process; and/or
      (4)   Knowingly commit a felony by using sham legal process.
   (c)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (b)(1) or (2)
of this section that the use of sham legal process was for a lawful purpose.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of using sham legal process. A
violation of division (b)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. A violation of division (b)(2) or (b)(3) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree, except that if the purpose of a violation of
division (b)(3) of this section is to commit or facilitate the commission of a
felony, a violation of division (b)(3) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate State law. A violation of division (b)(4) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate State law.
(ORC 2921.52(A) - (D))
§ 606.29 FAILURE TO DISCLOSE PERSONAL INFORMATION.
   (a)   No person who is in a public place shall refuse to disclose the
person’s name, address, or date of birth, when requested by a law enforcement
officer who reasonably suspects either of the following:
      (1)   The person is committing, has committed, or is about to commit a
criminal offense.
      (2)   The person witnessed any of the following:
         A.   An offense of violence that would constitute a felony under the
laws of this State;
         B.   A felony offense that causes or results in, or creates a
substantial risk of, serious physical harm to another person or property;
         C.   Any attempt or conspiracy to commit, or complicity in committing,
any offenses identified in division (a)(2)A. or (a)(2)B. of this section;
         D.   Any conduct reasonably indicating that any offense identified in
division (a)(2)A. or (a)(2)B. of this section or any attempt, conspiracy, or
complicity described in division (a)(2)C. of this section has been, is being,
or is about to be committed.
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of failure to
disclose one’s personal information, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (c)   Nothing in division (a) of this section requires a person to answer
any questions beyond that person’s name, address, or date of birth. Nothing in
division (a) of this section authorizes a law enforcement officer to arrest a
person for not providing any information beyond the person’s name, address, or
date of birth or for refusing to describe the offense observed.
   (d)   It is not a violation of division (a) of this section to refuse to
answer a question that would reveal a person’s age or date of birth if age is
an element of the crime that the person is suspected of committing.
(ORC 2921.29)
   (e)   No person entering an airport, train station, port, or other similar
critical transportation infrastructure site shall refuse to show identification
when requested by a law enforcement officer when there is a threat to security
and the law enforcement officer is requiring identification of all persons
entering the site.
   (f)   A law enforcement officer may prevent any person who refuses to show
identification when asked under the circumstances described in division (e) of
this section from entering the critical transportation infrastructure site.
(ORC 2909.31)
§ 606.30 MISUSE OF 9-1-1 SYSTEM.
   (a)   As used in this section, “9-1-1 system” means a system through which
individuals can request emergency service using the access number 9-1-1.
(R.C. § 128.01(A))
   (b)   No person shall knowingly use the telephone number of a 9-1-1 system
established under R.C. Chapter 128 to report an emergency if the person knows
that no emergency exists.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly use a 9-1-1 system for a purpose other than
obtaining emergency service.
   (d)   No person shall disclose or use any information concerning telephone
numbers, addresses, or names obtained from the database that serves the public
safety answering point of a 9-1-1 system established under R.C. Chapter 128,
except for any of the following purposes or under any of the following
circumstances:
      (1)   For the purpose of the 9-1-1 system;
      (2)   For the purpose of responding to an emergency call to an emergency
service provider;
      (3)   In the circumstance of the inadvertent disclosure of such
information due solely to technology of the wireless telephone network portion
of the 9-1-1 system not allowing access to the database to be restricted to 9-
1-1 specific answering lines at a public safety answering point;
      (4)   In the circumstance of access to a database being given by a
telephone company that is a wireless service provider to a public utility or
municipal utility in handling customer calls in times of public emergency or
service outages. The charge, terms and conditions for the disclosure or use of
the information for the purpose of such access to a database shall be subject
to the jurisdiction of the Steering Committee;
      (5)   In the circumstance of access to a database given by a telephone
company that is a wireline service provider to a state and local government in
warning of a public emergency, as determined by the Steering Committee. The
charge, terms and conditions for the disclosure or use of that information for
the purpose of access to a database is subject to the jurisdiction of the
Steering Committee.
(R.C. § 128.96(F) - (H))
   (e)   (1)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (c) or (d) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense and a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 128.99(A), (B))
§ 606.31 SELF DEFENSE: LIMITATIONS ON DUTY TO RETREAT PRIOR TO USING FORCE.
   (a)   As used in this section, RESIDENCE has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2901.05.
   (b)   For purposes of any section of this code that sets forth a criminal
offense, a person has no duty to retreat before using force in self-defense,
defense of another, or defense of that person's residence if that person is in
a place in which the person lawfully has a right to be.
   (c)   A trier of fact shall not consider the possibility of retreat as a
factor in determining whether or not a person who used force in self-defense,
defense of another, or defense of that person's residence reasonably believed
that the force was necessary to prevent injury, loss, or risk to life or
safety.
(R.C. § 2901.09)
CHAPTER 612: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
612.01   Definitions.
612.02   Sales to underage persons; prohibitions and misrepresentations.
612.03   Sales to intoxicated persons.
612.04   Liquor consumption in motor vehicle.
612.05   Permit required.
612.06   Posting age and firearm warning signs.
612.07   Open container prohibited.
612.08   Hours of sale or consumption.
612.09   Conveying intoxicating liquor or cash onto grounds of detention
facilities or other specified governmental facilities.
612.10   Sales of low-alcohol beverages to underage persons; prohibitions and
misrepresentations.
612.11   Alcohol vaporizing devices prohibited.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar State law
   Liquor Control Law - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4301
   Suspension of alcohol sales during emergency - see Ohio R.C. 4301.251
   Liquor permits - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4303
   Local option - see Ohio R.C. 4303.29
   Driving or physical control while intoxicated - see TRAF.
434.01
   Definitions generally - see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   Effect of voluntary intoxication on criminal liability - see GEN. OFF.
606.07
   Disorderly conduct while voluntarily intoxicated - see GEN. OFF.
648.04
   Using weapons while intoxicated - see GEN. OFF.
672.03
§ 612.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   ALCOHOL. Ethyl alcohol, whether rectified or diluted with water or
not, whatever its origin may be, and includes synthetic ethyl alcohol. The term
does not include denatured alcohol and wood alcohol.
   (b)   AT RETAIL. For use or consumption by the purchaser and not for resale.
   (c)   BEER.
      (1)   Includes all beverages brewed or fermented wholly or in part from
malt products and containing 0.5 percent or more of alcohol by volume.
      (2)   Beer, regardless of the percent of alcohol by volume, is not
intoxicating liquor for the purposes of this code, the Ohio Revised Code, or
any rules adopted under it.
   (d)   CIDER. All liquids that are fit to use for beverage purposes that
contain 0.5 percent of alcohol by volume, but not more than 6 percent of
alcohol by weight that are made through the normal alcoholic fermentation of
the juice of sound, ripe apples, including, without limitation, flavored,
sparkling, or carbonated cider and cider made from pure condensed apple mush.
   (e)   CLUB. A corporation or association of individuals organized in good
faith for social, recreational, benevolent, charitable, fraternal, political,
patriotic, or athletic purposes, which is the owner, lessor, or occupant of a
permanent building or part of a permanent building operated solely for such
purposes, membership in which entails the prepayment of regular dues, and
includes the place so operated.
   (f)   COMMUNITY FACILITY. Means either of the following:
      (1)   Any convention, sports or entertainment facility or complex, or any
combination of these, that is used by or accessible to the general public and
that is owned or operated in whole or in part by the State, a State agency, or
a political subdivision of the State or that is leased from, or located on
property owned by or leased from, the State, a State agency, a political
subdivision of the State, or a convention facilities authority created pursuant
to Ohio R.C. 351.02;
      (2)   An area designated as a community entertainment district pursuant
to Ohio R.C. 4301.80.
   (g)   CONTROLLED ACCESS ALCOHOL AND BEVERAGE CABINET. A closed container,
either refrigerated, in whole or in part, or nonrefrigerated, access to the
interior of which is restricted by means of a device that requires the use of a
key, magnetic card, or similar device and from which beer, intoxicating liquor,
other beverages, or food may be sold.
   (h)   HOTEL. The same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 3731.01, subject to the
exceptions mentioned in Ohio R.C. 3731.03.
   (i)   INTOXICATING LIQUOR and LIQUOR. All liquids and compounds, other than
beer, containing 0.5 percent or more of alcohol by volume which are fit to use
for beverage purposes, from whatever source and by whatever process produced,
by whatever name called, and whether they are medicated, proprietary, or
patented. INTOXICATING LIQUOR and LIQUOR include cider and alcohol, and all
solids and confections which contain 0.5 percent or more of alcohol by volume.
   (j)   LOW-ALCOHOL BEVERAGE. Any brewed or fermented malt product or any
product made from the fermented juices of grapes, fruits, or other agricultural
products that contains either no alcohol or less than 0.5 percent of alcohol by
volume. The beverages described in this definition do not include a soft drink
such as root beer, birch beer, or ginger beer.
   (k)   MANUFACTURE. All processes by which beer or intoxicating liquor is
produced, whether by distillation, rectifying, fortifying, blending,
fermentation, brewing, or in any other manner.
   (l)   MANUFACTURER. Any person engaged in the business of manufacturing beer
or intoxicating liquor.
   (m)   MIXED BEVERAGES. Includes bottled and prepared cordials, cocktails,
highballs, and solids and confections that are obtained by mixing any type of
whiskey, neutral spirits, brandy, gin or other distilled spirits with, or over,
carbonated or plain water, pure juices from flowers and plants, and other
flavoring materials. The completed product shall contain not less than 0.5
percent of alcohol by volume and not more than 21 percent of alcohol by volume.
The phrase includes the contents of a pod.
   (n)   NIGHTCLUB. A place habitually operated for profit, where food is
served for consumption on  the premises, and one or more forms of amusement are
provided or permitted for a consideration that may be in the form of a cover
charge or may be included in the price of the food and beverages, or both,
purchased by patrons.
   (o)   PERSON. Includes firms and corporations.
   (p)   PHARMACY. An establishment as defined in Ohio R.C. 4729.01, that is
under the management or control of a licensed pharmacist in accordance with
Ohio R.C. 4729.27.
   (q)   POD. Means a sealed capsule made from plastic, glass, aluminum, or a
combination thereof to which all of the following apply:
      (1)   The capsule contains intoxicating liquor of more than 21% of
alcohol by volume.
      (2)   The capsule also contains a concentrated flavoring mixture.
      (3)   The contents of the capsule are not readily accessible or intended
for consumption unless certain manufacturer's processing instructions are
followed.
      (4)   The instructions include releasing the contents of the capsule
through a machine specifically designed to process the contents.
      (5)   After being properly processed according to the manufacturer's
instructions, the final product produced from the capsule contains not less
than 0.5% of alcohol by volume and not more than 21% of alcohol by volume.
   (r)   RESTAURANT. A place located in a permanent building provided with
space and accommodations wherein, in consideration of the payment of money, hot
meals are habitually prepared, sold, and served at noon and evening, as the
principal business of the place. The term does not include pharmacies,
confectionery stores, lunch stands, nightclubs, and filling stations.
   (s)   SALE and SELL. The exchange, barter, gift, offer for sale, sale,
distribution, and delivery of any kind, and the transfer of title or possession
of beer and intoxicating liquor either by constructive or actual delivery by
any means or devices whatever, including the sale of beer or intoxicating
liquor by means of a controlled access alcohol and beverage cabinet pursuant to
Ohio R.C. 4301.21. Such terms do not include the mere solicitation of orders
for beer or intoxicating liquor from the holders of permits issued by the
Division of Liquor Control authorizing the sale of the beer or intoxicating
liquor, but no solicitor shall solicit any orders until the solicitor has been
registered with the Division pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4303.25.
   (t)   SALES AREA OR TERRITORY. An exclusive geographic area or territory
that is assigned to a particular A or B permit holder and that either has one
or more political subdivisions as its boundaries or consists of an area of land
with readily identifiable geographic boundaries. SALES AREA OR TERRITORY does
not include, however, any particular retail location in an exclusive geographic
area or territory that had been assigned to another A or B permit holder before
April 9, 2001.
   (u)   SEALED CONTAINER. Any container having a capacity of not more than 128
fluid ounces, the opening of which is closed to prevent the entrance of air.
   (v)   SPIRITUOUS LIQUOR. All intoxicating liquors containing more than 21
percent of alcohol by volume. The phrase does not include the contents of a
pod.
   (w)   VEHICLE. All means of transportation by land, by water, or by air, and
everything made use of in any way for such transportation.
   (x)   WHOLESALE DISTRIBUTOR and DISTRIBUTOR. A person engaged in the
business of selling to retail dealers for purposes of resale.
   (y)   WINE. All liquids fit to use for beverage purposes containing not less
than 0.5% of alcohol by  volume and not more than 21% of alcohol by volume,
that is made from the fermented juices of grapes, fruits, or other agricultural
products. The term includes cider, except as used in R.C. §§ 4301.13, 4301.421,
4301.422, 4301.432, and 4301.44, and, for purposes of determining the rate of
the tax that applies, R.C. § 4301.43(B), the term does not include cider.
(R.C. §§ 4301.01, 4301.244)
§ 612.02 SALES TO UNDERAGE PERSONS; PROHIBITIONS AND MISREPRESENTATIONS.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in Ohio R.C. Chapter
4301, no person shall sell beer or intoxicating liquor to an underage person,
shall buy beer or intoxicating liquor for an underage person, or shall furnish
it to an underage person unless given by a physician in the regular line of the
physician’s practice or given for established religious purposes or unless the
underage person is supervised by a parent, spouse who is not an underage
person, or legal guardian. In proceedings before the Liquor Control Commission,
no permit holder, or no employee or agent of a permit holder, charged with a
violation of this division shall be charged, for the same offense, with a
violation of Ohio R.C. 4301.22(A)(1) or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (b)   No person who is the owner or occupant of any public or private place
shall knowingly allow any underage person to remain in or on the place while
possessing or consuming beer or intoxicating liquor, unless the intoxicating
liquor or beer is given to the person possessing or consuming it by that
person’s parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian and
the parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian is present
at the time of the person’s possession or consumption of the beer or
intoxicating liquor. An owner of a public or private place is not liable for
acts or omissions in violation of this division that are committed by a lessee
of that place, unless the owner authorizes or acquiesces in the lessee’s acts
or omissions.
   (c)   No person shall engage or use accommodations at a hotel, inn, cabin,
campground, or restaurant when the person knows or has reason to know either of
the following:
      (1)   That beer or intoxicating liquor will be consumed by an underage
person on the premises of the accommodations that the person engages or uses,
unless the person engaging or using the accommodations is the spouse of the
underage person and who is not an underage person, or is the parent or legal
guardian of all of the underage persons, who consume beer or intoxicating
liquor on the premises and that person is on the premises at all times when
beer or intoxicating liquor is being consumed by an underage person.
      (2)   That a drug of abuse will be consumed on the premises of the
accommodations by any person, except a person who obtained the drug of abuse
pursuant to a prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized
to prescribe drugs and has the drug of abuse in the original container in which
it was dispensed to the person.
   (d)   (1)   No person is required to permit the engagement of accommodations
at any hotel, inn, cabin, or campground by an underage person or for an
underage person, if the person engaging the accommodations knows or has reason
to know that the underage person is intoxicated, or that the underage person
possesses any beer or intoxicating liquor and is not supervised by a parent,
spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian who is or will be
present at all times when the beer or intoxicating liquor is being consumed by
the underage person.
      (2)   No underage person shall knowingly engage or attempt to engage
accommodations at any hotel, inn, cabin, or campground by presenting
identification that falsely indicates that the underage person is 21 years of
age or older for the purpose of violating this section.
   (e)   (1)   No underage person shall knowingly order, pay for, share the
cost of, attempt to purchase, possess, or consume any beer or intoxicating
liquor in any public or private place. No underage person shall knowingly be
under the influence of any beer or intoxicating liquor in any public place. The
prohibitions set forth in this division against an underage person knowingly
possessing, consuming, or being under the influence of any beer or intoxicating
liquor shall not apply if the underage person is supervised by a parent, spouse
who is not an underage person, or legal guardian, or the beer or intoxicating
liquor is given by a physician in the regular line of the physician’s practice
or given for established religious purposes.
      (2)   A.   If a person is charged with violating division (e)(1) of this
section in a complaint filed under Ohio R.C. 2151.27, the court may order the
child into a diversion program specified by the court and hold the complaint in
abeyance pending successful completion of the diversion program. A child is
ineligible to enter into a diversion program under this division if the child
previously has been diverted pursuant to this division. If the child completes
the diversion program to the satisfaction of the court, the court shall dismiss
the complaint and order the child’s record in the case sealed under Ohio R.C.
2151.356 through 2151.358. If the child fails to satisfactorily complete the
diversion program, the court shall proceed with the complaint.
         B.   If a person is charged in a criminal complaint with violating
division (e)(1) of this section, Ohio R.C. 2935.36 shall apply to the offense,
except that a person is ineligible for diversion under that section if the
person previously has been diverted pursuant to divisions (e)(2)A. or (e)(2)B.
of this section. If the person completes the diversion program to the
satisfaction of the court, the court shall dismiss the complaint and order the
record in the case sealed under Ohio R.C. 2953.33. If the person fails to
satisfactorily complete the diversion program, the court shall proceed with the
complaint.
   (f)   No parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian of
a minor shall knowingly permit the minor to violate this section or Ohio R.C.
4301.63, 4301.633, or 4301.634, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (g)   The operator of any hotel, inn, cabin, or campground shall make the
provisions of this section available in writing to any person engaging or using
accommodations at the hotel, inn, cabin, or campground.
   (h)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   DRUG OF ABUSE. The same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 3719.011.
      (2)   HOTEL. The same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 3731.01.
      (3)   LICENSED HEALTH PROFESSIONAL AUTHORIZED TO PRESCRIBE DRUGS and
PRESCRIPTION. The same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 4729.01.
      (4)   MINOR. A person under the age of 18 years.
      (5)   UNDERAGE PERSON. A person under the age of 21 years.
(ORC 4301.69)
   (i)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in Ohio R.C. Chapter
4301, no person under the age of 21 years shall purchase beer or intoxicating
liquor.
(ORC 4301.63)
   (j)   Editor’s note:
         Division (j) was repealed because substantially equivalent State law,
Ohio R.C. 4301.632, was repealed in 2002.
   (k)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in Ohio R.C. Chapter
4301, no person shall knowingly furnish any false information as to the name,
age, or other identification of any person under 21 years of age, for the
purpose of obtaining, or with the intent to obtain, beer or intoxicating liquor
for a person under 21 years of age, by purchase, or as a gift.
(ORC 4301.633)
   (l)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in Ohio R.C. Chapter
4301, no person under the age of 21 years shall knowingly show or give false
information concerning his or her name, age, or other identification for the
purpose of purchasing or otherwise obtaining beer or intoxicating liquor in any
place in this municipality where beer or intoxicating liquor is sold under a
permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control, or sold by the Division of
Liquor Control.
(ORC 4301.634)
   (m)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor, shall be fined not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor
more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and in addition to the fine, may be
imprisoned for a definite term of not more than six months.
(ORC 4301.99(I))
   (n)   Whoever violates division (b), (c), (d), (f), (g) or (j) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(C))
   (o)   Whoever violates division (e)(1) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. If an offender who violates division (e)(1) of
this section was under the age of 18 years at the time of the offense and the
offense occurred while the offender was the operator of or a passenger in a
motor vehicle, the court, in addition to any other penalties it imposes upon
the offender, shall suspend the offender's temporary instruction permit or
probationary driver's license for a period of not less than six months and not
more than one year. If the offender is 15 years and six months of age or older
and has not been issued a temporary instruction permit or probationary driver's
license, the offender shall not be eligible to be issued such a license or
permit for a period of six months. If the offender has not attained the age of
15 years and six months, the offender shall not be eligible to be issued a
temporary instruction permit until the offender attains the age of 16 years.
(R.C. § 4301.99(D))
   (p)   Whoever violates division (i) of this section shall be fined not less
than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00).
The court imposing a fine for a violation of this section may order that the
fine be paid by the performance of public work at a reasonable hour rate
established by the court. The court shall designate the time within which the
public work shall be completed.
(ORC 4301.99(E))
   (q)   (1)   Whoever violates division (l) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If, in committing a first violation of
division (l), the offender presented to the permit holder or his or her
employee or agent a false, fictitious, or altered identification card, a false
or fictitious driver’s license purportedly issued by any State, or a driver’s
license issued by any State that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and
may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more than six months.
      (2)   On a second violation in which, for the second time, the offender
presented to the permit holder or his or her employee or agent a false,
fictitious, or altered identification card, a false or fictitious driver’s
license purportedly issued by any State, or a driver’s license issued by any
State that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree and shall be fined not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00)
nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and may be sentenced to a term
of imprisonment of not more than six months. The court also may impose a class
seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit or nonresident operation privilege from the range specified in Ohio R.C.
4510.02(A)(7).
      (3)   On a third or subsequent violation in which, for the third or
subsequent time, the offender presented to the permit holder or his or her
employee or agent a false, fictitious or altered identification card, a false
or fictitious driver’s license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver’s
license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than $500 nor more
than $1,000, and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more than
six months. Except as provided in this division, the court also may impose a
class six suspension of the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or permit or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. §
4510.02(A)(6), and the court may order that the suspension or denial remain in
effect until the offender attains the age of 21 years. The court, in lieu of
suspending the offender’s temporary instruction permit, probationary driver’s
license, or driver’s license, instead may order the offender to perform a
determinate number of hours of community service, with the court determining
the actual number of hours and the nature of the community service the offender
shall perform.
(ORC 4301.99(F))
§ 612.03 SALES TO INTOXICATED PERSONS.
   (a)   No permit holder and no agent or employee of a permit holder shall
sell or furnish beer or intoxicating liquor to an intoxicated person.
(ORC 4301.22(B))
   (b)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4301.99(D), (H))
§ 612.04 LIQUOR CONSUMPTION IN MOTOR VEHICLE.
   (a)   No person shall consume any beer or intoxicating liquor in a motor
vehicle. This section does not apply to persons described in Ohio R.C. 4301.62
(D) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(ORC 4301.64)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. If an offender who violates this section was under the age of 18 years
at the time of the offense, the court, in addition to any other penalties it
imposes upon the offender, may suspend the offender’s temporary instruction
permit, probationary driver’s license or driver’s license for a period of not
less than six months and not more than one year. In lieu of suspending the
offender’s temporary instruction permit, probationary driver’s license, or
driver’s license, the court instead may require the offender to perform
community service for a number of hours determined by the court. If the
offender is 15 years and six months of age or older and has not been issued a
temporary instruction permit or probationary driver’s license, the offender
shall not be eligible to be issued such a license or permit for a period of six
months. If the offender has not attained the age of 15 years and six months,
the offender shall not be eligible to be issued a temporary instruction permit
until the offender attains the age of 16 years.
(ORC 4301.99(B))
§ 612.05 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (a)   (1)   No person personally or by the person’s clerk, agent, or
employee, shall manufacture, manufacture for sale, offer, keep, or possess for
sale, furnish or sell, or solicit the purchase or sale of any beer or
intoxicating liquor in this State, or transport, import, or cause to be
transported or imported any beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol in or into
this municipality for delivery, use or sale, unless the person has fully
complied with Ohio R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303 or is the holder of a permit
issued by the Division of Liquor Control and in force at the time.
      (2)   No manufacturer, supplier, wholesale distributor, broker, or
retailer of beer or intoxicating liquor, or other person shall employ, retain,
or otherwise utilize any person in this state to act as an employee, agent,
solicitor, or salesperson, or act in any other representative capacity to sell,
solicit, take orders, or receive offers to purchase or expressions of interest
to purchase beer or intoxicating liquor from any person, at any location other
than a liquor permit premises, except as specifically authorized by Ohio R.C.
Chapter 4301 or Ohio R.C. Chapter 4303 or rules adopted thereunder. No
function, event, or party shall take place at any location other than a liquor
permit premises where any person acts in any manner to sell, solicit, take
orders, or receive offers to purchase or expressions of intent to purchase beer
or intoxicating liquor to or from any person, except as specifically authorized
by Ohio R.C. Chapter 4301 or Ohio R.C. Chapter 4303 or rules adopted
thereunder.
(ORC 4303.25)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
§ 612.06 POSTING AGE AND FIREARM WARNING SIGNS.
   (a)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in Ohio R.C. 4301.691, every place
in this municipality where beer, intoxicating liquor, or any low-alcohol
beverage is sold for beverage purposes shall display at all times, in a
prominent place on the premises thereof, a printed card, which shall be
furnished by the Division of Liquor Control and which shall read substantially
as follows:
   WARNING TO PERSONS UNDER AGE
   If you are under the age of 21
   Under the statutes of the State of Ohio, if you order, pay for, share the
cost of, or attempt to purchase, or possess or consume beer or intoxicating
liquor in any public place, or furnish false information as to name, age, or
other identification, you are subject to a fine of up to $1,000, or
imprisonment up to 6 months, or both.
   If you are under the age of 18
   Under the statutes of the State of Ohio, if you order, pay for, share the
cost of, or attempt to purchase, or posses or consume, any type of beer or wine
that contains either no alcohol or less than one- half of one per cent of
alcohol by volume in any public place, or furnish false information as to the
name, age, or other identification, you are subject to a fine of up to $250 or
to imprisonment up to 30 days, or both.
      (2)   No person shall be subject to any criminal prosecution or any
proceedings before the
Department or the Liquor Control Commission for failing to display this card.
No permit issued by the Department shall be suspended, revoked, or canceled
because of the failure of the permit holder to display this card.
   (b)   (1)   Every place in this municipality for which a D permit has been
issued under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4303 shall be issued a printed card by the
Division of Liquor Control that shall read substantially as follows:
   WARNING
   If you are carrying a firearm
   Under the statutes of Ohio, if you possess a firearm in any room in which
liquor is being dispensed in premises for which a D permit has been issued
under Chapter 4303 of the Revised Code, you may be guilty of a felony and may
be subjected to a prison term of up to one year.
      (2)   No person shall be subject to any criminal prosecution or any
proceedings before the Division of Liquor Control or the Liquor Control
Commission for failing to display this card. No permit issued by the Department
shall be suspended, revoked, or canceled because of the failure of the permit
holder to display this card.
(ORC 4301.637)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4301.70, 4301.99(A))
§ 612.07 OPEN CONTAINER PROHIBITED.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINE. A vehicle registered under R.C. § 4503.24.
      (2)   STREET, HIGHWAY, and MOTOR VEHICLE. Have the same meanings as in
R.C. § 4511.01.
   (b)   No person shall have in the person’s possession an opened container of
beer or intoxicating liquor in any of the following circumstances:
      (1)   Except as provided in division (c)(1)E. of this section, in a State
liquor store;
      (2)   Except as provided in division (c) or (j) of this section, on the
premises of the holder of any permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control;
      (3)   In any other public place;
      (4)   Except as provided in division (d) or (e) of this section while
operating or being a passenger in or on a motor vehicle on any street, highway
or other public or private property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking;
      (5)   Except as provided in division (d) or (e) of this section while
being in or on a stationary motor vehicle on any street, highway or other
public or private property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking.
   (c)   (1)   A person may have in the person’s possession an opened container
of any of the following:
         A.   Beer or intoxicating liquor that has been lawfully purchased for
consumption on the premises where bought from the holder of an A-1-A, A-2, A-
2f, A-3a, D-1, D-2, D-3, D-3a, D-4, D-4a, D-5, D-5a, D-5b, D-5c, D-5d, D-5e, D-
5f, D-5g, D-5h, D-5i, D-5j, D-5k, D-5l, D-5m, D-5n, D-5o, D-7, D-8, D-9, E, F,
F-2, F-5, F-7, F-8, or F-9 permit;
         B.   Beer, wine, or mixed beverages served for consumption on the
premises by the holder of an F-3 permit, wine served as a tasting sample by an
A-2, A-2f, S-1, or S-2 permit holder for consumption on the premises of a
farmers market for which an F-10 permit has been issued, or wine served for
consumption on the premises by the holder of an F-4 or F-6 permit;
         C.   Beer or intoxicating liquor consumed on the premises of a
convention facility as provided in R.C. § 4303.201;
         D.   Beer or intoxicating liquor to be consumed during tastings and
samplings approved by rule of the Liquor Control Commission;
         E.   Spiritous liquor to be consumed for purposes of a tasting sample,
as defined in R.C. § 4301.171.
         F.   Beer or intoxicating liquor to be consumed in an outdoor area
described in R.C. § 4303.188(B)(1).
      (2)   A person may have in the person’s possession on an F liquor permit
premises an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor that was not
purchased from the holder of the F permit if the premises for which the F
permit is issued is a music festival and the holder of the F permit grants
permission for that possession on the premises during the period for which the
F permit is issued. As used in this division (c)(2), MUSIC FESTIVAL means a
series of outdoor live musical performances extending for a period of at least
three consecutive days and located on an area of land of at least 40 acres.
      (3)   A.   A person may have in the person’s possession on a D-2 liquor
permit premises an opened or unopened container of wine that was not purchased
from the holder of the D-2 permit if the premises for which the D-2 permit is
issued is an outdoor performing arts center, the person is attending an
orchestral performance, and the holder of the D-2 permit grants permission for
the possession and consumption of wine in certain predesignated areas of the
premises during the period for which the D-2 permit is issued.
         B.   As used in division (c)(3)A. of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
            1.   ORCHESTRAL PERFORMANCE. A concert comprised of a group of not
fewer than 40 musicians playing various musical instruments.
            2.   OUTDOOR PERFORMING ARTS CENTER. An outdoor performing arts
center that is located on not less than 150 acres of land and that is open for
performances from the first day of April to the last day of October of each
year.
      (4)   A person may have in the person’s possession an opened or unopened
container of beer or intoxicating liquor at an outdoor location at which the
person is attending an orchestral performance as defined in division (c)(3)B.
of this section if the person with supervision and control over the performance
grants permission for the possession and consumption of beer or intoxicating
liquor in certain predesignated areas of that outdoor location.
      (5)   A person may have in the person’s possession on an F-9 liquor
permit premises an opened or unopened container of beer or intoxicating liquor
that was not purchased from the holder of the F-9 permit if the F-9 permit
holder grants permission for the possession and consumption of beer or
intoxicating liquor in certain predesignated areas of the premises during the
period for which the F-9 permit is issued.
      (6)   A.   A person may have in the person’s possession on the property
of an outdoor motorsports facility an opened or unopened container of beer or
intoxicating liquor that was not purchased from the owner of the facility if
both of the following apply:
            1.   The person is attending a racing event at the facility; and
            2.   The owner of the facility grants permission for the possession
and consumption of beer or intoxicating liquor on the property of the facility.
         B.   As used in division (c)(6)A. of this section:
            1.   OUTDOOR MOTORSPORTS FACILITY. An outdoor racetrack to which
all of the following apply:
               a.   It is 2.4 miles or more in length.
               b.   It is located on 200 acres or more of land.
               c.   The primary business of the owner of the facility is the
hosting and promoting of racing events.
               d.   The holder of a D-1, D-2, or D-3 permit is located on the
property of the facility.
            2.   RACING EVENT. A motor vehicle racing event sanctioned by one
or more motor racing sanctioning organizations.
      (7)   A.   A person may have in the person’s possession an opened
container of beer or intoxicating liquor at an outdoor location within an
outdoor refreshment area created under R.C. § 4301.82 if the opened container
of beer or intoxicating liquor was purchased from an A-1, A-1-A, A-1c, A-2, A-
2f, D class, or F class permit holder to which both of the following apply:
            1.   The permit holder’s premises is located within the outdoor
refreshment area.
            2.   The permit held by the permit holder has an outdoor
refreshment area designation.
         B.   Division (c)(7) of this section does not authorize a person to do
either of the following:
            1.   Enter the premises of an establishment within an outdoor
refreshment area while possessing an opened container of beer or intoxicating
liquor acquired elsewhere;
            2.   Possess an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor
while being in or on a motor vehicle within an outdoor refreshment area, unless
the possession is otherwise authorized under division (d) or (e) of this
section.
         C.   As used in division (c)(7) of this section, “D class permit
holder” does not include a D-6 or D-8 permit holder.
      (8)   A.   A person may have in the person’s possession on the property
of a market, within a defined F-8 permit premises, an opened container of beer
or intoxicating liquor that was purchased from a D permit premises that is
located immediately adjacent to the market if both of the following apply:
            1.   The market grants permission for the possession and
consumption of beer and intoxicating liquor within the defined F-8 permit
premises;
            2.   The market is hosting an event pursuant to an F-8 permit and
the market has notified the division of liquor control about the event in
accordance with R.C. § 4303.208(A)(3).
         B.   As used in division (c)(8) of this section, “market” means a
market, for which an F-8 permit is held, that has been in operation since 1860.
   (d)   This section does not apply to a person who pays all or a portion of
the fee imposed for use of a chauffeured limousine pursuant to a prearranged
contract or the guest of the person, when all of the following apply:
      (1)   The person or guest is a passenger in the limousine.
      (2)   The person or guest is located in the limousine, but is not
occupying a seat in the front compartment of the limousine where the operator
of the limousine is located.
      (3)   The limousine is located on any street, highway or other public or
private property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel or
parking.
   (e)   An opened bottle of wine that was purchased from the holder of a
permit that authorizes the sale of wine for consumption on the premises where
sold is not an opened container for the purposes of this section if both of the
following apply:
      (1)   The opened bottle of wine is securely resealed by the permit holder
or an employee of the permit holder before the bottle is removed from the
premises. The bottle shall be secured in such a manner that it is visibly
apparent if the bottle has been subsequently opened or tampered with.
      (2)   The opened bottle of wine that is resealed in accordance with
division (e)(1) of this section is stored in the trunk of a motor vehicle or,
if the motor vehicle does not have a trunk, behind the last upright seat or in
an area not normally occupied by the driver or passengers and not easily
accessible by the driver.
(R.C. § 4301.62)
   (f)   (1)   Except if an ordinance or resolution is enacted or adopted under
division (f)(2) of this section, this section does not apply to a person who,
pursuant to a prearranged contract, is a passenger riding on a commercial
quadricycle when all of the following apply:
         A.   The person is not occupying a seat in the front of the commercial
quadricycle where the operator is steering or braking.
         B.   The commercial quadricycle is being operated on a street,
highway, or other public or private property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking.
         C.   The person has in their possession on the commercial quadricycle
an opened container of beer or wine.
         D.   The person has in their possession on the commercial quadricycle
not more than either 36 ounces of beer or 18 ounces of wine.
      (2)   The Legislative Authority may enact an ordinance or adopt a
resolution, as applicable, that prohibits a passenger riding on a commercial
quadricycle from possessing an opened container of beer or wine.
      (3)   As used in this section, “commercial quadricycle” means a vehicle
that has fully-operative pedals for propulsion entirely by human power and that
meets all of the following requirements:
         A.   It has four wheels and is operated in a manner similar to a
bicycle.
         B.   It has at least five seats for passengers.
         C.   It is designed to be powered by the pedaling of the operator and
the passengers.
         D.   It is used for commercial purposes.
         E.   It is operated by the vehicle owner or an employee of the owner.
   (g)   (1)   This section does not apply to a person that has in the person’s
possession an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor on the premises
of a market if the beer or intoxicating liquor has been purchased from a D
liquor permit holder that is located in the market.
      (2)   As used in division (g) of this section, “market” means an
establishment that:
         A.   Leases space in the market to individual vendors, not less than
50% of which are retail food establishments or food service operations licensed
under R.C. Chapter 3717;
         B.   Has an indoor sales floor area of not less than 22,000 square
feet;
         C.   Hosts a farmer’s market on each Saturday from April through
December.
   (h)   (1)   As used in this section, “alcoholic beverage” has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 4303.185.
      (2)   An alcoholic beverage in a closed container being transported under
R.C. § 4303.185 to its final destination is not an opened container for the
purposes of this section if the closed container is securely sealed in such a
manner that it is visibly apparent if the closed container has been
subsequently opened or tampered with after sealing.
   (i)   This section does not apply to a person who has in the person’s
possession an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor in a public-use
airport, as described in R.C. § 4303.181(D)(2)(a)(iii), when both of the
following apply:
      (1)   Consumption of the opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor
occurs in the area of the airport terminal that is restricted to persons taking
flights to and from the airport; and
      (2)   The consumption is authorized under R.C. § 4303.181(D)(2)(a).
(R.C. § 4301.62)
   (j)   This section does not apply to a person that has in the person's
possession an opened container of homemade beer or wine that is served in
accordance with R.C. § 4301.201(E).
(R.C. § 4301.62)
   (k)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4301.99(A))
§ 612.08 HOURS OF SALE OR CONSUMPTION.
   (a)   This section shall apply to the retail sale of beer, wine, mixed
beverages, or spirituous liquor.
   (b)   No beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor shall be sold or
delivered by an A-1, A-1C, A-2, B-1, B-2, B-4, B-5, C-1, C-2, C-2X, D-1, D-2,
D-2X, D-3 when issued without a D-3A, D-3X, D-4, D-5H, D-5K, D-8, F, F-1, F-2,
F-3, F-4, F-5, F-6, F-7, F-8, F-9, G, or I permit holder:
      (1)   From Monday to Saturday between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:30
a.m.
      (2)   On Sunday between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and Sunday midnight,
unless statutorily authorized otherwise.
      (3)   Consumption of beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor is
also prohibited during the above hours upon the premises of the above permit
holders who are authorized by their permit to sell beer, wine, mixed beverages,
or spirituous liquor for on-premises consumption.
   (c)   No beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor shall be sold or
delivered by an A-1A, D-3 when issued with a D-3A, D-4A, D-5, D-5A, D-5B, D-5C,
D-5D, D-5E, D-5F, D-5G, D-5I, D-5J, D-5L, D-5M, D-5N, D-5O, or D-7 permit
holder:
      (1)   From Monday to Saturday between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 5:30
a.m.
      (2)   On Sunday between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and Sunday midnight,
unless statutorily authorized otherwise.
      (3)   Consumption of beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor is
also prohibited during the above hours upon the premises of the above permit
holders who are authorized by their permit to sell beer, wine, mixed beverages,
or spirituous liquor for on-premises consumption.
   (d)   Permit holders authorized to sell beer, wine, mixed beverages, or
spirituous liquor at retail who are not specifically identified in divisions
(b) or (c) above shall be subject to the provisions of division (b), unless
statutorily authorized otherwise.
   (e)   The hours on Sunday during which sales, delivery, or consumption of
alcoholic beverages may take place are established by statute, but in no event
shall they begin prior to 5:30 a.m.
(O.A.C. 4301:1-1-49)
   (f)   No association, corporation, local unit of an association or
corporation, or D permit holder who holds an F-2 permit shall sell beer or
intoxicating liquor beyond the hours of sale allowed by the permit. This
division imposes strict liability on the holder of such permit and on any
officer, agent or employee of such permit holder.
(R.C. § 4303.202(D)(2))
   (g)   No F-8 permit holder shall sell beer or intoxicating liquor beyond the
hours of sale allowed by the permit. This division imposes strict liability on
the holder of an F-8 permit and on any officer, agent or employee of that
permit holder.
(R.C. § 4303.208(C))
   (h)   Whoever violates divisions (f) or (g) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4303.99(D))
§ 612.09 CONVEYING INTOXICATING LIQUOR OR CASH ONTO GROUNDS OF DETENTION
FACILITIES OR OTHER SPECIFIED GOVERNMENTAL FACILITIES.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly convey, or attempt to convey, onto the
grounds of a detention facility or of an institution, office building or other
place that is under the control of the Department of Mental Health and
Addiction Services, the Department of Developmental Disabilities, the
Department of Youth Services or the Department of Rehabilitation and
Correction, any of the following items:
      (1)   Any deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance, as defined in R.C. §
2923.11, or any part of or ammunition for use in the deadly weapon or dangerous
ordnance.
      (2)   Any drug of abuse, as defined in R.C. § 3719.011.
      (3)   Any intoxicating liquor, as defined in R.C. § 4301.01, except for
small amounts of wine for sacramental purposes when the person engaging in the
specified conduct is a cleric, as defined in R.C. § 2317.02.
   (b)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to any person who conveys
or attempts to convey an item onto the grounds of a detention facility or of an
institution, office building or other place under the control of the Department
of Mental Health and Addiction Services, the Department of Developmental
Disabilities, the Department of Youth Services or the Department of
Rehabilitation and Correction, with written authorization of the person in
charge of the detention facility or the institution and in accordance with the
written rules of the detention facility or the institution, office building or
other place.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly deliver, or attempt to deliver, to any
person who is confined in a detention facility, to a child confined in a youth
services facility, to a prisoner who is temporarily released from confinement
for a work assignment, or to any patient in an institution under the control of
the Department of Mental Health and Addiction Services, or the Department of
Developmental Disabilities, any item listed in division (a).
   (d)   No person shall knowingly deliver or attempt to deliver cash to any
person who is confined in a detention facility, to a child confined in a youth
services facility, or to a prisoner who is temporarily released from
confinement for a work assignment.
   (e)   No person shall knowingly deliver, or attempt to deliver, to any
person who is confined in a detention facility, to a child confined in a youth
services facility, or to a prisoner who is temporarily released from
confinement for a work assignment a cellular telephone, two-way radio or other
electronic communications device.
   (f)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (a)(1)
of this section that the weapon or dangerous ordnance in question was being
transported in a motor vehicle for any lawful purpose, that it was not on the
actor’s person, and if the weapon or dangerous ordnance was a firearm, that it
was unloaded and was being carried in a closed package, box or case or in a
compartment that can be reached only by leaving the vehicle.
      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (c) of this
section that the actor was not otherwise prohibited by law from delivering the
item to the confined person, the child, the prisoner or the patient and that
either of the following applies:
         A.   The actor was permitted by the written rules of the detention
facility or the institution, office building or other place to deliver the item
to the confined person or the patient.
         B.   The actor was given written authorization by the person in charge
of the detention facility or the institution, office building or other place to
deliver the item to the confined person or the patient.
   (g)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a)(1) of this section or commits a
violation of division (c) of this section involving any item listed in division
(a)(1) of this section is guilty of illegal conveyance of weapons onto the
grounds of a specified governmental facility, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (a)(2) of this section or commits a
violation of division (c) of this section involving any drug of abuse is guilty
of illegal conveyance of drugs of abuse onto the grounds of a specified
governmental facility, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (a)(3) of this section or commits a
violation of division (c) of this section involving any intoxicating liquor is
guilty of illegal conveyance of intoxicating liquor onto the grounds of a
specified governmental facility, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (d) of this section is guilty of illegal
conveyance of cash onto the grounds of a detention facility, a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (d) of this section or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, illegal conveyance of cash onto
the grounds of a detention facility is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (e) of this section is guilty of illegal
conveyance of a communications device onto the grounds of a specified
governmental facility, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (e)
of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
illegal conveyance of a communications device onto the grounds of a detention
facility is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2921.36)
§ 612.10 SALES OF LOW-ALCOHOL BEVERAGES TO UNDERAGE PERSONS; PROHIBITIONS AND
MISREPRESENTATIONS.
   (a)   As used in this section, UNDERAGE PERSON means a person under 18 years
of age.
   (b)   No underage person shall purchase any low- alcohol beverage.
   (c)   No underage person shall order, pay for, share the cost of, or attempt
to purchase any low- alcohol beverage.
   (d)   No person shall knowingly furnish any false information as to the
name, age, or other identification of any underage person for the purpose of
obtaining or with the intent to obtain any low-alcohol beverage for an underage
person, by purchase or as a gift.
   (e)   No underage person shall knowingly show or give false information
concerning his or her name, age, or other identification for the purpose of
purchasing or otherwise obtaining any low-alcohol beverage in any place in this
Municipality.
   (f)   No person shall sell or furnish any low- alcohol beverage to, or buy
any low-alcohol beverage for, an underage person, unless given by a physician
in the regular line of his or her practice or given for established religious
purposes, or unless the underage person is accompanied by a parent, spouse who
is not an underage person, or legal guardian.
   (g)   (1)   No person who is the owner or occupant of any public or private
place shall knowingly allow any underage person to remain in or on the place
while possessing or consuming any low- alcohol beverage, unless the low-alcohol
beverage is given to the person possessing or consuming it by that person’s
parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian, and the
parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian is present when
the person possesses or consumes the low- alcohol beverage.
      (2)   An owner of a public or private place is not liable for acts or
omissions in violation of division (g)(1) that are committed by a lessee of
that place, unless the owner authorizes or acquiesces in the lessee’s acts or
omissions.
   (h)   No permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control shall be suspended,
revoked, or cancelled because of a violation of either division (f) or (g).
   (i)   No underage person shall knowingly possess or consume any low-alcohol
beverage in any public or private place, unless he or she is accompanied by a
parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian, or unless the
low-alcohol beverage is given by a physician in the regular line of his or her
practice or given for established religious purposes.
   (j)   No parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian of
an underage person shall knowingly permit the underage person to violate this
section.
(ORC 4301.631)
   (k)   No low-alcohol beverage shall be sold to any person under 18 years of
age.
(ORC 4301.22(A)(2))
   (l)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section shall be fined not less
than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00).
The court imposing a fine for a violation of division (b) of this section may
order that the fine be paid by the performance of public work at a reasonable
hour rate established by the court. The court shall designate the time within
which the public work shall be completed.
(ORC 4301.99(E))
   (m)   Whoever violates divisions (c) through (k) hereof is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(ORC 4301.99(B))
§ 612.11 ALCOHOL VAPORIZING DEVICES PROHIBITED.
   (a)   As used in this section, ALCOHOL VAPORIZING DEVICE means a machine or
other device that mixes beer or intoxicating liquor with pure oxygen or any
other gas to produce a vaporized product for the purpose of consumption by
inhalation.
   (b)   No person shall sell or offer for sale an alcohol vaporizing device.
   (c)   No person shall purchase or use an alcohol vaporizing device.
(ORC 4301.65)
   (d)   (1)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of
misdemeanor of the third degree. For a second or subsequent violation occurring
within a period of five consecutive years after the first violation, a person
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 4301.99(J))
      (2)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(ORC 4301.99(A))
CHAPTER 618: ANIMALS
618.01   Dogs and other animals running at large; nuisance, dangerous or
vicious dogs; hearings.
618.02   Abandoning animals.
618.03   Killing or injuring animals.
618.04   Poisoning animals.
618.05   Cruelty to animals; cruelty to companion animals.
618.06   Coloring rabbits and baby poultry; sale or display of poultry.
618.07   Barking or howling dogs.
618.08   Registration of dogs required.
618.09   Hindering capture of unregistered dog.
618.095   Dogs required to wear tags.
618.10   Unlawful tags.
618.11   Rabies quarantine.
618.12   Hunting prohibited.
618.13   Nuisance conditions prohibited.
618.14   Impounding and disposition; records.
618.15   Animal fights.
618.16   Assistance dogs with blind, deaf, or hearing impaired person, or
person with a mobility impairment, or trainer.
618.17   Restrictions on dog ownership for certain convicted felons.
618.18   Sexual conduct with an animal.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar State law
   Power to restrain and impound animals - see Ohio R.C. 715.23
   Driving animals upon roadway - see TRAF.
404.04,
412.05
   Definitions generally - see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   Assaulting police dog or horse or handicapped assistance dog - see GEN. OFF.
642.30
   Offensive odors from places where animals are kept or fed - see GEN. OFF.
660.04
§ 618.01 DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE; NUISANCE, DANGEROUS OR
VICIOUS DOGS; HEARINGS.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   DANGEROUS DOG.
         A.   A dog that, without provocation, and subject to division B. of
this definition, has done any of the following:
            1.   Caused injury, other than killing or serious injury, to any
person;
            2.   Killed another dog;
            3.   Been the subject of a third or subsequent violation of R.C. §
955.22(C) or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
         B.   DANGEROUS DOG does not include a police dog that has caused
injury, other than killing or serious injury, to any person or has killed
another dog while the police dog is being used to assist one or more law
enforcement officers in the performance of their official duties.
      (2)   MENACING FASHION. A dog that would cause any person being chased or
approached to reasonably believe that the dog will cause physical injury to
that person.
      (3)   NUISANCE DOG.
         A.   Subject to division B. of this definition, NUISANCE DOG means a
dog that without provocation and while off the premises of its owner, keeper,
or harborer has chased or approached a person in either a menacing fashion or
an apparent attitude of attack or has attempted to bite or otherwise endanger
any person.
         B.   NUISANCE DOG does not include a police dog that, while being used
to assist one or more law enforcement officers in the performance of official
duties, has chased or approached a person in either a menacing fashion or an
apparent attitude of attack or has attempted to bite or otherwise endanger any
person.
      (4)   POLICE DOG. A dog that has been trained and may be used to assist
one or more law enforcement officers in the performance of their official
duties.
      (5)   SERIOUS INJURY. Any of the following:
         A.   Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk of death;
         B.   Any physical harm that involves a permanent incapacity, whether
partial or total, or a temporary, substantial incapacity;
         C.   Any physical harm that involves a permanent disfigurement or a
temporary, serious disfigurement;
         D.   Any physical harm that involves acute pain of a duration that
results in substantial suffering or any degree of prolonged or intractable
pain.
      (6)   VICIOUS DOG.
         A.   A dog that, without provocation and subject to division B. of
this definition, has killed or caused serious injury to any person.
         B.   VICIOUS DOG does not include either of the following:
            1.   A police dog that has killed or caused serious injury to any
person while the police dog is being used to assist one or more law enforcement
officers in the performance of their official duties;
            2.   A dog that has killed or caused serious injury to any person
while a person was committing or attempting to commit a trespass or other
criminal offense on the property of the owner, keeper, or harborer of the dog.
      (7)   WITHOUT PROVOCATION. A dog acts WITHOUT PROVOCATION when it was not
teased, tormented or abused by a person, or it was not coming to the aid or the
defense of a person who was not engaged in illegal or criminal activity and who
was not using the dog as a means of carrying out the activity.
(R.C. § 955.11(A))
   (b)   No person, who is the owner or keeper of horses, mules, cattle, bison,
sheep, goats, swine, llamas, alpacas, or poultry, shall permit them to run at
large in the public road, highway, street, lane, or alley, or upon unenclosed
land, or cause the animals to be herded, kept, or detained for the purpose of
grazing on premises other than those owned or lawfully occupied by the owner or
keeper of the animals.
(R.C. §§ 951.02)
   (c)   No owner, keeper or harborer of any female dog shall permit it to go
beyond the premises of the owner, keeper or harborer at any time the dog is in
heat unless the dog is properly in leash.
(R.C. §§ 955.22(B))
   (d)   (1)   The owner or harborer of a harmless dog, not on the owner or
harborer’s premises or in a motor vehicle, shall keep said dog on a leash of
such length to keep the dog from annoying others. A harmless dog may be
unleashed if either of the following is applicable:
         A.   The dog is in training, a competition, or show; or
         B.   The dog is on property with the permission of the property owner.
      (2)   For purposes of this section, HARMLESS DOG means a dog which is
neither dangerous nor vicious, and LEASH means a rope, leather strap, chain, or
other type of tether of sufficient strength to bind a dog to the person
harboring the dog.
(Ord. 27-2014, passed 5-27-2014)
   (e)   Except when a dangerous dog is lawfully engaged in hunting or training
for the purpose of hunting and is accompanied by the owner, keeper, harborer,
or handler of the dog, no owner, keeper or harborer of a dangerous dog shall
fail to do either of the following:
      (1)   While the dog is on the premises of the owner, keeper or harborer,
securely confine it at all times in a locked pen that has a top.
      (2)   While the dog is off the premises of the owner, keeper or harborer,
keep that dog on a chain- link leash or tether that is not more than six feet
in length and additionally do at least one of the following: keep the dog in a
locked pen that has a top, locked fenced yard or other locked enclosure that
has a top; have the leash or tether controlled by a person who is of suitable
age and discretion or securely attach, tie or affix the leash or tether to the
ground or a stationary object or fixture so that the dog is adequately
restrained and station a person in close enough proximity to that dog so as to
prevent it from causing injury to any person; or muzzle that dog.
   (f)   No person who has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more
violations of division (d) of this section involving the same dog and no owner,
keeper, or harborer of a dangerous dog shall fail to do the following:
      (1)   Obtain liability insurance with an insurer authorized to write
liability insurance in this state providing coverage in each occurrence because
of damage or bodily injury to or death of a person caused by the dangerous dog
if so ordered by a court and provide proof of that liability insurance upon
request to any law enforcement officer, county dog warden, or public health
official charged with enforcing this section;
      (2)   Obtain a dangerous dog registration certificate from the County
Auditor pursuant to division (j) of this section, affix a tag that identifies
the dog as a dangerous dog to the dog’s collar, and ensure that the dog wears
the collar and tag at all times;
      (3)   Notify the local dog warden immediately if any of the following
occurs:
         A.   The dog is loose or unconfined.
         B.   The dog bites a person, unless the dog is on the property of the
owner of the dog, and the person who is bitten is unlawfully trespassing or
committing a criminal act within the boundaries of that property.
         C.   The dog attacks another animal while the dog is off the property
of the owner of the dog.
      (4)   If the dog is sold, given to another person, or dies, notify the
County Auditor within ten days of the sale, transfer, or death.
   (g)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Debark or surgically silence a dog that the person knows or has
reason to believe is a dangerous dog;
      (2)   Possess a dangerous dog if the person knows or has reason to
believe that the dog has been debarked or surgically silenced;
      (3)   Falsely attest on a waiver form provided by the veterinarian under
division (h) of this section that the person’s dog is not a dangerous dog or
otherwise provide false information on that written waiver form.
   (h)   Before a veterinarian debarks or surgically silences a dog, the
veterinarian may give the owner of the dog a written waiver form that attests
that the dog is not a dangerous dog. The written waiver form shall include all
of the following:
      (1)   The veterinarian’s license number and current business address;
      (2)   The number of the license of the dog if the dog is licensed;
      (3)   A reasonable description of the age, coloring and gender of the dog
as well as any notable markings on the dog;
      (4)   The signature of the owner of the dog attesting that the owner’s
dog is not a dangerous dog;
      (5)   A statement that R.C. § 955.22(F) prohibits any person from doing
any of the following:
         A.   Debarking or surgically silencing a dog that the person knows or
has reason to believe is a dangerous dog;
         B.   Possessing a dangerous dog if the person knows or has reason to
believe that the dog has been debarked or surgically silenced;
         C.   Falsely attesting on a waiver form provided by the veterinarian
under R.C. § 955.22(G) that the person’s dog is not a dangerous dog or
otherwise provide false information on that written waiver form.
   (i)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of a violation of division
(g) of this section that the veterinarian who is charged with the violation
obtained, prior to debarking or surgically silencing the dog, a written waiver
form that complies with division (h) of this section and that attests that the
dog is not a dangerous dog.
   (j)   (1)   The County Auditor shall issue a dangerous dog registration
certificate to a person who is the owner of a dog, who is 18 years of age or
older, and who provides the following to the County Auditor:
         A.   A fee of $50;
         B.   The person’s address, phone number, and other appropriate means
for the local dog warden or County Auditor to contact the person;
         C.   With respect to the person and the dog for which the registration
is sought, all of the following:
            1.   Either satisfactory evidence of the dog’s current rabies
vaccination or a statement from a licensed veterinarian that a rabies
vaccination is medically contraindicated for the dog;
            2.   Either satisfactory evidence of the fact that the dog has been
neutered or spayed or a statement from a licensed veterinarian that neutering
or spaying of the dog is medically contraindicated;
            3.   Satisfactory evidence of the fact that the person has posted
and will continue to post clearly visible signs at the person’s residence
warning both minors and adults of the presence of a dangerous dog on the
property;
            4.   Satisfactory evidence of the fact that the dog has been
permanently identified by means of a microchip and the dog’s microchip number.
      (2)   Upon the issuance of a dangerous dog registration certificate to
the owner of a dog, the County Auditor shall provide the owner with a uniformly
designed tag that identifies the animal as a dangerous dog. The owner shall
renew the certificate annually for the same fee and in the same manner as the
initial certificate was obtained. If a certificate holder relocates to a new
county, the certificate holder shall follow the procedure in division (j)(3)B.
of this section and, upon the expiration of the certificate issued in the
original county, shall renew the certificate in the new county.
      (3)   A.   If the owner of a dangerous dog for whom a registration
certificate has previously been obtained relocates to a new address within the
same county, the owner shall provide notice of the new address to the County
Auditor within ten days of relocating to the new address.
         B.   If the owner of a dangerous dog for whom a registration
certificate has previously been obtained relocates to a new address within
another county, the owner shall do both of the following within ten days of
relocating to the new address:
            1.   Provide written notice of the new address and a copy of the
original dangerous dog registration certificate to the County Auditor of the
new county;
            2.   Provide written notice of the new address to the County
Auditor of the county where the owner previously resided.
      (4)   The owner of a dangerous dog shall present the dangerous dog
registration certificate upon being requested to do so by any law enforcement
officer, dog warden, or public health official charged with enforcing this
section.
(R.C. § 955.22(D) - (I))
   (k)   Hearing.
      (1)   The municipal court or county court that has territorial
jurisdiction over the residence of the owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog
shall conduct any hearing concerning the designation of the dog as a nuisance
dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog.
      (2)   If a person who is authorized to enforce this chapter has
reasonable cause to believe that a dog in the person’s jurisdiction is a
nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog, the person shall notify the owner,
keeper, or harborer of that dog, by certified mail or in person, of both of the
following:
         A.   That the person has designated the dog a nuisance dog, dangerous
dog, or vicious dog, as applicable;
         B.   That the owner, keeper, or harborer of the dog may request a
hearing regarding the designation in accordance with this division (k). The
notice shall include instructions for filing a request for a hearing in the
county in which the dog’s owner, keeper, or harborer resides.
      (3)   If the owner, keeper, or harborer of the dog disagrees with the
designation of the dog as a nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog, as
applicable, the owner, keeper, or harborer, not later than ten days after
receiving notification of the designation, may request a hearing regarding the
determination. The request for a hearing shall be in writing and shall be filed
with the municipal court or county court that has territorial jurisdiction over
the residence of the dog’s owner, keeper, or harborer. At the hearing, the
person who designated the dog as a nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog
has the burden of proving, by clear and convincing evidence, that the dog is a
nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog. The owner, keeper, or harborer of
the dog or the person who designated the dog as a nuisance dog, dangerous dog,
or vicious dog may appeal the court’s final determination as in any other case
filed in that court.
      (4)   A court, upon motion of an owner, keeper, or harborer or an
attorney representing the owner, keeper, or harborer, may order that the dog
designated as a nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog be held in the
possession of the owner, keeper, or harborer until the court makes a final
determination under this section or during the pendency of an appeal, as
applicable. Until the court makes a final determination and during the pendency
of any appeal, the dog shall be confined or restrained in accordance with the
provisions of division (e) that apply to dangerous dogs regardless of whether
the dog has been designated as a vicious dog or a nuisance dog rather than a
dangerous dog. The owner, keeper, or harborer of the dog shall not be required
to comply with any other requirements established in this Code or the Ohio
Revised Code that concern a nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog, as
applicable, until the court makes a final determination and during the pendency
of any appeal.
      (5)   If a dog is finally determined under this division (k), or on
appeal as described in this division (k), to be a vicious dog, R.C. § 955.11(D)
and divisions (e) to (j) of this section apply with respect to the dog and the
owner, keeper, or harborer of the dog as if the dog were a dangerous dog, and §
618.17 applies with respect to the dog as if it were a dangerous dog, and the
court shall issue an order that specifies that those provisions apply with
respect to the dog and the owner, keeper, or harborer in that manner. As part
of the order, the court shall require the owner, keeper, or harborer to obtain
the liability insurance required under division (f)(1) in an amount described
in division (l)(5)B. of this section.
      (6)   As used in this division (k), NUISANCE DOG, DANGEROUS DOG, and
VICIOUS DOG have the same meanings as in R.C. § 955.11.
(R.C. § 955.222)
   (l)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever recklessly violates division (b) of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 951.99)
      (2)   A.   Whoever violates division (c) of this section or commits a
violation of division (d) of this section that involves a dog that is not a
nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog shall be fined not less than $25 or
more than $100 on a first offense, and on each subsequent offense shall be
fined not less than $75 or more than $250 and may be imprisoned for not more
than 30 days.
         B.   In addition to the penalties prescribed in division (l)(2)A. of
this section, if the offender is guilty of a violation of division (c) of this
section or a violation of division (d) of this section that involves a dog that
is not a nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog, the court may order the
offender to personally supervise the dog that the offender owns, keeps, or
harbors, to cause that dog to complete dog obedience training, or to do both.
(R.C. § 955.99(E))
      (3)   A.   Whoever commits a violation of division (d) of this section
that involves a nuisance dog is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on the first
offense and of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on each subsequent offense
involving the same dog. Upon a person being convicted of or pleading guilty to
a third violation of division (d) of this section involving the same dog, the
court shall require the offender to register the involved dog as a dangerous
dog.
         B.   In addition to the penalties prescribed in division (l)(2)A. of
this section, if a violation of division (d) of this section involves a
nuisance dog, the court may order the offender to personally supervise the
nuisance dog that the offender owns, keeps, or harbors, to cause that dog to
complete dog obedience training, or to do both.
(R.C. § 955.99(F))
      (4)   Whoever commits a violation of division (d) of this section that
involves a dangerous dog, or a violation of division (e) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense and of a
misdemeanor of the third degree on each subsequent offense. Additionally, the
court may order the offender to personally supervise the dangerous dog that the
offender owns, keeps, or harbors, to cause that dog to complete dog obedience
training, or to do both, and the court may order the offender to obtain
liability insurance pursuant to division (f) of this section. The court, in the
alternative, may order the dangerous dog to be humanely destroyed by a licensed
veterinarian, the county dog warden, or the county humane society at the
owner’s expense. With respect to a violation of division (d) of this section
that involves a dangerous dog, until the court makes a final determination and
during the pendency of any appeal of a violation of that division and at the
discretion of the dog warden, the dog shall be confined or restrained in
accordance with division (e) of this section or at the county dog pound at the
owner’s expense.
(R.C. § 955.99(G))
      (5)   A.   Whoever commits a violation of division (d) of this section
that involves a vicious dog is guilty of one of the following:
            1.   A felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law if the
dog kills or seriously injures a person. Additionally, the court shall order
that the vicious dog be humanely destroyed by a licensed veterinarian, the
county dog warden, or the county humane society at the owner’s expense.
            2.   A misdemeanor of the first degree if the dog causes serious
injury to a person. Additionally, the court may order the vicious dog to be
humanely destroyed by a licensed veterinarian, the county dog warden, or the
county humane society at the owner’s expense.
         B.   If the court does not order the vicious dog to be destroyed under
division (l)(5)A.2. of this section, the court shall issue an order that
specifies that R.C. § 955.11(D) and divisions (e) to (j) of this section apply
with respect to the dog and the owner, keeper, or harborer of the dog as if the
dog were a dangerous dog and that §
618.17 applies with respect to the dog as if it were a dangerous dog. As part
of the order, the court shall order the offender to obtain the liability
insurance required under division (f)(1) of this section in an amount,
exclusive of interest and costs, that equals or exceeds $100,000. Until the
court makes a final determination and during the pendency of any appeal of a
violation of division (d) of this section and at the discretion of the dog
warden, the dog shall be confined or restrained in accordance with the
provisions described in division (e) of this section or at the county dog pound
at the owner’s expense.
(R.C. § 955.99(H))
      (6)   Whoever violates division (f)(2) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 955.99(J))
      (7)   Whoever violates division (g)(1), (g)(2), or (g)(3) of this section
is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
Additionally, the court shall order that the dog involved in the violation be
humanely destroyed by a licensed veterinarian, the county dog warden, or the
county humane society. Until the court makes a final determination and during
the pendency of any appeal of a violation of division (g)(1), (g)(2), or (g)(3)
of this section and at the discretion of the dog warden, the dog shall be
confined or restrained in accordance with the provisions of division (e) of
this section or at the county dog pound at the owner’s expense.
(R.C. § 955.99(L))
      (8)   Whoever violates division (f)(1), (f)(3), or (f)(4) of this section
is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 955.99(M))
      (9)   Whoever violates division (j)(4) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 955.99(N))
      (10)   A.   If a dog is confined at the county dog pound pursuant to
division (l)(4), (l)(5), or (l)(7) of this section, the county dog warden shall
give written notice of the confinement to the owner of the dog. If the county
dog warden is unable to give the notice to the owner of the dog, the county dog
warden shall post the notice on the door of the residence of the owner of the
dog or in another conspicuous place on the premises at which the dog was
seized. The notice shall include a statement that a security in the amount of
$100 is due to the county dog warden within ten days to secure payment of all
reasonable expenses, including medical care and boarding of the dog for 60
days, expected to be incurred by the county dog pound in caring for the dog
pending the determination. The county dog warden may draw from the security any
actual costs incurred in caring for the dog.
         B.   If the person ordered to post security under division (l)(10)A.
of this section does not do so within ten days of the confinement of the
animal, the dog is forfeited, and the county dog warden may determine the
disposition of the dog unless the court issues an order that specifies
otherwise.
         C.   Not more than ten days after the court makes a final
determination under division (l)(4), (l)(5), or (l)(7) of this section, the
county dog warden shall provide the owner of the dog with the actual cost of
the confinement of the dog. If the county dog warden finds that the security
provided under division (l)(10)A. of this section is less than the actual cost
of confinement of the dog, the owner shall remit the difference between the
security provided and the actual cost to the county dog warden within 30 days
after the court’s determination. If the county dog warden finds that the
security provided under division (l)(10)A. of this section is greater than that
actual cost, the county dog warden shall remit the difference between the
security provided and the actual cost to the owner within 30 days after the
court’s determination.
(R.C. § 955.99(P))
      (11)   As used in this division (l), NUISANCE DOG, DANGEROUS DOG, and
VICIOUS DOG have the same meanings as in R.C. § 955.11.
(R.C. § 955.99(Q))
   (m)   No person shall allow a dog under his or her control to be upon public
property or upon the property of another, absent the consent of the owner or
occupant of the property, without some device for the removal and containment
of such dog's excrement; nor shall any person fail to immediately remove any
excrement deposited by any dog under his or her control on public or private
property. This section shall not apply to guide dogs under the control of a
blind person.
   (o)   Whoever violates division (m) of this section shall be guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(Ord. 27-2014, passed 5-27-2014)
§ 618.02 ABANDONING ANIMALS.
   (a)   No owner or keeper of a dog, cat, or other domestic animal shall
abandon the animal.
(ORC 959.01)
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the
first degree on each subsequent offense.
(ORC 959.99(E)(3))
§ 618.03 KILLING OR INJURING ANIMALS.
   (a)   No person shall maliciously, or willfully and without the consent of
the owner, kill or injure a dog, cat, or any other domestic animal that is the
property of another. This section does not apply to a licensed veterinarian
acting in an official capacity.
(ORC 959.02)
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
If the value of the animal killed or the injury done amounts to three hundred
dollars ($300.00) or more, whoever violates division (a) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 959.99(B))
§ 618.04 POISONING ANIMALS.
   (a)   No person shall maliciously, or willfully and without the consent of
the owner, administer poison, except a licensed veterinarian acting in such
capacity, to a dog, cat, or any other domestic animal that is the property of
another; and no person shall, willfully and without the consent of the owner,
place any poisoned food where it may be easily found and eaten by any such
animal, either upon his or her own lands or the lands of another.
(ORC 959.03)
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(ORC 959.99(C))
§ 618.05 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS; CRUELTY TO COMPANION ANIMALS.
   (a)   No person shall:
      (1)   Torture an animal, deprive one of necessary sustenance,
unnecessarily or cruelly beat, needlessly mutilate or kill, or impound or
confine an animal without supplying it during the confinement with a sufficient
quantity of good wholesome food and water;
      (2)   Impound or confine an animal without affording it, during the
confinement, access to shelter from wind, rain, snow, or excessive direct
sunlight, if it can reasonably be expected that the animal would otherwise
become sick or in some other way suffer. This division does not apply to
animals impounded or confined prior to slaughter. For the purpose of this
section, SHELTER means an artificial enclosure, windbreak, sunshade, or natural
windbreak or sunshade that is developed from the earth’s contour, tree
development, or vegetation;
      (3)   Carry or convey an animal in a cruel or inhuman manner;
      (4)   Keep animals other than cattle, poultry or fowl, swine, sheep, or
goats in an enclosure without wholesome exercise and change of air, nor feed
cows on food that produces impure or unwholesome milk;
      (5)   Detain livestock in railroad cars or compartments longer than 28
hours after they are so placed without supplying them with necessary food,
water, and attention, nor permit the stock to be so crowded as to overlie,
crush, wound, or kill each other.
   (b)   Upon the written request of the owner or person in custody of any
particular shipment of livestock, which written request shall be separate and
apart from any printed bill of lading or other railroad form, the length of
time in which the livestock may be detained in any cars or compartment without
food, water, and attention may be extended to 36 hours without penalty
therefor. Division (a) of this section does not prevent the dehorning of
cattle.
   (c)   All fines collected for violations of division (a) of this section
shall be paid to the society or association for the prevention of cruelty to
animals, if there is one in the municipality; otherwise, all fines shall be
paid to the general fund.
(R.C. § 959.13)
   (d)   Cruelty to companion animals.
      (1)   As used in this section:
         A.   ANIMAL RESCUE FOR DOGS. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 956.01.
         B.   BOARDING KENNEL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 956.01.
         C.   CAPTIVE WHITE-TAILED DEER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
1531.01.
         D.   COMPANION ANIMAL. Means any animal that is kept inside a
residential dwelling and any dog or cat regardless of where it is kept,
including a pet store as defined in R.C. § 956.01. The term does not include
livestock or any wild animal.
         E.   CRUELTY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1717.01.
         F.   DOG KENNEL. Means an animal rescue for dogs, a boarding kennel,
or a training kennel.
         G.   FEDERAL ANIMAL WELFARE ACT. Means the “Laboratory Animal Act of
1966", Pub. L. No. 89-544, 80 Stat. 350 (1966), 7 U.S.C. §§ 2131 et seq., as
amended by the “Animal Welfare Act of 1970", Pub. L. No. 91-579, 84 Stat. 1560
(1970), the “Animal Welfare Act Amendments of 1976", Pub. L. No. 94-279, 90
Stat. 417 (1976), and the “Food Security Act of 1985", Pub. L. No. 99-198, 99
Stat. 1354 (1985), and as it may be subsequently amended.
         H.   LIVESTOCK. Means horses, mules, and other equidae; cattle, sheep,
goats, and other bovidae; swine and other suidae; poultry; alpacas; llamas;
captive white-tailed deer; and any other animal that is raised or maintained
domestically for food or fiber.
         I.   PRACTICE OF VETERINARY MEDICINE. Has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 4741.01.
         J.   RESIDENTIAL DWELLING. Means a structure or shelter or the portion
of a structure or shelter that is used by one or more humans for the purpose of
a habitation.
         K.   SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM. Means any of the following:
            1.   Physical harm that carries an unnecessary or unjustifiable
substantial risk of death;
            2.   Physical harm that involves either partial or total permanent
incapacity;
            3.   Physical harm that involves acute pain of a duration that
results in substantial suffering or that involves any degree of prolonged or
intractable pain.
         L.   TORMENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1717.01.
         M.   TORTURE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1717.01.
         N.   TRAINING KENNEL. Means an establishment operating for profit that
keeps, houses, and maintains dogs for the purpose of training the dogs in
return for a fee or other consideration.
         O.   WILD ANIMAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1531.01.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly torture, torment, needlessly mutilate or
maim, cruelly beat, poison, needlessly kill, or commit an act of cruelty
against a companion animal.
      (3)   No person shall knowingly cause serious physical harm to a
companion animal.
      (4)   No person who confines or who is the custodian or caretaker of a
companion animal shall negligently do any of the following:
         A.   Torture, torment, or commit an act of cruelty against the
companion animal;
         B.   Deprive the companion animal of necessary sustenance or confine
the companion animal without supplying it during the confinement with
sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water if it can reasonably be
expected that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any other way
as a result of or due to the deprivation or confinement;
         C.   Impound or confine the companion animal without affording it,
during the impoundment or confinement, with access to shelter from heat, cold,
wind, rain, snow, or excessive direct sunlight if it can reasonably be expected
that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any other way as a
result of or due to the lack of adequate shelter.
      (5)   No person who confines or who is the custodian or caretaker of a
companion animal shall recklessly deprive the companion animal of necessary
sustenance or confine the companion animal without supplying it during the
confinement with sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water.
      (6)   No owner, manager, or employee of a dog kennel who confines or is
the custodian or caretaker of a companion animal shall knowingly do any of the
following:
         A.   Torture, torment, needlessly mutilate or maim, cruelly beat,
poison, needlessly kill, or commit an act of cruelty against the companion
animal;
         B.   Deprive the companion animal of necessary sustenance or confine
the companion animal without supplying it during the confinement with
sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water if it is reasonably
expected that the companion animal would die or experience unnecessary or
unjustifiable pain or suffering as a result of the deprivation or confinement;
         C.   Impound or confine the companion animal without affording it,
during the impoundment or confinement, with access to shelter from heat, cold,
wind, rain, snow, or excessive direct sunlight if it is reasonably expected
that the companion animal would die or experience unnecessary or unjustifiable
pain or suffering as a result of or due to the lack of adequate shelter.
      (7)   No owner, manager, or employee of a dog kennel who confines or is
the custodian or caretaker of a companion animal shall negligently do any of
the following:
         A.   Torture, torment, or commit an act of cruelty against the
companion animal;
         B.   Deprive the companion animal of necessary sustenance or confine
the companion animal without supplying it during the confinement with
sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water if it can reasonably be
expected that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any other way
as a result of or due to the deprivation or confinement;
         C.   Impound or confine the companion animal without affording it,
during the impoundment or confinement, with access to shelter from heat, cold,
wind, rain, snow, or excessive direct sunlight if it can reasonably be expected
that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any other way as a
result of or due to the lack of adequate shelter.
      (8)   Divisions (d)(2), (d)(3), (d)(4), (d)(5), (d)(6), and (d)(7) of
this section do not apply to any of the following:
         A.   A companion animal used in scientific research conducted by an
institution in accordance with the federal animal welfare act and related
regulations;
         B.   The lawful practice of veterinary medicine by a person who has
been issued a license, temporary permit, or registration certificate to do so
under R.C. Chapter 4741;
         C.   Dogs being used or intended for use for hunting or field trial
purposes, provided that the dogs are being treated in accordance with usual and
commonly accepted practices for the care of hunting dogs;
         D.   The use of common training devices, if the companion animal is
being treated in accordance with usual and commonly accepted practices for the
training of animals;
         E.   The administering of medicine to a companion animal that was
properly prescribed by a person who has been issued a license, temporary
permit, or registration certificate under R.C. Chapter 4741.
      (9)   Notwithstanding any section of the Ohio Revised Code that otherwise
provides for the distribution of fine moneys, the Clerk of Court shall forward
all fines the Clerk collects that are so imposed for any violation of this
division (d) to the Treasurer of the municipality, whose county humane society
or law enforcement agency is to be paid the fine money as determined under this
division. The Treasurer shall pay the fine moneys to the county humane society
or the county, township, municipal corporation, or state law enforcement agency
in this state that primarily was responsible for or involved in the
investigation and prosecution of the violation. If a county humane society
receives any fine moneys under this division, the county humane society shall
use the fine moneys either to provide the training that is required for humane
society agents under R.C. § 1717.061 or to provide additional training for
humane society agents.
(R.C. § 959.131)
   (e)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree. In addition, the court may order the offender
to forfeit the animal or livestock and may provide for its disposition
including but not limited to the sale of the animal or livestock. If an animal
or livestock is forfeited and sold pursuant to this division, the proceeds from
the sale first shall be applied to pay the expenses incurred with regard to the
care of the animal from the time it was taken from the custody of the former
owner. The balance of the proceeds from the sale, if any, shall be paid to the
former owner of the animal.
(R.C. § 959.99(D))
   (f)   (1)   Whoever violates division (d)(2) or (d)(5) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree on a first offense and a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law on each subsequent offense.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (d)(3) of this section is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (d)(4) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the
first degree on each subsequent offense.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (d)(6) of this section is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (d)(7) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (6)   A.   A court may order a person who is convicted of or pleads
guilty to a violation of division (d) of this section to forfeit to an
impounding agency, as defined in R.C. § 959.132, any or all of the companion
animals in that person’s ownership or care. The court also may prohibit or
place limitations on the person’s ability to own or care for any companion
animals for a specified or indefinite period of time.
         B.   A court may order a person who is convicted of or pleads guilty
to a violation of division (a) of this section or division (d) of this section
to reimburse an impounding agency for the reasonably necessary costs incurred
by the agency for the care of a companion animal that the agency impounded as a
result of the investigation or prosecution of the violation, provided that the
costs were not otherwise paid under R.C. § 959.132.
      (7)   If a court has reason to believe that a person who is convicted of
or pleads guilty to a violation of division (d) of this section has a mental or
emotional disorder that contributed to the violation, the court may impose as a
community control sanction or as a condition of probation a requirement that
the offender undergo psychological evaluation or counseling. The court shall
order the offender to pay the costs of the evaluation or counseling.
(R.C. § 959.99(E))
Statutory reference:
Impoundment of companion animals; notice and hearing, see R.C. § 959.132
§ 618.06 COLORING RABBITS AND BABY POULTRY; SALE OR DISPLAY OF POULTRY.
   (a)   No person shall dye or otherwise color any rabbit or baby poultry,
including, but not limited to, chicks and ducklings. No person shall sell,
offer for sale, expose for sale, raffle or give away any rabbit or baby poultry
which has been dyed or otherwise colored. No poultry younger than four weeks of
age may be sold, given away or otherwise distributed to any person in lots of
less than three. Stores, shops, vendors and others offering young poultry for
sale or other distribution shall provide and operate brooders or other heating
devices that may be necessary to maintain poultry in good health, and shall
keep adequate food and water available to the poultry at all times.
(ORC 925.62)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree on a first offense; each subsequent offense is a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
(ORC 925.99(B))
§ 618.07 BARKING OR HOWLING DOGS.
   (a)   No person shall harbor or keep in custody a dog which by loud and
frequent or habitual barking or yelping shall cause serious annoyance or
disturbance to the neighborhood; provided, that at the time of the complaint,
no person or persons were trespassing or threatening to trespass upon the
private property of the owner, and provided that the dog was not being teased
or provoked in any manner.
   (b)   Any person who shall allow any dog habitually to remain, be lodged or
fed within any dwelling, building, yard or enclosure owned or occupied by such
person shall be considered as harboring or keeping such dog.
   (c)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to owners, operators or
employees of licensed veterinary hospitals, licensed kennels, or licensed
animal boarding establishments, nor does this section apply to blind, deaf or
hearing impaired, or mobility impaired persons when the dog serves as an
assistance dog.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a
first or a second offense, and a misdemeanor of the fourth degree for a third
or subsequent offense that occurs within a 12-month period from the date of the
original offense. For purposes of this section, first-time offenders shall be
fined not less than ninety dollars ($90.00), and an additional violation(s) of
this section within a 12-month period from the date of the original offense
shall be fined not less than one hundred sixty-five dollars ($165.00).
(Ord. 27-2014, passed 5-27-2014)
§ 618.08 REGISTRATION OF DOGS REQUIRED.
   (a)   No owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog more than three months of age,
nor owner of a dog kennel, shall fail to file an application for registration
required by Ohio R.C. 955.01, nor shall he or she fail to pay the legal fee
therefor.
(ORC 955.21)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than twenty-five
dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) on a first
offense, and on each subsequent offense shall be fined not less than seventy-
five dollars ($75.00) nor more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and may
be imprisoned for not more than 30 days.
(ORC 955.99(E))
§ 618.09 HINDERING CAPTURE OF UNREGISTERED DOG.
   (a)   No person shall obstruct or interfere with anyone lawfully engaged in
capturing an unlicensed dog or making an examination of a dog wearing a tag.
(ORC 955.24)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 955.99(B))
§ 618.095 DOGS REQUIRED TO WEAR TAGS.
   (a)   No owner of a dog, except a dog constantly confined to a dog kennel
registered under R.C. Chapter 955 or one licensed under R.C. Chapter 956, shall
fail to require the dog to wear, at all times, a valid tag issued in connection
with a certificate of registration. A dog found not wearing at any time a valid
tag shall be prima-facie evidence of lack of registration and shall subject any
dog found not wearing such a tag to impounding, sale, or destruction.
(ORC 955.10)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 955.99(B))
§ 618.10 UNLAWFUL TAGS.
   (a)   No person shall own, keep, or harbor a dog wearing a fictitious,
altered, or invalid registration tag or a registration tag not issued by the
County Auditor in connection with the registration of that animal.
(ORC 955.25)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 955.99(B))
§ 618.11 RABIES QUARANTINE.
   (a)   No person having knowledge of the existence of rabies in an animal, or
knowledge that an animal has exhibited symptoms or behavior suggestive of
rabies, or knowledge that an animal has bitten any person, shall fail to
immediately report such information to the Mayor or the Chief of Police.
   (b)   Whenever it is established by the Mayor or Chief of Police that any
animal has bitten any person or exhibits symptoms or behavior suggestive of
rabies, the person who owns, harbors or otherwise cares for such animal shall
confine it in close quarantine and isolation or shall place such animal in the
establishment of a veterinarian until, in either case, it is determined by the
County Board of Health that the animal is not afflicted with rabies. The
isolation and quarantine period hereby required shall be not less than ten days
from the date the person was bitten. If the animal has, or develops, any
symptoms suspicious of rabies during the ten-day period, the County Board of
Health shall be notified immediately. All expenses incurred for the keeping of
such animal, or the necessary tests to determine whether rabies exists, shall
be borne exclusively by the person who owns, harbors or otherwise cares for
such animal.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
§ 618.12 HUNTING PROHIBITED.
   (a)   The hunting of animals or fowl within the Municipality is prohibited.
No person shall hunt, kill or attempt to kill any animal or fowl by the use of
firearms or any other means. However, nothing in this section shall be deemed
to prohibit the killing of rats and other undesirable rodents authorized to be
killed by the Chief of Police using means for such killing which are also
authorized by the Chief.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
§ 618.13 NUISANCE CONDITIONS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall keep or harbor any animal or fowl in the Municipality
so as to create noxious or offensive odors or unsanitary conditions which are a
menace to the health, comfort or safety of the public.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
§ 618.14 IMPOUNDING AND DISPOSITION; RECORDS.
   (a)   A police officer or animal warden may impound every dog or other
animal found in violation of §
618.01. If the impounded dog is not wearing a valid registration tag, the dog
shall forthwith be turned over to an officer charged by law with the custody
and disposal of such dogs. If the dog is wearing a valid registration tag or
the identity of the owner or harborer is otherwise established, notice shall
immediately be given to such owner or harborer that the dog has been impounded.
Notice may be by telephone or by ordinary mail to the last known address of
such owner or harborer. The dog shall not be released except upon the payment
of reasonable expenses for its taking and keeping. Any dog not redeemed within
three days of the time it is seized or impounded may be sold or otherwise
disposed of as provided by Ohio R.C. 955.16.
   (b)   A record of all dogs impounded, the disposition of the same, the
owner’s name and address, if known, and a statement of any costs or receipts
involving such dog shall be kept.
§ 618.15 ANIMAL FIGHTS.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly do either of the following:
      (1)   Engage in cockfighting, bearbaiting, or pitting an animal against
another;
      (2)   Use, train, or possess any animal for seizing, detaining, or
maltreating a domestic animal.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly do either of the following:
      (1)   Be employed at cockfighting, bearbaiting, or pitting an animal
against another;
      (2)   Do any of the following regarding an event involving cockfighting,
bearbaiting, or pitting an animal against another:
         A.   Wager money or anything else of value on the results of the
event;
         B.   Pay money or give anything else of value in exchange for
admission to or being present at the event;
         C.   Receive money or anything else of value in exchange for the
admission of another person to the event or for another person to be present at
the event;
         D.   Use, possess, or permit or cause to be present at the event any
device or substance intended to enhance an animal's ability to fight or to
inflict injury on another animal;
         E.   Permit or cause a minor to be present at the event if any person
present at or involved with the event is conducting any of the activities
described in division (b)(1) or (b)(2)A., (b)(2)B., (b)(2)C., or (b)(2)D. of
this section.
   (c)   A person who knowingly witnesses cockfighting, bearbaiting, or an
event in which one animal is pitted against another when a violation of
division (b) of this section is occurring at the cockfighting, bearbaiting, or
event is an aider and abettor and has committed a violation of this division.
(R.C. § 959.15)
   (d)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) or (c) of this section is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 959.99(C), (I))
Statutory reference:
   Dogfighting, felony provisions, see R.C. § 959.16
§ 618.16 ASSISTANCE DOG WITH BLIND, DEAF, OR HEARING IMPAIRED PERSON, OR PERSON
WITH A MOBILITY IMPAIRMENT, OR TRAINER.
   (a)   When a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired, a person with a
mobility impairment, or a trainer of an assistance dog is accompanied by an
assistance dog, the person or trainer, as applicable, is entitled to the full
and equal accommodations, advantages, facilities, and privileges of all public
conveyances, hotels, and lodging places, all places of public accommodation,
amusement, or resort, and other places to which the general public is invited,
and may take the dog into such conveyances and places, subject only to the
conditions and limitations applicable to all persons not so accompanied, except
that:
      (1)   The dog shall not occupy a seat in any public conveyance; and
      (2)   The dog shall be leashed while using the facilities of a common
carrier.
      (3)   Any dog in training to become an assistance dog shall be covered by
a liability insurance policy provided by the nonprofit special agency engaged
in such work protecting members of the public against personal injury or
property damage caused by the dog.
   (b)   No person shall deprive a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing
impaired, a person who has a mobility impairment, or a trainer of an assistance
dog when the person or trainer, as applicable, is accompanied by an assistance
dog of any of the advantages, facilities, or privileges provided in division
(A) of this section, and no person shall charge the person or trainer a fee or
charge for the dog.
(R.C. § 955.43(A), (B))
   (c)   As used in this section:
      (1)   ASSISTANCE DOG. Means a guide dog, hearing dog, or service dog that
has been trained by a nonprofit special agency.
      (2)   BLIND. Means either of the following:
         A.   Vision 20/200 or less in the better eye with proper correction;
         B.   Field defect in the better eye with proper correction that
contracts the peripheral field so that the diameter of the visual field
subtends an angle no greater than 20 degrees.
      (3)   GUIDE DOG. Means a dog that has been trained or is in training to
assist a blind person.
      (4)   HEARING DOG. Means a dog that has been trained or is in training to
assist a deaf or hearing-impaired person.
      (5)   INSTITUTIONS OF EDUCATION. Means:
         A.   Any state university or college as defined in R.C. § 3345.32;
         B.   Any private college or university that holds a certificate of
authorization issued by the Ohio Board of Regents pursuant to R.C. Chapter
1713;
         C.   Any elementary or secondary school operated by a board of
education;
         D.   Any chartered or nonchartered nonpublic elementary or secondary
school; or
         E.   Any school issued a certificate of registration by the state
Board of Career Colleges and Schools.
      (7)   PERSON WITH A MOBILITY IMPAIRMENT. Any person, regardless of age,
who is subject to a physiological impairment regardless of its cause, nature,
or extent that renders the person unable to move about without the aid of
crutches, a wheelchair, or any other form of support, or that limits the
person's functional ability to ambulate, climb, descend, sit, rise, or perform
any related function. The phrase includes a person with a neurological or
psychological disability that limits the person's functional ability to
ambulate, climb, descend, sit, rise, or perform any related function. The
phrase also includes a person with a seizure disorder and a person who is
diagnosed with autism.
      (8)   SERVICE DOG. Means a dog that has been trained or is in training to
assist a person with a mobility impairment.
(R.C. §§ 955.011(B), 955.43(C))
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(ORC 955.99(D))
§ 618.17 RESTRICTIONS ON DOG OWNERSHIP FOR CERTAIN CONVICTED FELONS.
   (a)   No person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a felony offense of
violence committed on or after May 22, 2012 or a felony violation of any
provision of R.C. Chapter 959, R.C. Chapter 2923 or R.C. Chapter 2925 committed
on or after May 22, 2012 shall knowingly own, possess, have custody of, or
reside in a residence with either of the following for a period of three years
commencing either upon the date of release of the person from any period of
incarceration imposed for the offense or violation or, if the person is not
incarcerated for the offense or violation, upon the date of the person’s final
release from the other sanctions imposed for the offense or violation:
      (1)   An unspayed or unneutered dog older than 12 weeks of age;
      (2)   Any dog that has been determined to be a dangerous dog under R.C.
Chapter 955 or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (b)   A person described in division (a) of this section shall microchip for
permanent identification any dog owned, possessed by, or in the custody of the
person.
   (c)   (1)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to any person who is
confined in a correctional institution of the Department of Rehabilitation and
Correction.
      (2)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to any person with
respect to any dog that the person owned, possessed, had custody of, or resided
in a residence with prior to May 22, 2012.
(R.C. § 955.54)
   (d)   Whoever violates division (a) or (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 955.99(O))
§ 618.18 SEXUAL CONDUCT WITH AN ANIMAL.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   ANIMAL. Means a nonhuman mammal, bird, reptile, or amphibian,
either dead or alive.
      (2)   OFFENSE. Means a violation of this section or an attempt, in
violation of R.C. § 2923.02, to violate this section.
      (3)   OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 959.132.
      (4)   SEXUAL CONDUCT. Means either of the following committed for the
purpose of sexual gratification:
         A.   Any act done between a person and animal that involves contact of
the penis of one and the vulva of the other, the penis of one and the penis of
the other, the penis of one and the anus of the other, the mouth of one and the
penis of the other, the mouth of one and the anus of the other, the vulva of
one and the vulva of the other, the mouth of one and the vulva of the other,
any other contact between a reproductive organ of one and a reproductive organ
of the other, or any other insertion of a reproductive organ of one into an
orifice of the other;
         B.   Without a bona fide veterinary or animal husbandry purpose to do
so, the insertion, however slight, of any part of a person's body or any
instrument, apparatus, or other object into the vaginal, anal, or reproductive
opening of an animal.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly engage in sexual conduct with an animal or
knowingly possess, sell, or purchase an animal with the intent that it be
subjected to sexual conduct.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly organize, promote, aid, or abet in the
conduct of an act involving any sexual conduct with an animal.
(R.C. § 959.21)
   (d)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
second degree. In addition, the court may order the offender to forfeit the
animal or livestock and may provide for its disposition including but not
limited to the sale of the animal or livestock. If an animal or livestock is
forfeited and sold pursuant to this division, the proceeds from the sale first
shall be applied to pay the expenses incurred with regard to the care of the
animal from the time it was taken from the custody of the former owner. The
balance of the proceeds from the sale, if any, shall be paid to the former
owner of the animal.
(R.C. § 959.99(D))
      (2)   If a court has reason to believe that a person who is convicted of
or pleads guilty to a violation of this section suffers from a mental or
emotional disorder that contributed to the violation, the court may impose as a
community control sanction or as a condition of probation a requirement that
the offender undergo psychological evaluation or counseling. The court shall
order the offender to pay the costs of the evaluation or counseling.
(R.C. § 959.99(E)(7))
CHAPTER 624: DRUGS
624.01   Definitions.
624.02   Adult use cannabis control; limitations on conduct by individuals.
624.025   Cultivation of marihuana.
624.03   Drug possession offenses.
624.04   Possession of drug abuse instruments.
624.05   Permitting drug abuse.
624.06   Deception to obtain a dangerous drug. (Repealed)
624.07   Abusing harmful intoxicants.
624.073   Improperly dispensing or distributing nitrous oxide.
624.076   Possessing nitrous oxide in motor vehicles.
624.08   Illegal dispensing of drug samples.
624.09   Possession, sale and disposal of hypodermics.
624.10   Evidence.
624.11   Double jeopardy.
624.12   Controlled substance schedules.
624.13   Controlled substance or prescription labels.
624.14   Unauthorized possession of blank drug prescription forms.
624.15   Sale of drug paraphernalia for use of marihuana to juveniles.
(Repealed)
624.16   Possession, manufacture and sale of drug paraphernalia.
624.17   Counterfeit controlled substances.
624.18   Loitering in aid of drug offenses.
624.19   Pseudoephedrine sales.
624.20   Reimbursement for drug test fees.
624.21   Sale of pure caffeine product.
624.22   Sale of dextromethorphan.
624.23   Prohibiting adult use cannabis operations.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar State law
   Treatment of drug dependent persons in lieu of conviction - see Ohio R.C.
2951.041
   Intoxicated pedestrians - see TRAF.
416.10
   Driving or physical control while under the influence - see TRAF.
434.01
   Effect of voluntary intoxication on criminal liability - see GEN. OFF.
606.07
   Alcoholic beverages - see GEN. OFF. Ch.
612
   Placing harmful substance or objects in food or confection - see GEN. OFF.
636.16
   Disorderly conduct while voluntarily intoxicated - see GEN. OFF.
648.04
   Using weapons while intoxicated - see GEN. OFF.
672.03
§ 624.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Words,
terms and phrases and their derivatives used in this chapter which are not
defined in this section shall have the meanings given to them in the Ohio
Revised Code.
   (a)   ADMINISTER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   (b)   ADULTERATE. To cause a drug to be adulterated as described in R.C. §
3715.63.
   (c)   ALCOHOL AND DRUG ADDICTION SERVICES. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5119.01.
   (d)   BULK AMOUNT. Of a controlled substance means any of the following:
      (1)   For any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance included in
Schedule I, Schedule II, or Schedule III, with the exception of any controlled
substance analog, marihuana, cocaine, L.S.D., heroin, any fentanyl-related
compound, and hashish and except as provided in division (2), (5), or (6) of
this definition, whichever of the following is applicable:
         A.   An amount equal to or exceeding ten grams or 25 unit doses of a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of
a Schedule I opiate or opium derivative;
         B.   An amount equal to or exceeding ten grams of a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of raw or gum opium;
         C.   An amount equal to or exceeding 30 grams or ten unit doses of a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of
a Schedule I hallucinogen other than tetrahydrocannabinol or lysergic acid
amide, or a Schedule I stimulant or depressant;
         D.   An amount equal to or exceeding 20 grams or five times the
maximum daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard
pharmaceutical reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule II opiate or opium
derivative;
         E.   An amount equal to or exceeding five grams or ten unit doses of a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of
phencyclidine;
         F.   An amount equal to or exceeding 120 grams or 30 times the maximum
daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard pharmaceutical
reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or
contains
any amount of a Schedule II stimulant that is in a final dosage form
manufactured by a person authorized by the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
(21 U.S.C. §§ 301 et seq., as amended) and the federal drug abuse control laws,
as defined in this section, that is or contains any amount of a Schedule II
depressant substance or a Schedule II hallucinogenic substance;
         G.   An amount equal to or exceeding three grams of a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule
II stimulant, or any of its salts or isomers, that is not in a final dosage
form manufactured by a person authorized by the Federal Food, Drug, and
Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. §§ 301 et seq., as amended) and the federal drug abuse
control laws;
      (2)   An amount equal to or exceeding 120 grams or 30 times the maximum
daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard pharmaceutical
reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule III or IV substance other than an anabolic
steroid or a Schedule III opiate or opium derivative;
      (3)   An amount equal to or exceeding 20 grams or five times the maximum
daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard pharmaceutical
reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule III opiate or opium derivative;
      (4)   An amount equal to or exceeding 250 milliliters or 250 grams of a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of
a Schedule V substance;
      (5)   An amount equal to or exceeding 200 solid dosage units, 16 grams,
or 16 milliliters of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule III anabolic steroid;
      (6)   For any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is a
combination of a fentanyl-related compound and any other compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance included in Schedule III, Schedule IV, or Schedule V,
if the defendant is charged with a violation of R.C. § 2925.11 and the
sentencing provisions set forth in R.C. § 2925.11(C)(10)(b) and (C)(11) will
not apply regarding the defendant and the violation, the bulk amount of the
controlled substance for purposes of the violation is the amount specified in
division (1), (2), (3), (4), or (5) of this definition for the other Schedule
III, Schedule IV, or Schedule V controlled substance that is combined with the
fentanyl-related compound.
   (e)   CERTIFIED GRIEVANCE COMMITTEE. A duly constituted and organized
committee of the Ohio State Bar Association or of one or more local bar
associations of the state that complies with the criteria set forth in Rule V,
Section 6 of the Rules for the Government of the Bar of Ohio.
   (f)   COCAINE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A cocaine salt, isomer, or derivative, a salt of a cocaine isomer
or derivative, or the base form of cocaine.
      (2)   Coca leaves or a salt, compound, derivative, or preparation of coca
leaves, including ecgonine, a salt, isomer, or derivative of ecgonine, or a
salt of an isomer or derivative of ecgonine.
      (3)   A salt, compound, derivative, or preparation of a substance
identified in division (1) or (2) of this definition that is chemically
equivalent to or identical with any of those substances, except that the
substances shall not include decocainized coca leaves or extraction of coca
leaves if the extractions do not contain cocaine or ecgonine.
   (g)   COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A JUVENILE. An offense is “committed in
the vicinity of a juvenile” if the offender commits the offense within 100 feet
of a juvenile or within the view of a juvenile, regardless of whether the
offender knows the  age of the juvenile, whether the offender knows the offense
is being committed within 100 feet of or within view of the juvenile, or
whether the juvenile actually views the commission of the offense.
   (h)   COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A SCHOOL. An offense is “committed in the
vicinity of a school” if the offender commits the offense on school premises,
in a school building, or within 1,000 feet of the boundaries of any school
premises, regardless of whether the offender knows the offense is being
committed on school premises, in a school building, or within 1,000 feet of the
boundaries of any school premises.
   (i)   COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A SUBSTANCE ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER
OR A RECOVERING ADDICT. An offense is committed in the vicinity of a substance
addiction services provider or a recovering addict if either of the following
apply:
      (1)   The offender commits the offense on the premises of a substance
addiction services provider's facility, including a facility licensed prior to
June 29, 2019, under R.C. § 5119.391 to provide methadone treatment or an
opioid treatment program licensed on or after that date under R.C. § 5119.37,
or within 500 feet of the premises of a substance addiction services provider's
facility and the offender knows or should know that the offense is being
committed within the vicinity of the substance addiction services provider's
facility.
      (2)   The offender sells, offers to sell, delivers, or distributes the
controlled substance or controlled substance analog to a person who is
receiving treatment at the time of the commission of the offense, or received
treatment within 30 days prior to the commission of the offense, from a
substance addiction services provider and the offender knows that the person is
receiving or received that treatment.
   (j)   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   (k)   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE ANALOG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
3719.01.
   (l)   COUNTERFEIT CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any drug that bears, or whose container or label bears, a
trademark, trade name, or other identifying mark used without authorization of
the owner of rights to the trademark, trade name, or identifying mark.
      (2)   Any unmarked or unlabeled substance that is represented to be a
controlled substance manufactured, processed, packed, or distributed by a
person other than the person that manufactured, processed, packed, or
distributed it.
      (3)   Any substance that is represented to be a controlled substance but
is not a controlled substance or is a different controlled substance.
      (4)   Any substance other than a controlled substance that a reasonable
person would believe to be a controlled substance because of its similarity in
shape, size, and color, or its markings, labeling, packaging, distribution, or
the price for which it is sold or offered for sale.
   (k)   CULTIVATE. Includes planting, watering, fertilizing or tilling.
   (l)   DANGEROUS DRUG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   (m)   CULTIVATE. Includes planting, watering, fertilizing or tilling.
   (n)   DANGEROUS DRUG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   (o)   DECEPTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
   (p)   DISCIPLINARY COUNSEL. The disciplinary counsel appointed by the Board
of Commissioners on Grievances and Discipline of the Ohio Supreme Court under
the Rules for the Government of the Bar of Ohio.
   (q)   DISPENSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   (r)   DISTRIBUTE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   (s)   DRUG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   (t)   DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2913.02(A) that constitutes theft of drugs,
or any violation of R.C. § 2925.02, 2925.03, 2925.04, 2925.041, 2925.05,
2925.06, 2925.11, 2925.12, 2925.13, 2925.22, 2925.23, 2925.24, 2925.31,
2925.32, 2925.36, or 2925.37.
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former law of a municipality, state
or any other state or of the United States, that is substantially equivalent to
any section listed in division (1) of this definition.
      (3)   An offense under an existing or former law of a municipality, state
or any other state, or of the United States, of which planting, cultivating,
harvesting, processing, making, manufacturing, producing, shipping,
transporting, delivering, acquiring, possessing, storing, distributing,
dispensing, selling, inducing another to use, administering to another, using,
or otherwise dealing with a controlled substance is an element.
      (4)   A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing or attempting to commit, any offense under division (1), (2), or (3)
of this definition.
   (u)   DRUG OF ABUSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.011.
   (v)   FELONY DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE. Any drug abuse offense that would
constitute a felony under the laws of this state, any other state, or the
United States.
   (w)   FENTANYL-RELATED COMPOUND. Any of the following:
      (1)   Fentanyl;
      (2)   Alpha-methylfentanyl (N-[1-(alpha- methyl-beta-phenyl)ethyl-4-
piperidyl] propionanilide; 1-(1-methyl-2-phenylethyl)-4-(N- propanilido)
piperidine);
      (3)   Alpha-methylthiofentanyl (N-[1- methyl-2-(2-thienyl)ethyl-4-
piperidinyl]-N- phenylpropanamide);
      (4)   Beta-hydroxyfentanyl (N-[1-(2- hydroxy-2-phenethyl-4-piperidinyl]-
N- phenylpropanamide);
      (5)   Beta-hydroxy-3-methylfentanyl (other name: N-[1-(2-hydroxy-2-
phenethyl)-3-methyl-4- piperidinyl]-N-phenylpropanamide);
      (6)   3-methylfentanyl (N-[3-methyl-1-(2- phenylethyl)-4-piperidyl]-N-
phenylpropanamide);
      (7)   3-methylthiofentanyl (N-[3-methyl-1- [2-(thienyl)ethyl]-4-
piperidinyl]-– phenylpropanamide);
      (8)   Para-fluorofentanyl (N-(4- fluorophenyl)-N-[1-(2-phenethyl)-4-
piperidinyl]propanamide;
      (9)   Thiofentanyl (N-phenyl-N-[1-(2- thienyl)ethyl-4-piperidinyl]-
propanamide;
      (10)   Alfentanil;
      (11)   Carfentanil;
      (12)   Remifentanil;
      (13)   Sufentanil;
      (14)   Acetyl-alpha-methylfentanyl (N-[1- (1-methyl-2-phenethyl)-4-
piperidinyl]-N- phenylacetamide); and
      (15)   Any compound that meets all of the following fentanyl
pharmacophore requirements to bind at the mu receptor, as identified by a
report from an established forensic laboratory, including acetylfentanyl,
furanylfentanyl, valerylfentanyl, butyrylfentanyl, isobutyrylfentanyl, 4-
methoxybutyrylfentanyl, para- fluorobutyrylfentanyl, acrylfentanyl, and ortho-
fluorofentanyl:
         A.   A chemical scaffold consisting of both of the following:
            1.   A five, six, or seven member ring structure containing a
nitrogen, whether or not further substituted;
            2.   An attached nitrogen to the ring, whether or not that nitrogen
is enclosed in a ring structure, including an attached aromatic ring or other
lipophilic group to that nitrogen.
         B.   A polar functional group attached to the chemical scaffold,
including but not limited to a hydroxyl, ketone, amide, or ester;
         C.   An alkyl or aryl substitution off the ring nitrogen of the
chemical scaffold; and
         D.   The compound has not been approved for medical use by the United
States food and drug administration.
   (x)   HARMFUL INTOXICANT. Does not include beer or intoxicating liquor, but
means any of the following:
      (1)   Any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance the gas, fumes, or
vapor of which when inhaled can induce intoxication, excitement, giddiness,
irrational behavior, depression, stupefaction, paralysis, unconsciousness,
asphyxiation, or other harmful physiological effects, and includes but is not
limited to any of the following:
         A.   Any volatile organic solvent, plastic cement, model cement,
fingernail polish remover, lacquer thinner, cleaning fluid, gasoline, or other
preparation containing a volatile organic solvent.
         B.   Any aerosol propellant.
         C.   Any fluorocarbon refrigerant.
         D.   Any anesthetic gas.
      (2)   Gamma Butyrolactone;
      (3)   1,4 Butanediol.
   (y)   HASHISH.
      (1)   A resin or a preparation of a resin to which both of the following
apply:
         A.   It is contained in or derived from any part of the plant of the
genus cannabis, whether in solid form or in a liquid concentrate, liquid
extract, or liquid distillate form.
         B.   It has a delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol concentration of more than
0.3%.
      (2)   The term does not include a hemp byproduct in the possession of a
licensed hemp processor under R.C. Chapter 928, provided that the hemp
byproduct is being produced, stored, and disposed of in accordance with rules
adopted under R.C. § 928.03.
   (z)   HYPODERMIC. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   (aa)   JUVENILE. A person under 18 years of age.
   (bb)   LICENSED HEALTH PROFESSIONAL AUTHORIZED TO PRESCRIBE DRUGS. Has the
same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   (cc)   L.S.D. Lysergic acid diethylamide.
   (dd)   MAJOR DRUG OFFENDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
   (ee)   MANDATORY PRISON TERM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
   (ff)   MANUFACTURE. To plant, cultivate, harvest, process, make, prepare, or
otherwise engage in any part of the production of a drug, by propagation,
extraction, chemical synthesis, or compounding, or any combination of the same,
and includes packaging, repackaging, labeling, and other activities incident to
production.
   (gg)   MANUFACTURER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   (hh)   MARIHUANA. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01, except that it
does not include hashish.
   (ii)   METHAMPHETAMINE. Meth- amphetamine, any salt, isomer, or salt of an
isomer of methamphetamine, or any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance
containing methamphetamine or any salt, isomer, or salt of an isomer of
methamphetamine.
   (jj)   MINOR DRUG POSSESSION OFFENSE. Either of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2925.11 as it existed prior to July 1, 1996,
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (2)   A violation of R.C. § 2925.11 as it exists on and after July 1,
1996, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that is a misdemeanor
or a felony of the fifth degree.
   (kk)   OFFICIAL WRITTEN ORDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   (ll)   PERSON. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   (mm)   PERSON WITH A DRUG DEPENDENCY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
3719.011.
   (nn)   PHARMACIST. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   (oo)   PHARMACY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   (pp)   POSSESS or POSSESSION. Having control over a thing or substance but
may not be inferred solely from mere access to the thing or substance through
ownership or occupation of the premises upon which the thing or substance is
found.
   (qq)   PREMISES OF A SUBSTANCE ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER'S FACILITY. Means
the parcel of real property on which any substance addiction service provider’s
facility is situated.
   (rr)   PRESCRIPTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   (ss)   PRESUMPTION FOR A PRISON TERM or PRESUMPTION THAT A PRISON TERM SHALL
BE IMPOSED. A presumption as described in R.C. § 2929.13(D) that a prison term
is a necessary sanction for a felony in order to comply with the purposes and
principles of sentencing under R.C. § 2929.11.
   (tt)   PROFESSIONAL LICENSE. Any license, permit, certificate, registration,
qualification, admission, temporary license, temporary permit, temporary
certificate, or temporary registration that is described in R.C. § 2925.01(W)
(1) through (W)(37) and that qualifies a person as a professionally licensed
person.
   (uu)   PROFESSIONALLY LICENSED PERSON. Any of the following:
      (1)   A person who has received a certificate or temporary certificate as
a certified public accountant or who has registered as a public accountant
under R.C. Chapter 4701 and who holds an Ohio permit issued under that chapter;
      (2)   A person who holds a certificate of qualification to practice
architecture issued or renewed and registered under R.C. Chapter 4703;
      (3)   A person who is registered as a landscape architect under R.C.
Chapter 4703 or who holds a permit as a landscape architect issued under that
chapter;
      (4)   A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4707;
      (5)   A person who has been issued a barber’s license, barber
instructor’s license, assistant barber instructor’s license, or independent
contractor’s license under R.C. Chapter 4709;
      (6)   A person licensed and regulated to engage in the business of a debt
pooling company by a legislative authority, under authority of R.C. Chapter
4710;
      (7)   A person who has been issued a cosmetologist’s license, hair
designer’s license, manicurist’s license, esthetician’s license, natural hair
stylist’s license, advanced license to practice cosmetology, advanced license
to practice hair design, advanced license to practice manicuring, advanced
license to practice esthetics, advanced license to practice natural hair
styling, cosmetology instructor’s license, hair design instructor’s license,
manicurist instructor’s license, esthetics instructor’s license, natural hair
style instructor’s license, independent contractor’s license, or tanning
facility permit under R.C. Chapter 4713;
      (8)   A person who has been issued a license to practice dentistry, a
general anesthesia permit, a conscious sedation permit, a limited resident’s
license, a limited teaching license, a dental hygienist’s license, or a dental
hygienist’s teacher’s certificate under R.C. Chapter 4715;
      (9)   A person who has been issued an embalmer’s license, a funeral
director’s license, a funeral home license, or a crematory license, or who has
been registered for an embalmer’s or funeral director’s apprenticeship under
R.C. Chapter 4717;
      (10)   A person who has been licensed as a registered nurse or practical
nurse, or who has been issued a certificate for the practice of nurse-
midwifery under R.C. Chapter 4723;
      (11)   A person who has been licensed to practice optometry or to engage
in optical dispensing under R.C. Chapter 4725;
      (12)   A person licensed to act as a pawnbroker under R.C. Chapter 4727;
      (13)   A person licensed to act as a precious metals dealer under R.C.
Chapter 4728;
      (14)   A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4729 as a pharmacist or
pharmacy intern or registered under that chapter as a registered pharmacy
technician, certified pharmacy technician, or pharmacy technician trainee;
      (15)   A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4729 as a manufacturer of
dangerous drugs, outsourcing facility, third-party logistics provider,
repackager of dangerous drugs, wholesale distributor of dangerous drugs, or
terminal distributor of dangerous drugs;
      (16)   A person who is authorized to practice as a physician assistant
under R.C. Chapter 4730;
      (17)   A person who has been issued a license to practice medicine and
surgery, osteopathic medicine and surgery, or podiatric medicine and surgery
under R.C. Chapter 4731 or has been issued a certificate to practice a limited
branch of medicine under that chapter;
      (18)   A person licensed as a psychologist, independent school
psychologist, or school psychologist under R.C. Chapter 4732;
      (19)   A person registered to practice the profession of engineering or
surveying under R.C. Chapter 4733;
      (20)   A person who has been issued a license to practice chiropractic
under R.C. Chapter 4734;
      (21)   A person licensed to act as a real estate broker or real estate
salesperson under R.C. Chapter 4735;
      (22)   A person registered as a registered environmental health
specialist under R.C. Chapter 3776;
      (23)   A person licensed to operate or maintain a junkyard under R.C.
Chapter 4737;
      (24)   A person who has been issued a motor vehicle salvage dealer’s
license under R.C. Chapter 4738;
      (25)   A person who has been licensed to act as a steam engineer under
R.C. Chapter 4739;
      (26)   A person who has been issued a license or temporary permit to
practice veterinary medicine or any of its branches, or who is registered as a
graduate animal technician under R.C. Chapter 4741;
      (27)   A person who has been issued a hearing aid dealer’s or fitter’s
license or trainee permit under R.C. Chapter 4747;
      (28)   A person who has been issued a class A, class B, or class C
license or who has been registered as an investigator or security guard
employee under R.C. Chapter 4749;
      (29)   A person licensed to practice as a nursing home administrator
under R.C. Chapter 4751;
      (30)   A person licensed to practice as a speech-language pathologist or
audiologist under R.C. Chapter 4753;
      (31)   A person issued a license as an occupational therapist or physical
therapist under R.C. Chapter 4755;
      (32)   A person who is licensed as a licensed professional clinical
counselor, licensed professional counselor, social worker, independent social
worker, independent marriage and family therapist, or marriage and family
therapist, or registered as a social work assistant under R.C. Chapter 4757;
      (33)   A person issued a license to practice dietetics under R.C. Chapter
4759;
      (34)   A person who has been issued a license or limited permit to
practice respiratory therapy under R.C. Chapter 4761;
      (35)   A person who has been issued a real estate appraiser certificate
under R.C. Chapter 4763;
      (36)   A person who has been issued a home inspector license under R.C.
Chapter 4764;
      (37)   A person who has been admitted to the bar by order of the Ohio
Supreme Court in compliance with its prescribed and published rules;
      (38)   A person who has been issued a license to practice as a certified
mental health assistant under R.C. Chapter 4772.
   (vv)   PUBLIC PREMISES. Any hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall,
or other place of public accommodation, business, amusement, or resort.
   (ww)   SALE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   (xx)   SAMPLE DRUG. A drug or pharmaceutical preparation that would be
hazardous to health or safety if used without the supervision of a licensed
health professional authorized to prescribe drugs, or a drug of abuse, and
that, at one time, had been placed in a container plainly marked as a sample by
a manufacturer.
   (yy)   SCHEDULE I, SCHEDULE II, SCHEDULE III, SCHEDULE IV or SCHEDULE V.
Have the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   (zz)   SCHOOL. Any school operated by a board of education, any community
school established under R.C. Chapter 3314, or any nonpublic school for which
the Director of Education and Workforce prescribes minimum standards under R.C.
§ 3301.07, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities or
training provided by the school is being conducted at the time a criminal
offense is committed.
   (aaa)   SCHOOL BUILDING. Any building in which any of the instruction,
extracurricular activities, or training provided by a school is conducted,
whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or training
provided by the school is being conducted in the school building at the time a
criminal offense is committed.
   (bbb)   SCHOOL PREMISES. Either of the following:
      (1)   The parcel of real property on which any school is situated,
whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or training
provided by the school is being conducted on the premises at the time a
criminal offense is committed.
      (2)   Any other parcel of real property that is owned or leased by a
board of education of a school, the governing authority of a community school
established under R.C. Chapter 3314, or the governing body of a nonpublic
school for which the Director of Education and Workforce prescribes minimum
standards under R.C. § 3301.07 and on which some of the instruction,
extracurricular activities or training of the school is conducted, whether or
not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or training provided by the
school is being conducted on the parcel of real property at the time a criminal
offense is committed.
   (ccc)   STANDARD PHARMACEUTICAL REFERENCE MANUAL. The current edition, with
cumulative changes if any, of references that are approved by the State Board
of Pharmacy.
   (ddd)   SUBSTANCE ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER. Means an agency, association,
corporation or other legal entity, individual, or program that provides one or
more of the following at a facility:
      (1)   Either alcohol addiction services, or drug addiction services, or
both such services that are certified by the Ohio Director of Mental Health and
Addiction Services under R.C. § 5119.36;
      (2)   Recovery supports that are related to either alcohol addiction
services, or drug addiction services, or both such services and paid for with
federal, state, or local funds administered by the Ohio Department of Mental
Health and Addiction Services or a board of alcohol, drug addiction, and mental
health services.
   (eee)   UNIT DOSE. An amount or unit or a compound, mixture, or preparation
containing a controlled substance that is separately identifiable and in a form
that indicates that it is the amount or unit by which the controlled substance
is separately administered to or taken by an individual.
   (fff)   WHOLESALER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
(R.C.§ 2925.01)
§ 624.02 ADULT USE CANNABIS CONTROL; LIMITATIONS ON CONDUCT BY INDIVIDUALS.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapter 3780 and notwithstanding
any conflicting provision of this code or the Ohio Revised Code, an adult use
consumer, may do the following:
      (1)   Use adult use cannabis;
      (2)   Possess, transfer without remuneration to another adult consumer,
or transport adult use cannabis, subject to division (b) of this section; and
      (3)   Purchase adult use cannabis from an adult use dispensary per day in
amounts that do not exceed the possession limits set forth in division (b)(1)
of this section.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapter 3796:
      (1)   The amount of cannabis that may be possessed by an adult use
consumer shall not exceed:
         A.   Two and one-half ounces of adult use cannabis in any form except
adult use extract; and
         B.   Fifteen grams of adult use cannabis in the form of adult use
extract.
      (2)   The amount of cannabis that may be transferred by an adult use
consumer without remuneration and not advertised or promoted to the public
shall not exceed:
         A.   Two and one-half ounces of adult use cannabis in any form except
adult use extract; and
         B.   Fifteen grams of adult use cannabis in the form of adult use
extract.
      (3)   The amount of cannabis that may be transported by an adult use
consumer shall not exceed:
         A.   Two and one-half ounces of adult use cannabis in any form except
adult use extract; and
         B.   Fifteen grams of adult use cannabis in the form of adult use
extract.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapter 3780, an adult use
consumer shall not be subject to arrest, criminal prosecution, or civil penalty
for engaging in any of the activities authorized under R.C. Chapter 3780,
including:
      (1)   Obtaining, using, possessing, or transporting adult use cannabis;
      (2)   Performing conduct authorized under R.C. § 3780.29;
      (3)   Acquiring, possessing, using, purchasing, manufacturing, selling,
or transporting paraphernalia; and
      (4)   Assisting another adult use consumer, or allowing property to be
used, in any of the acts authorized by R.C. Chapter 3780.
   (d)   (1)   An individual is prohibited from operating a vehicle, motor
vehicle, streetcar, trackless trolley, bike, watercraft, or aircraft while
using adult use cannabis or while under the influence of adult use cannabis and
is subject to R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance
for any violation of this division.
      (2)   An individual is prohibited from smoking, vaporizing, or using any
other combustible adult use cannabis product while in a vehicle, motor vehicle,
streetcar, trackless trolley, bike, watercraft, or aircraft and is subject to
R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance for any
violation of this division.
   (e)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapter 3780, no individual under
21 years of age shall knowingly show or give false information concerning the
individual’s name, age, or other identification for the purpose of purchasing
adult use cannabis from an adult use dispensary licensed under R.C. Chapter
3780.
   (f)   Nothing in R.C. Chapter 3780 is intended to permit the transfer or
sale of adult use cannabis, with or without remuneration, to an individual
under 21 years of age, or to allow an individual under 21 years of age to
purchase, possess, use, process, transport, or cultivate cannabis except where
authorized by R.C. Chapter 3796.
   (g)   It is unlawful for any parent or guardian to knowingly permit their
residence, any other private property under their control, or any vehicle,
conveyance, or watercraft under their control to be used by an invitee of the
parent’s child or the guardian’s ward, if the invitee is under 21 years of age,
in a manner that constitutes a violation of R.C. Chapter 3780.
      (1)   A parent or guardian is deemed to have knowingly permitted their
residence, any other private property under their control, or any vehicle,
conveyance, or watercraft under their control to be used in violation of R.C.
Chapter 3780 if they knowingly authorize or permit consumption of cannabis by
underage invitees.
      (2)   Where the residence or other property has an owner and a tenant or
lessee, the trier of fact may infer that the residence or other property is
occupied only by the tenant or lessee.
(R.C. § 3780.36)
   (h)   Penalties.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapter 3796, R.C. § 2925.11
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance shall apply when an adult use
consumer possesses an amount of cannabis greater than the limits set forth in
division (b)(1) of this section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapter 3780, an adult use
consumer who uses adult use cannabis in public areas, or who violates division
(d)(2) of this section as a passenger, is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (3)   A.   An individual under 21 years of age who knowingly shows or
gives false information concerning the individual’s name, age, or other
identification for the purpose of purchasing or otherwise obtaining adult use
cannabis from an adult use dispensary licensed under R.C. Chapter 3780 is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If, in committing a first
violation, the offender presented to an adult use dispensary licensed under
R.C. Chapter 3780 a false, fictitious, or altered identification card, a false
or fictitious driver’s license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver’s
license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than $250 and not
more than $1,000, and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more
than six months.
         B.   On a second violation in which, for the second time, the offender
presented to an adult use dispensary licensed under R.C. Chapter 3780 a false,
fictitious, or altered identification card, a false or fictitious driver’s
license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver’s license issued by any
state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree and shall be fined not less than $500 nor more than $1,000, and
may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more than six months. The
court also may impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege from
the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7). The court, in lieu of suspending
the offender’s temporary instruction permit, probationary driver’s license, or
driver’s license, instead may order the offender to perform a determinate
number of hours of community service, with the court determining the actual
number of hours and the nature of the community service the offender shall
perform.
         C.   On a third or subsequent violation in which, for the third or
subsequent time, the offender presented to an adult use dispensary licensed
under R.C. Chapter 3780 a false, fictitious, or altered identification card, a
false or fictitious driver’s license purportedly issued by any state, or a
driver’s license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than
$500 nor more than $1,000, and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of
not more than six months. Except as provided in this division, the court also
may impose a class six suspension of the offender’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(6), and the court may order that the suspension
or denial remain in effect until the offender attains the age of 21 years. The
court, in lieu of suspending the offender’s temporary instruction permit,
probationary driver’s license, or driver’s license, instead may order the
offender to perform a determinate number of hours of community service, with
the court determining the actual number of hours and the nature of the
community service the offender shall perform.
      (4)   An individual who is under 21 years of age and who solicits another
individual to purchase adult use cannabis from an adult use dispensary licensed
under R.C. Chapter 3780 is guilty of:
         A.   For a first violation, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; and
         B.   For a second or subsequent violation, a misdemeanor of the second
degree.
      (5)   An employee or agent of an adult use dispensary licensed under R.C.
Chapter 3780 who knowingly sells cannabis to an individual under 21 years of
age is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (6)   Any individual who violates R.C. § 3780.10(A), or R.C. § 3780.29
(F), is guilty of the illegal trafficking in drugs under R.C. § 2925.03 and the
illegal manufacture of drugs under R.C. § 2925.04.
      (7)   Any individual who violates division (b)(2) or (b)(3) of this
section guilty of the illegal trafficking in drugs under R.C. § 2925.03.
      (8)   Any individual who violates R.C. § 3780.20(B) is guilty of illegal
dispensing of drug samples under R.C. § 2925.36 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
      (9)   A.   An individual who violates division (g) of this section is
guilty of:
            1.   For a first violation, a misdemeanor of the third degree; and
            2.   For a second or subsequent violation, a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
         B.   If a violation of division (g) of this section directly or
indirectly results in great bodily harm or death to any individual, the
individual violating division (g) is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 3780.99)
§ 624.025 CULTIVATION OF MARIHUANA.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly cultivate marihuana.
   (b)   This section does not apply to any person listed in Ohio R.C. 2925.03
(B)(1), (2) or (3), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, to the
extent and under the circumstances described in that division.
   (c)   Whoever commits a violation of division (a) of this section is guilty
of illegal cultivation of marihuana.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in the following divisions, illegal
cultivation of marihuana is a minor misdemeanor or, if the offense was
committed in the vicinity of a school or in the vicinity of a juvenile, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   If the amount of marihuana involved equals or exceeds 100 grams but
is less than 200 grams, illegal cultivation of marihuana is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree or, if the offense was committed in the vicinity of a school
or in the vicinity of a juvenile, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (3)   If the amount of marihuana involved equals or exceeds 200 grams,
illegal cultivation of marihuana is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
State law.
   (d)   Arrest or conviction for a minor misdemeanor violation of this section
does not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the person so
arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries about the person’s criminal
record, including any inquiries contained in any application for employment,
license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection with the person’s
appearance as a witness.
(R.C. § 2925.04(A), (B), (C)(5), (G))
§ 624.03 DRUG POSSESSION OFFENSES.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly obtain, possess or use a controlled
substance or a controlled substance analog.
   (b)   (1)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
         A.   Manufacturers, licensed health professionals authorized to
prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies, and other persons whose
conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731,
4741, and 4772.
         B.   If the offense involves an anabolic steroid, any person who is
conducting or participating in a research project involving the use of an
anabolic steroid if the project has been approved by the United States Food and
Drug Administration.
         C.   Any person who sells, offers for sale, prescribes, dispenses or
administers for livestock or other nonhuman species an anabolic steroid that is
expressly intended for administration through implants to livestock or other
nonhuman species and approved for that purpose under the Federal Food, Drug and
Cosmetic Act, and is sold, offered for sale, prescribed, dispensed or
administered for that purpose in accordance with that Act.
         D.   Any person who obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs if the prescription was issued for a legitimate medical purpose and not
altered, forged, or obtained through deception or commission of a theft
offense. As used in this division (b)(1)D., “deception” and “theft offense”
have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      (2)   A.   As used in division (b)(2) of this section:
            1.   “Community addiction services provider.” Has the same meaning
as in R.C. § 5119.01.
            2.   “Community control sanction.” Has the same meanings as in R.C.
§ 2929.01.
            3.   “Health care facility.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2919.16.
            4.   “Minor drug possession offense.” A violation of this section
or R.C. § 2925.11 that is a misdemeanor or a felony of the fifth degree.
            5.   “Peace officer.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2935.01.
            6.   “Post-release control sanction.” Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2967.28.
            7.   “Public agency.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2930.01.
            8.   "Qualified individual." A person who is acting in good faith
who seeks or obtains medical assistance for another person who is experiencing
a drug overdose, a person who experiences a drug overdose and who seeks medical
assistance for that overdose, or a person who is the subject of another person
seeking or obtaining medical assistance for that overdose as described in
division (b)(2)B. of this section.
            9.   “Seek or obtain medical assistance.” Includes, but is not
limited to making a 9-1-1 call, contacting in person or by telephone call an
on-duty peace officer, or transporting or presenting a person to a health care
facility.
         B.   Subject to division (b)(2)E. of this section, a qualified
individual shall not be arrested, charged, prosecuted, convicted, or penalized
pursuant to this chapter for a minor drug possession offense or a violation of
R.C. § 2925.12, R.C. § 2925.14(C)(1), or R.C. § 2925.141 if all of the
following apply:
            1.   The evidence of the obtaining, possession, or use of the
controlled substance or controlled substance analog, drug abuse instruments, or
drug paraphernalia that would be the basis of the offense was obtained as a
result of the qualified individual seeking the medical assistance or
experiencing an overdose and needing medical assistance.
            2.   Subject to division (b)(2)F. of this section, within 30 days
after seeking or obtaining the medical assistance, the qualified individual
seeks and obtains a screening and receives a referral for treatment from a
community addiction services provider or a properly credentialed addiction
treatment professional.
            3.   Subject to division (b)(2)F. of this section, the qualified
individual who obtains a screening and receives a referral for treatment under
division (b)(2)B.2. of this section, upon the request of any prosecuting
attorney, submits documentation to the prosecuting attorney that verifies that
the qualified individual satisfied the requirements of that division. The
documentation shall be limited to the date and time of the screening obtained
and referral received.
         C.   If a person who is serving a community control sanction or is
under a sanction on post-release control acts pursuant to division (b)(2)B. of
this section, then R.C. § 2929.141(B), R.C. § 2929.15(B)(2), R.C. § 2929.25(D)
(3), or R.C. § 2967.28(F)(3) applies to the person with respect to any
violation of the sanction or post-release control sanction based on a minor
drug possession offense, as defined in R.C. § 2925.11, or a violation of R.C. §
2925.12, R.C. § 2925.14(C)(1), or R.C. § 2925.141.
         D.   Nothing in division (b)(2)B. of this section shall be construed
to do any of the following:
            1.   Limit the admissibility of any evidence in connection with the
investigation or prosecution of a crime with regards to a defendant who does
not qualify for the protections of division (b)(2)B. of this section or with
regards to any crime other than a minor drug possession offense or a violation
of R.C. § 2925.12, R.C. § 2925.14(C)(1), or R.C. § 2925.141 committed by a
person who qualifies for protection pursuant to division (b)(2)B. of this
section;
            2.   Limit any seizure of evidence or contraband otherwise
permitted by law;
            3.   Limit or abridge the authority of a peace officer to detain or
take into custody a person in the course of an investigation or to effectuate
an arrest for any offense except as provided in that division;
            4.   Limit, modify, or remove any immunity from liability available
pursuant to law in effect prior to September 13, 2016 to any public agency or
to an employee of any public agency.
         E.   Division (b)(2)B. of this section does not apply to any person
who twice previously has been granted an immunity under division (b)(2)B. of
this section. No person shall be granted an immunity under division (b)(2)B. of
this section more than two times.
         F.   Nothing in this section shall compel any qualified individual to
disclose protected health information in a way that conflicts with the
requirements of the "Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of
1996", 104 Pub. L. No. 191, 110 Stat. 2021, 42 U.S.C. §§ 1320d et seq., as
amended, and regulations promulgated by the United States Department of Health
and Human Services to implement the act or the requirements of 42 C.F.R. Part
2.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of one of the
following:
      (1)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance included in Schedule I or Schedule II, with the
exception of marihuana or hashish, whoever violates division (a) of this
section is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance included in Schedule III, Schedule IV, or Schedule V,
whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of possession of drugs.
The penalty for the offense shall be determined as follows:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(2)B. of this
section, possession of drugs is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the
offender previously has been convicted of a drug abuse offense, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         B.   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds the bulk
amount, possession of drugs is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (3)   If the drug involved in the violation is marihuana or a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance containing marihuana other than hashish,
whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of possession of
marihuana. The penalty for the offense shall be determined as follows:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(3)B. or (c)(3)C. of
this section, possession of marihuana is a minor misdemeanor.
         B.   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds 100 grams
but is less than 200 grams, possession of marihuana is a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
         C.   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds 200 grams,
possession of marihuana is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
      (4)   If the drug involved in the violation is hashish or a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance containing hashish, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of possession of hashish. The penalty
for the offense shall be determined as follows:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(4)B. or (c)(4)C. of
this section, possession of hashish is a minor misdemeanor.
         B.   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds five grams
but is less than ten grams of hashish in a solid form or equals or exceeds one
gram but is less than two grams of hashish in a liquid concentrate, liquid
extract, or liquid distillate form, possession of hashish is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.
         C.   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds ten grams of
hashish in a solid form or equals or exceeds two grams of hashish in a liquid
concentrate, liquid extract, or liquid distillate form, possession of hashish
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance that is a combination of a fentanyl-related compound
and marihuana, one of the following applies:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(5)B. of this
section, the offender is guilty of possession of marihuana and shall be
punished as provided in division (c)(3) of this section. Except as otherwise
provided in division (c)(5)B. of this section, the offender is not guilty of
possession of a fentanyl-related compound under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11) and shall
not be charged with, convicted of, or punished under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11) for
possession of a fentanyl-related compound.
         B.   If the offender knows or has reason to know that the compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance that is the drug involved contains a
fentanyl-related compound, the offender is guilty of possession of a fentanyl-
related compound and shall be punished under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11).
      (6)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance that is a combination of a fentanyl-related compound
and any Schedule III, Schedule IV, or Schedule V controlled substance that is
not a fentanyl- related compound, one of the following applies:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(6)B. of this
section, the offender is guilty of possession of drugs and shall be punished as
provided in division (c)(2) of this section. Except as otherwise provided in
division (c)(6)B. of this section, the offender is not guilty of possession of
a fentanyl-related compound under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11) and shall not be
charged with, convicted of, or punished under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11) for
possession of a fentanyl-related compound.
         B.   If the offender knows or has reason to know that the compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance that is the drug involved contains a
fentanyl-related compound, the offender is guilty of possession of a fentanyl-
related compound and shall be punished under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11).
   (d)   Arrest or conviction for a minor misdemeanor violation of this section
does not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the person so
arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries about the person’s criminal
record, including any inquiries contained in any application for employment,
license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection with the person’s
appearance as a witness.
   (e)   In addition to any prison term or jail term authorized or required by
division (c) of this section and R.C. §§ 2929.13, 2929.14, 2929.22, 2929.24,
and 2929.25, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and in
addition to any other sanction that is imposed for the offense under this
section, R.C. §§ 2929.11 through 2929.18, or R.C. §§ 2929.21 through 2929.28,
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, if applicable, the court
shall also do the following:
      (1)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition to
any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
      (2)   If the offender has a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit, R.C. § 2929.33 applies.
   (f)   (1)   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to September 13, 2016 may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States
that arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
      (2)   Upon the filing of a motion under division (f) of this section, the
sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(R.C. § 2925.11)
Statutory reference:
   Felony drug possession offenses, see Ohio R.C. 2925.11(C)
§ 624.04 POSSESSION OF DRUG ABUSE INSTRUMENTS.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly make, obtain, possess, or use any
instrument, article, or thing the customary and primary purpose of which is for
the administration or use of a dangerous drug, other than marihuana, when the
instrument involved is a hypodermic or syringe, whether or not of crude or
extemporized manufacture or assembly, and the instrument, article, or thing
involved has been used by the offender to unlawfully administer or use a
dangerous drug, other than marihuana, or to prepare a dangerous drug, other
than marihuana, for unlawful administration or use.
   (b)   (1)   This section does not apply to manufacturers, licensed health
professionals authorized to prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies
and other persons whose conduct was in accordance with R.C. Chapters 3719,
4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, 4741, and 4772.
      (2)   Division (B)(2) of R.C. § 2925.11 applies with respect to a
violation of this section when a person seeks or obtains medical assistance for
another person who is experiencing a drug overdose, a person experiences a drug
overdose and seeks medical assistance for that overdose, or a person is the
subject of another person seeking or obtaining medical assistance for that
overdose.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing drug abuse
instruments, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of a drug abuse offense, violation of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (d)   (1)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition
to any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
      (2)   If the offender has a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit, R.C. § 2929.33 applies.
      (3)   A.   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to September 13, 2016 may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States
that arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
         B.   Upon the filing of a motion under division (d)(3) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(R.C. § 2925.12)
§ 624.05 PERMITTING DRUG ABUSE.
   (a)   No person who is the owner, operator, or person in charge of a
locomotive, watercraft, aircraft, or other vehicle, as defined in Ohio R.C.
4501.01, shall knowingly permit the vehicle to be used for the commission of a
felony drug abuse offense.
   (b)   No person, who is the owner, lessee, or occupant, or who has custody,
control, or supervision of premises, or real estate, including vacant land,
shall knowingly permit his or her premises, or real estate, including vacant
land, to be used for the commission of a felony drug abuse offense by another
person.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of permitting drug abuse.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (c)(2) of this section, permitting
drug abuse is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   Permitting drug abuse is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law if the felony drug abuse offense in question is a
violation of R.C. § 2925.02, 2925.03, or 2925.04, or if the felony drug abuse
offense in question is a violation of R.C. § 2925.041 and the offender had
actual knowledge, at the time the offender permitted the vehicle, premises, or
real estate to be used as described in division (a) or (b) of this section,
that the person who assembled or possessed the chemicals in question in
violation of R.C. § 2925.041 had assembled or possessed them with the intent to
manufacture a controlled substance in Schedule I or Schedule II in violation of
R.C. § 2925.04.
   (d)   (1)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition
to any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
      (2)   If the offender has a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit, R.C. § 2929.33 applies.
      (3)   A.   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to September 13, 2016, may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
similar municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States that
arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
         B.   Upon the filing of a motion under division (d)(3) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
   (e)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of R.C. § 3719.21, the clerk of
the court shall pay a fine imposed for a violation of this section pursuant to
R.C. § 2929.18(A) in accordance with and subject to the requirements of R.C. §
2925.03(F). The agency that receives the fine shall use the fine as specified
in R.C. § 2925.03(F).
   (f)   Any premises or real estate that is permitted to be used in violation
of division (b) of this section constitutes a nuisance subject to abatement
pursuant to Ohio R.C. Chapter 3767.
(R.C. § 2925.13)
§ 624.06 DECEPTION TO OBTAIN A DANGEROUS DRUG. (REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
   Section 624.06 was repealed as part of the 1991 updating and revision of
these Codified Ordinances because a violation of substantially identical State
law (Ohio R.C. 2925.22), was made a felony by the Ohio General Assembly by Am.
Sub. H.B. No. 615, effective March 27, 1991.
§ 624.07 ABUSING HARMFUL INTOXICANTS.
   (a)   Except for lawful research, clinical, medical, dental, or veterinary
purposes, no person, with purpose to induce intoxication or similar
physiological effects, shall obtain, possess, or use a harmful intoxicant.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of abusing harmful
intoxicants, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of a drug abuse offense, abusing harmful intoxicants is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate State law.
   (c)   (1)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition
to any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
      (2)   If the offender has a driver's or commercial driver's license or
permit, R.C. § 2929.33 applies.
      (3)   A.   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to the September 13, 2016 may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States
that arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
         B.   Upon the filing of a motion under division (c)(3) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(R.C. § 2925.31)
§ 624.073 IMPROPERLY DISPENSING OR DISTRIBUTING NITROUS OXIDE.
   (a)   No person who dispenses or distributes nitrous oxide in cartridges
shall fail to comply with either of the following:
      (1)   The record-keeping requirements established under division (c) of
this section.
      (2)   The labeling and transaction identification requirements
established under division (d) of this section.
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section is guilty
of improperly dispensing or distributing nitrous oxide, a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
   (c)   Beginning July 1, 2001, a person who dispenses or distributes nitrous
oxide shall record each transaction involving the dispensing or distribution of
the nitrous oxide on a separate card. The person shall require the purchaser to
sign the card and provide a complete residence address. The person dispensing
or distributing the nitrous oxide shall sign and date the card. The person
shall retain the card recording a transaction for one year from the date of the
transaction. The person shall maintain the cards at the person’s business
address and make them available during normal business hours for inspection and
copying by officers or employees of the State Board of Pharmacy or of other law
enforcement agencies that are authorized to investigate violations of this
code, Ohio R.C. Chapters 2925, 3719, or 4729, or Federal drug abuse control
laws. The cards used to record each transaction shall inform the purchaser of
the following:
      (1)   That nitrous oxide cartridges are to be used only for purposes of
preparing food;
      (2)   That inhalation of nitrous oxide can have dangerous health effects;
and
      (3)   That it is a violation of State law to distribute or dispense
cartridges of nitrous oxide to any person under age 21, punishable as a felony
of the fifth degree.
   (d)   (1)   Each cartridge of nitrous oxide dispensed or distributed in this
Municipality shall bear the following printed warning: “Nitrous oxide
cartridges are to be used only for purposes of preparing food. Nitrous oxide
cartridges may not be sold to persons under age 21. Do not inhale contents.
Misuse can be dangerous to your health.”
      (2)   Each time a person dispenses or distributes one or more cartridges
of nitrous oxide, the person shall mark the packaging containing the cartridges
with a label or other device that identifies the person who dispensed or
distributed the nitrous oxide and the person’s business address.
(ORC 2925.32(B)(4), (D)(2), (F), (G))
Statutory reference:
   Trafficking in harmful intoxicants, felony offenses, see Ohio R.C. 2925.32
§ 624.076 POSSESSING NITROUS OXIDE IN MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (a)   As used in this section, MOTOR VEHICLE, STREET, and HIGHWAY have the
same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4511.01.
   (b)   Unless authorized by these Codified Ordinances or by State law, no
person shall possess an open cartridge of nitrous oxide in either of the
following circumstances:
      (1)   While operating or being a passenger in or on a motor vehicle on a
street, highway, or other public or private property open to the public for
purposes of vehicular traffic or parking.
      (2)   While being in or on a stationary motor vehicle on a street,
highway, or other public or private property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular traffic or parking.
      (3)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for
possessing nitrous oxide in a motor vehicle, the court may suspend for not more
than five years the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing nitrous oxide in
a motor vehicle, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 2925.33)
§ 624.08 ILLEGAL DISPENSING OF DRUG SAMPLES.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly furnish a sample drug to another person.
   (b)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to manufacturers,
wholesalers, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies, licensed health professionals
authorized to prescribe drugs, and other persons whose conduct is in accordance
with R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715, 4723, 4725, 4729, 4730, 4731, 4741, and 4722.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal dispensing of
drug samples.
      (2)   If the drug involved in the offense is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance included in Schedule I or Schedule II, with the
exception of marihuana, illegal dispensing of drug samples is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the drug involved in the offense is a dangerous drug or a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance included in Schedule III, Schedule
IV or Schedule V, or is marihuana, the penalty for the offense shall be
determined as follows:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in the following division, illegal
dispensing of drug samples is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
         B.   If the offense was committed in the vicinity of a school or in
the vicinity of a juvenile, illegal dispensing of drug samples is a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
   (d)   (1)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition
to any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
      (2)   If the offender has a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit, R.C. § 2929.33 applies.
      (3)   A.   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to September 13, 2016, may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
similar municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States that
arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
         B.   Upon the filing of a motion under division (d)(3) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
   (e)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of R.C. § 3719.21, the clerk of
the court shall pay a fine imposed for a violation of this section pursuant to
R.C. § 2929.18(A) in accordance with and subject to the requirements of R.C. §
2925.03(F). The agency that receives the fine shall use the fine as specified
in R.C. § 2925.03(F).
(R.C. § 2925.36(A) - (D), (F))
Statutory reference:
   Felony offenses, see R.C. § 2925.36(C)(2)
§ 624.09 POSSESSION, SALE AND DISPOSAL OF HYPODERMICS.
   (a)   Possession of a hypodermic is authorized for the following:
      (1)   A manufacturer or distributor of, or dealer in hypodermics, or
medication packaged in hypodermics, and any authorized agent or employee of
that manufacturer, distributor or dealer, in the regular course of business;
      (2)   A terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, in the regular course of
business;
      (3)   A person authorized to administer injections, in the regular course
of the person’s profession or employment;
      (4)   A person, when the hypodermic in his possession was lawfully
obtained and is kept and used for the purpose of self-administration of insulin
or other drug prescribed for the treatment of disease by a licensed health
professional authorized to prescribe drugs;
      (5)   A person whose use of a hypodermic is for legal research, clinical,
educational or medicinal purposes;
      (6)   A farmer, for the lawful administration of a drug to an animal;
      (7)   A person whose use of a hypodermic is for lawful professional,
mechanical, trade or craft purposes.
   (b)   No manufacturer or distributor of, or dealer in, hypodermics or
medication packaged in hypodermics, or their authorized agents or employees,
and no terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, shall display any hypodermic
for sale. No person authorized to possess a hypodermic pursuant to division (a)
of this section shall negligently fail to take reasonable precautions to
prevent any hypodermic in the person’s possession from theft or acquisition by
any unauthorized person.
(ORC 3719.172(A), (B))
   (c)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. If the offender previously has been convicted
of a violation of division (b) of this section, Ohio R.C. 3719.05, 3719.06,
3719.13, 3719.172(B), or 3719.31, or a drug abuse offense, a violation of
division (b) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 3719.99(E))
Statutory reference:
   Felony offenses, see Ohio R.C. 3719.172(C),
    (D)
§ 624.10 EVIDENCE.
   (a)   (1)   In any criminal prosecution for a violation of this chapter or
Ohio R.C. Chapters 2925 or 3719, a laboratory report from the Bureau of
Criminal Identification and Investigation or a laboratory operated by another
law enforcement agency, or a laboratory established by or under the authority
of an institution of higher education that has its main campus in this State
and that is accredited by the Association of American Universities or the North
Central Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools, primarily for the
purpose of providing scientific service to law enforcement agencies, and signed
by the person performing the analysis, stating that the substance that is the
basis of the alleged offense has been weighed and analyzed and stating the
findings as to the content, weight, and identity of the substance and that it
contains any amount of a controlled substance and the number and description of
unit dosages, is prima facie evidence of the content, identity, and weight or
the existence and number of unit dosages of the substance. In any criminal
prosecution for a violation of Ohio R.C. 2925.041 or a violation of this
chapter, Ohio R.C. Chapter 2925 or Ohio R.C. Chapter 3719 that is based on the
possession of chemicals sufficient to produce a compound, mixture, preparation,
or substance included in Schedule I, II, III, IV, or V, a laboratory report
from the Bureau or from any laboratory that is operated or established as
described in this division that is signed by the person performing the
analysis, stating that the substances that are the basis of the alleged offense
have been weighed and analyzed and stating the findings as to the content,
weight, and identity of each of the substances, is prima facie evidence of the
content, identity, and weight of the substances.
      (2)   Attached to that report shall be a copy of a notarized statement by
the signer of the report giving the name of the signer and stating that the
signer is an employee of the laboratory issuing the report and that performing
the analysis is a part of the signer’s regular duties, and giving an outline of
the signer’s education, training, and experience for performing an analysis of
materials included under this section. The signer shall attest that
scientifically accepted tests were performed with due caution, and that the
evidence was handled in accordance with established and accepted procedures
while in the custody of the laboratory.
   (b)   The prosecuting attorney shall serve a copy of the report on the
attorney of record for the accused, or on the accused if the accused has no
attorney, prior to any proceeding in which the report is to be used against the
accused other than at a preliminary hearing or grand jury proceeding where the
report may be used without having been previously served upon the accused.
   (c)   The report shall not be prima facie evidence of the contents,
identity, and weight or the existence and number of unit dosages of the
substance if the accused or the accused’s attorney demands the testimony of the
person signing the report, by serving the demand upon the prosecuting attorney,
within seven days from the accused or the accused’s attorney’s receipt of the
report. The time may be extended by a trial judge in the interests of justice.
   (d)   Any report issued for use under this section shall contain notice of
the right of the accused to demand, and the manner in which the accused shall
demand, the testimony of the person signing the report.
   (e)   Any person who is accused of a violation of this chapter or Ohio R.C.
Chapters 2925 or 3719 is entitled, upon written request made to the prosecuting
attorney, to have a portion of the substance that is, or of each of the
substances that are, the basis of the alleged violation preserved for the
benefit of independent analysis performed by a laboratory analyst employed by
the accused person, or, if the accused is indigent, by a qualified laboratory
analyst appointed by the court. Such portion shall be a representative sample
of the entire substance that is, or of each of the substances that are, the
basis of the alleged violation and shall be of sufficient size, in the opinion
of the court, to permit the accused’s analyst to make a thorough scientific
analysis concerning the identity of the substance or substances. The
prosecuting attorney shall provide the accused’s analyst with the sample
portion at least 14 days prior to trial, unless the trial is to be held in a
court not of record or unless the accused person is charged with a minor
misdemeanor, in which case the prosecuting attorney shall provide the accused’s
analyst with the sample portion at least three days prior to trial. If the
prosecuting attorney determines that such a sample portion cannot be preserved
and given to the accused’s analyst, the prosecuting attorney shall so inform
the accused person, or the accused’s attorney. In such a circumstance, the
accused person is entitled, upon written request made to the prosecuting
attorney, to have the accused’s privately employed or court appointed analyst
present at an analysis of the substance that is, or the substances that are,
the basis of the alleged violation, and, upon further written request, to
receive copies of all recorded scientific data that result from the analysis
and that can be used by an analyst in arriving at conclusions, findings, or
opinions concerning the identity of the substance or substances subject to the
analysis.
   (f)   In addition to the rights provided under division (e) of this section,
any person who is accused of a violation of this chapter or Ohio R.C. Chapters
2925 or 3719 that involves a bulk amount of a controlled substance, or any
multiple thereof, or who is accused of a violation of Ohio R.C. 2925.11 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, other than a minor misdemeanor
violation, that involves marihuana, is entitled, upon written request made to
the prosecuting attorney, to have a laboratory analyst of the accused’s choice,
or, if the accused is indigent, a qualified laboratory analyst appointed by the
court, present at a measurement or weighing of the substance that is the basis
of the alleged violation. Also, the accused person is entitled, upon further
written request, to receive copies of all recorded scientific data that result
from the measurement or weighing and that can be used by an analyst in arriving
at conclusions, findings, or opinions concerning the weight, volume, or number
of unit doses of the substance subject to the measurement or weighing.
(ORC 2925.51)
   (g)   In addition to the financial sanctions authorized or required under
Ohio R.C. 2929.18 and 2929.28 and to any costs otherwise authorized or required
under any provision of law, the court imposing sentence upon an offender who is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a drug abuse offense may order the offender to
pay to the state, municipal, or county law enforcement agencies that handled
the investigation and prosecution all of the costs that the state, municipal
corporation, or county reasonably incurred in having tests performed under this
section or Ohio R.C. 2925.51 or in any other manner on any substance that was
the basis of, or involved in, the offense to determine whether the substance
contained any amount of a controlled substance if the results of the tests
indicate that the substance tested contained any controlled substance. No court
shall order an offender under this section to pay the costs of tests performed
on a substance if the results of the tests do not indicate that the substance
tested contained any controlled substance. The court shall hold a hearing to
determine the amount of costs to be imposed under this section. The court may
hold the hearing as part of the sentencing hearing for the offender.
(ORC 2925.511)
§ 624.11 DOUBLE JEOPARDY.
   No person shall be prosecuted for a violation of this chapter if the person
has been acquitted or convicted under the federal drug abuse control laws of
the same act or omission which, it is alleged, constitutes a violation of this
chapter.
(ORC 2925.50, 3719.19)
§ 624.12 CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE SCHEDULES.
   Controlled Substance Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as established in Ohio
R.C. 3719.41 and amended by Ohio R.C. 3719.43 and 3719.44, are hereby adopted
by reference, and shall be treated as if set forth in full herein.
§ 624.13 CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE OR PRESCRIPTION LABELS.
   (a)   Whenever a manufacturer sells a controlled substance, and whenever a
wholesaler, repackager, or outsourcing facility sells a controlled substance in
a package the wholesaler, repackager, or outsourcing facility has prepared, the
manufacturer or the wholesaler, repackager, or outsourcing facility, as the
case may be, shall securely affix to each package in which the controlled
substance is contained a label showing in legible English the name and address
of the vendor and the quantity, kind, and form of controlled substance
contained therein. No person, except a pharmacist for the purpose of dispensing
a controlled substance upon a prescription shall alter, deface, or remove any
label so affixed. As used in this division, “repackager” and “outsourcing
facility” have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   (b)   No person shall alter, deface or remove any label affixed pursuant to
Ohio R.C. 3719.08 as long as any of the original contents remain.
(R.C. § 3719.08(A), (E))
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this
section, or Ohio R.C. 3719.07 or 3719.08, or a drug abuse offense, a violation
of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate State law. If
the violation involves the sale, offer to sell, or possession of a Schedule I
or II controlled substance, with the exception of marihuana, and if the
offender, as a result of the violation, is a major drug offender, then Ohio
R.C. 3719.99(D) applies.
(R.C. § 3719.99(C))
§ 624.14 UNAUTHORIZED POSSESSION OF BLANK DRUG PRESCRIPTION FORMS.
   (a)   No person other than a practitioner, or a person authorized by such
practitioner shall knowingly have in his or her possession any paper that has
lettered thereon only the name, address, telephone number and other such
professional information concerning such practitioner and that can be used for
making a written prescription for drugs.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
§ 624.15 SALE OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA FOR USE OF MARIHUANA TO JUVENILES.
(REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
   Section 624.15 was repealed. See §
624.16.
§ 624.16 POSSESSION, MANUFACTURE AND SALE OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
   (a)   Drug paraphernalia defined. As used in this section, DRUG
PARAPHERNALIA is defined as follows:
      (1)   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA means all equipment, products and materials of
any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use, in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging,
repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling,
or otherwise introducing into the human body, a controlled substance in
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. It includes, but is not
limited to:
         A.   Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use, in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which
is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived;
         B.   Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use, in
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing
controlled substances;
         C.   Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or designed for
use, in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled
substance;
         D.   Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed for use, in
identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled
substances;
         E.   Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use,
in weighing or measuring controlled substances;
         F.   Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride,
mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use, or designed
for use, in cutting controlled substances;
         G.   Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or designed
for use, in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or
refining, marihuana;
         H.   Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used,
intended for use, or designed for use, in compounding controlled substances;
         I.   Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended
for use, or designed for use, in packaging small quantities of controlled
substances;
         J.   Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed
for use, in storing or concealing controlled substances;
         K.   Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for
use, or designed for use, in parenterally injecting controlled substances into
the human body; and
         L.   Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting,
inhaling or otherwise introducing marihuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil
into the human body, such as:
            1.   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic
pipes, with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured
metal bowls;
            2.   Water pipes;
            3.   Carburetion tubes and devices;
            4.   Smoking and carburetion masks;
            5.   Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material,
such as a marihuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be
held in the hand;
            6.   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
            7.   Chamber pipes;
            8.   Carburetor pipes;
            9.   Electric pipes;
            10.   Air-driven pipes;
            11.   Chillums;
            12.   Bongs; and
            13.   Ice pipes or chillers.
      (2)   In determining whether an object is DRUG PARAPHERNALIA, a court or
other authority should consider, in addition to all other logically relevant
factors, the following:
         A.   Statements by an owner, or by anyone in control of the object,
concerning its use;
         B.   Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in control
of the object, under any city, state or Federal law relating to any controlled
substance;
         C.   The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter;
         D.   The proximity of the object to controlled substances;
         E.   The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the
object;
         F.   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or
of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he or she
knows, or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to facilitate a
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. The innocence of an owner,
or of anyone in control of the object, as to a direct violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter shall not prevent a finding that the object is
intended or designed for use as DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
         G.   Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object
concerning its use;
         H.   Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or
depict its use;
         I.   National and local advertising concerning its use;
         J.   The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;
         K.   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the
object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise;
         L.   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community; and
         M.   Expert testimony concerning its use.
   (b)   Violations.
      (1)   No person shall use, or possess with intent to use, drug
paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture,
compound, convert, produce, process, prepare; test, analyze, pack, repack,
store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into
the human body, a controlled substance in violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter.
      (2)   No person shall deliver, sell, possess with intent to deliver or
sell, or manufacture with intent to deliver or sell, drug paraphernalia,
knowing that it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest,
manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack,
repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce
into the human body, a controlled substance in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter.
      (3)   No person shall place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill or other
publication, any advertisement, knowing that the purpose of the advertisement,
in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects designed or intended for
use as drug paraphernalia.
      (4)   Any person eighteen years of age or over who violates paragraph (b)
(2) hereof by delivering drug paraphernalia to a person under eighteen years of
age who is at least three years his or her junior is guilty of a special
offense.
      (5)   This section does not apply to manufacturers, licensed health
professionals authorized to prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies
and other persons whose conduct is in accordance with Ohio R.C. Chapters 3719,
4715, 4723, 4729, 4731 and 4741. This section shall not be construed to
prohibit the possession or use of a hypodermic as authorized by §
624.09.
      (6)   Any drug paraphernalia used in violation of this section shall be
seized and forfeited to the Municipality.
      (7)   If any provision of this section or the application thereof to any
person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other
provisions or applications of the section which can be given effect without the
invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this
section are severable.
      (8)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of paragraph (b)(1), (2) or
(3) hereof is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the offender has
previously been convicted of a violation of paragraph (b)(1), (2) or (3)
hereof, any subsequent violation of the same paragraph is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. Whoever violates any of the provisions of paragraph (b)(4) hereof
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. The penalty shall be as
provided in §
698.02.
   (c)   Illegal use or possession of marihuana drug paraphernalia.
      (1)   No person shall knowingly use, or possess with purpose to use, any
drug paraphernalia that is equipment, a product, or material of any kind that
is used by the person, intended by the person for use, or designed for use in
storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise
introducing into the human body marihuana.
      (2)   This section does not apply to manufacturers, licensed health
professionals authorized to prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies
and other persons whose conduct is in accordance with Ohio R.C. Chapters 3719,
4715, 4723,4729, 4731 and 4741. This subsection shall not be construed to
prohibit the possession or use of a hypodermic as authorized by §
624.09.
      (3)   Subsection (b)(6) of this section applies with respect to any drug
paraphernalia that was used or possessed in violation of this subsection.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (c)(1) of this subsection is guilty of
illegal use or possession of marihuana drug paraphernalia, a minor misdemeanor.
      (5)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for a
violation of this section, the court shall suspend for not less than six months
or more than five years the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license
or permit. If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition to
any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court
immediately shall comply with Ohio R.C. § 2925.38.
(Ord. 18-2014, passed 3-25-2014)
§ 624.17 COUNTERFEIT CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly possess any counterfeit controlled
substance.
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section shall be guilty of
possession of counterfeit controlled substances, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 2925.37(A), (G))
Statutory reference:
   Trafficking, other felony counterfeit controlled substance offenses, see
R.C. § 2925.37(H) - (M)
§ 624.18 LOITERING IN AID OF DRUG OFFENSES.
   (a)   No person, while in a public place and with purpose to commit or aid
in the commission of a drug abuse offense, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Repeatedly beckon to stop, attempt to stop, or engage passers-by in
conversation;
      (2)   Repeatedly stop or attempt to stop motor vehicles;
      (3)   Repeatedly interfere with the free passage of pedestrians or motor
vehicles;
      (4)   Direct a pedestrian or motor vehicle operator or passenger to a
location where a controlled substance can be obtained unlawfully; or
      (5)   Inform a pedestrian or motor vehicle operator or passenger where a
controlled substance can be obtained unlawfully.
   (b)   For purposes of this section, the term DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE is defined
in §
624.01 and also includes any violation of a substantially equivalent offense
under Chapter 624 of these Codified Ordinances. The term CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE
is defined in §
624.01.
   (c)   For purposes of this section, the term PUBLIC PLACE means an area of
property, either publicly owned or to which the public has access, and
includes, but is not limited to, streets, alleys, sidewalks, rights-of-way,
bridges, plazas, parks, driveways, parking lots, transportation facilities, or
other places open to the public, the doorways, entrances, porches, passageways
and roofs to any building which fronts on any of the aforesaid places, or motor
vehicles in or upon such places.
   (d)   In determining the purpose of an offender under this section, the
Court shall consider all relevant surrounding circumstances, which may include,
but are not limited to, the following factors, in addition to the overt acts
set forth in division (a) hereof:
      (1)   That the person has been convicted to and found delinquent for a
drug abuse offense within the three years preceding the arrest.
      (2)   That the person is loitering and directing pedestrians or
motorists, through words, hailing, waiving of arms, pointing, signaling or
other bodily gestures, to a person or premises where controlled substances are
possessed or sold.
      (3)   That the person is loitering and has an electronic device, walkie-
talkie, or beeper within 100 yards of a person or premises where controlled
substances are possessed or sold.
      (4)   Any statement by the offender.
   (e)   No arrest shall be made for a violation of this section until the
arresting officer first requests and affords such person an opportunity to
explain such conduct, and no person shall be convicted upon trial if it appears
that the explanation rendered is true, and considering the surrounding
circumstances disclosed a lawful purpose.
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of loitering in aid of drug
offenses, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If an offender has previously
been convicted under this section, then upon second and subsequent offenses,
whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
§ 624.19 PSEUDOEPHEDRINE SALES.
   (a)   Unlawful purchases.
      (1)   As used in divisions (a), (b), (c) and (d) of this section:
         A.   CONSUMER PRODUCT. Any food or drink that is consumed or used by
humans and any drug, including a drug that may be provided legally only
pursuant to a prescription, that is intended to be consumed or used by humans.
         B.   EPHEDRINE. Any material, compound, mixture, or preparation that
contains any quantity of ephedrine, any of its salts, optical isomers, or salts
of optical isomers.
         C.   EPHEDRINE PRODUCT. A consumer product that contains ephedrine.
         D.   PSEUDOEPHEDRINE. Any material, compound, mixture, or preparation
that contains any quantity of pseudoephedrine, any of its salts, optical
isomers, or salts of optical isomers.
         E.   PSEUDOEPHEDRINE PRODUCT. A consumer product that contains
pseudoephedrine.
         F.   RETAILER. A place of business that offers consumer products for
sale to the general public.
         G.   SINGLE-INGREDIENT PREPARATION. A compound, mixture, preparation,
or substance that contains a single active ingredient.
         H.   TERMINAL DISTRIBUTOR OF DANGEROUS DRUGS. Has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 4729.01.
      (2)   A.   1.   No individual shall knowingly purchase, receive, or
otherwise acquire an amount of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
that is greater than either of the following unless the pseudoephedrine product
or ephedrine product is dispensed by a pharmacist pursuant to a valid
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs and the conduct of the pharmacist and the licensed health professional
authorized to prescribe drugs is in accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715,
4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, 4741, or 4772:
               a.   Three and six tenths grams within a period of a single day;
               b.   Nine grams within a period of 30 consecutive days.
            2.   The limits specified in divisions (a)(2)A.1.a. and (a)
(2)A.1.b. of this section apply to the total amount of base pseudoephedrine or
base ephedrine in the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product,
respectively. The limits do not apply to the product’s overall weight.
         (b)   It is not a violation of division (b)(1) of this section for an
individual to receive or accept more than an amount of pseudoephedrine product
or ephedrine product specified in division (a)(2)A.1.a. or (a)(2)A.1.b. of this
section if the individual is an employee of a retailer or terminal distributor
of dangerous drugs, and the employee receives or accepts from the retailer or
terminal distributor of dangerous drugs the pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product in a sealed container in connection with manufacturing,
warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging, loading, or unloading of the
product.
      (3)   A.   A.   No individual under 18 years of age shall knowingly
purchase, receive, or otherwise acquire a pseudoephedrine product, or ephedrine
product unless the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product is dispensed by
a pharmacist pursuant to a valid prescription issued by a licensed health
professional authorized to prescribe drugs and the conduct of the pharmacist
and the licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs is in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, 4741, or 4772.
         B.   Division (a)(3)A. of this section does not apply to an individual
under 18 years of age who purchases, receives, or otherwise acquires a
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product from any of the following:
            1.   A licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs
or pharmacist who dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides the pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product to that individual and whose conduct is in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, 4741, or 4772;
            2.   A parent or guardian of that individual who provides the
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the individual;
            3.   A person, as authorized by that individual’s parent or
guardian, who dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides the pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product to the individual;
            4.   A retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs who
provides the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to that individual if
the individual is an employee of the retailer or terminal distributor of
dangerous drugs and the individual receives or accepts from the retailer or
terminal distributor of dangerous drugs the pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product in a sealed container in connection with manufacturing,
warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging, loading, or unloading of the
product.
      (4)   No individual under 18 years of age shall knowingly show or give
false information concerning the individual’s name, age, or other
identification for the purpose of purchasing, receiving, or otherwise acquiring
a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product.
      (5)   No individual shall knowingly fail to comply with the requirements
of R.C. § 3715.051(B).
      (6)   Whoever violates division (a)(2)A. of this section is guilty of
unlawful purchase of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (7)   Whoever violates division (a)(3)A. of this section is guilty of
underage purchase of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
delinquent act that would be a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if it could be
committed by an adult.
      (8)   Whoever violates division (a)(4) of this section is guilty of using
false information to purchase a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
delinquent act that would be a misdemeanor of the first degree if it could be
committed by an adult.
      (9)   Whoever violates division (a)(5) of this section is guilty of
improper purchase of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(ORC 2925.55)
   (b)   Unlawful Retail Sales.
      (1)   A.   1.   Except as provided in division (b)(1)B. of this section,
no retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs or an employee of a
retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall knowingly sell, offer
to sell, hold for sale, deliver, or otherwise provide to any individual an
amount of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product that is greater than
either of the following:
               a.   Three and six-tenths grams within a period of a single day;
               b.   Nine grams within a period of 30 consecutive days.
            2.   The maximum amounts specified in divisions (b)(1)A.1.a. and
(b)(1)A.1.b. of this section apply to the total amount of base pseudoephedrine
or base ephedrine in the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product,
respectively. The maximum amounts do not apply to the product’s overall weight.
         B.   1.   Division (b)(1)A. of this section does not apply to any
quantity of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product dispensed by a
pharmacist pursuant to a valid prescription issued by a licensed health
professional authorized to prescribe drugs if the conduct of the pharmacist and
the licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs is in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, 4741, or 4772.
            2.   It is not a violation of division (b)(1)A. of this section for
a retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, or employee of either to
provide to an individual more than an amount of pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product specified in division (b)(1)A.1.a. or (b)(1)A.1.b. of this
section under either of the following circumstances:
               a.   The individual is an employee of the retailer or terminal
distributor of dangerous drugs, and the employee receives or accepts from the
retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, or employee the
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product in a sealed container in
connection with manufacturing, warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging,
loading, or unloading of the product;
               b.   A stop-sale alert is generated after the submission of
information to the national precursor log exchange under the conditions
described in R.C. § 3715.052(A)(2).
      (2)   A.   Except as provided in division (b)(2)B. of this section, no
retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs or an employee of a
retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall sell, offer to sell,
hold for sale, deliver, or otherwise provide a pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product to an individual who is under 18 years of age.
         B.   Division (b)(2)A. of this section does not apply to any of the
following:
            1.   A licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs
or pharmacist who dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides a pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product to an individual under 18 years of age and whose
conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731,
4741, or 4772;
            2.   A parent or guardian of an individual under 18 years of age
who provides a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the individual;
            3.   A person who, as authorized by the individual’s parent or
guardian, dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides a pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product to an individual under 18 years of age;
            4.   The provision by a retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous
drugs, or employee of either of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
in a sealed container to an employee of the retailer or terminal distributor of
dangerous drugs who is under 18 years of age in connection with manufacturing,
warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging, loading, or unloading of the
product.
      (3)   No retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall fail
to comply with the requirements of R.C. § 3715.051(A) or R.C. § 3715.052(A)(2).
      (4)   No retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall fail
to comply with the requirements of R.C. § 3715.052(A)(1).
      (5)   Whoever violates division (b)(1)A. of this section is guilty of
unlawfully selling a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (6)   Whoever violates division (b)(2)A. of this section is guilty of
unlawfully selling a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to a minor, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (7)   Whoever violates division (b)(3) of this section is guilty of
improper sale of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a misdemeanor
of the second degree.
      (8)   Whoever violates division (b)(4) of this section is guilty of
failing to submit information to the national precursor log exchange, a
misdemeanor for which the offender shall be fined not more than 8$1,000 per
violation.
(ORC 2925.56)
   (c)   Transaction Scans.
      (1)   As used in this division and division (d) of this section:
         A.   CARD HOLDER. Any person who presents a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or an identification card to a seller, or an agent or employee
of a seller, to purchase or receive any pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product from the seller, agent or employee.
         B.   IDENTIFICATION CARD has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2927.021.
         C.   SELLER means a retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous
drugs.
         D.   TRANSACTION SCAN means the process by which a seller or an agent
or employee of a seller checks by means of a transaction scan device the
validity of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification card
that is presented as a condition for purchasing or receiving any
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product.
         E.   TRANSACTION SCAN DEVICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2927.021.
      (2)   A.   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may perform a
transaction scan by means of a transaction scan device to check the validity of
a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a
card holder as a condition for selling, giving away, or otherwise distributing
to the card holder a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product.
         B.   If the information deciphered by the transaction scan performed
under division (c)(2)A. of this section fails to match the information printed
on the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented
by the card holder, or if the transaction scan indicates that the information
so printed is false or fraudulent, neither the seller nor any agent or employee
of the seller shall sell, give away, or otherwise distribute any
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the card holder.
         C.   Division (c)(2)A. of this section does not preclude a seller or
an agent or employee of a seller as a condition for selling, giving away, or
otherwise distributing a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the
person presenting the document from using a transaction scan device to check
the validity of a document other than a driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or an identification card if the document includes a bar code or magnetic strip
that may be scanned by the device.
      (3)   Rules adopted by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles under Ohio R.C.
4301.61(C) apply to the use of transaction scan devices for purposes of this
division (c) and division (d) of this section.
      (4)   A.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall
electronically or mechanically record or maintain any information derived from
a transaction scan, except the following:
            1.   The name, address, and date of birth of the person listed on
the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by
a card holder;
            2.   The expiration date, identification number, and issuing agency
of the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented
by a card holder.
         B.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use the
information that is derived from a transaction scan or that is permitted to be
recorded and maintained under division (c)(4)A. of this section except for
purposes of division (d) of this section, R.C. § 2925.58, or R.C. § 3715.052(A)
(1).
         C.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use a
transaction scan device for a purpose other than the purpose specified in
division (c)(2)A. of this section.
         D.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall sell or
otherwise disseminate the information derived from a transaction scan to any
third party, including, but not limited to, selling or otherwise disseminating
that information for any marketing, advertising, or promotional activities, but
a seller or agent or employee of a seller may release that information pursuant
to a court order or as specifically authorized by division (d) of this section
or any other section of the Ohio Revised Code.
      (5)   Nothing in this division (c) or division (d) of this section
relieves a seller or an agent or employee of a seller of any responsibility to
comply with any other applicable state or federal laws or rules governing the
sale, giving away, or other distribution of pseudoephedrine products or
ephedrine products.
      (6)   Whoever violates division (c)(2)B. or (c)(4) of this section is
guilty of engaging in an illegal pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
transaction scan, and the court may impose upon the offender a civil penalty of
up to one thousand dollars ($1,000) for each violation. The Clerk of the Court
shall pay each collected civil penalty to the County Treasurer for deposit into
the County Treasury.
(ORC 2925.57)
   (d)   Affirmative Defenses.
      (1)   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may not be found
guilty of a charge of a violation of division (b) of this section in which the
age of the purchaser or other recipient of a pseudoephedrine product is an
element of the alleged violation if the seller, agent, or employee raises and
proves as an affirmative defense that all of the following occurred:
         A.   A card holder attempting to purchase or receive a pseudoephedrine
product presented a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an
identification card.
         B.   A transaction scan of the driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or identification card that the card holder presented indicated that the
license or card was valid.
         C.   The pseudoephedrine product was sold, given away, or otherwise
distributed to the card holder in reasonable reliance upon the identification
presented and the completed transaction scan.
      (2)   In determining whether a seller or an agent or employee of a seller
has proven the affirmative defense provided by division (d)(1) of this section,
the trier of fact in the action for the alleged violation of division (b) of
this section shall consider any written policy that the seller has adopted and
implemented and that is intended to prevent violations of division (b) of this
section. For purposes of division (d)(1)C. of this section, the trier of fact
shall consider that reasonable reliance upon the identification presented and
the completed transaction scan may require a seller or an agent or employee of
a seller to exercise reasonable diligence to determine, and that the use of a
transaction scan device does not excuse a seller or an agent or employee of a
seller from exercising reasonable diligence to determine, the following:
         A.   Whether a person to whom the seller or agent or employee of a
seller sells, gives away, or otherwise distributes a pseudoephedrine product is
18 years of age or older;
         B.   Whether the description and picture appearing on the driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a card holder
is that of the card holder.
      (3)   In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense provided by
division (d)(1) of this section is raised, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a
deputy registrar who issued an identification card under Ohio R.C. 4507.50
through 4507.52 shall be permitted to submit certified copies of the records of
that issuance in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of or contractors with
the Bureau of Motor Vehicles in the action.
(ORC 2925.58)
   (e)   Retailer’s Duties.
      (1)   As used in divisions (e) and (f) of this section:
         A.   CONSUMER PRODUCT. Any food or drink that is consumed or used by
humans and any drug, including a drug that may be provided legally only
pursuant to a prescription, that is intended to be consumed or used by humans.
         B.   DRUG. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         C.   EPHEDRINE. Any material, compound, mixture, or preparation that
contains any quantity of ephedrine, any of its salts, optical isomers, or salts
of optical isomers.
         D.   EPHEDRINE PRODUCT. A consumer product that contains ephedrine.
         E.   LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL. An officer or employee of any agency or
authority of the United States, a state, a territory, a political subdivision
of a state or territory, or an Indian tribe, who is empowered by the law to
investigate or conduct an official inquiry into a potential violation of law or
prosecute or otherwise conduct a criminal, civil, or administrative proceeding
arising from an alleged violation of law.
         F.   LICENSED HEALTH PROFESSIONAL AUTHORIZED TO PRESCRIBE DRUGS. Has
the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         G.   NATIONAL PRECURSOR LOG EXCHANGE or EXCHANGE. The electronic
system for tracking sales of pseudoephedrine products and ephedrine products on
a national basis that is administered by the National Association of Drug
Diversion Investigators or a successor organization.
         H.   PHARMACIST. A person licensed under Chapter 4729 of the Revised
Code to engage in the practice of pharmacy.
         I.   PHARMACY. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         J.   PRESCRIBER. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         K.   PRESCRIPTION. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         L.   PROOF OF AGE. A driver’s license, a commercial driver’s license,
a military identification card, a passport, or an identification card issued
under R.C. §§ 4507.50 to 4507.52 that shows a person is 18 years of age or
older.
         M.   PSEUDOEPHEDRINE. Any material, compound, mixture, or preparation
that contains any quantity of pseudoephedrine, any of its salts, optical
isomers, or salts of optical isomers.
         N.   PSEUDOEPHEDRINE PRODUCT. A consumer product that contains
pseudoephedrine.
         O.   RETAILER. A place of business that offers consumer products for
sale to the general public.
         P.   SINGLE-INGREDIENT PREPARATION. A compound, mixture, preparation,
or substance that contains a single active ingredient.
         Q.   STOP-SALE ALERT. A notification sent from the national precursor
log exchange to a retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs
indicating that the completion of a sale of a pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product would result in a violation of R.C. § 2925.56(A)(1) or
federal law.
         R.   TERMINAL DISTRIBUTOR OF DANGEROUS DRUGS. Has the same meanings as
in R.C. § 4729.01.
         S.   WHOLESALER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
      (2)   A retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs that sells,
offers to sell, holds for sale, delivers, or otherwise provides a
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the public shall do all of the
following:
         A.   Segregate pseudoephedrine products or ephedrine products from
other merchandise so that no member of the public may procure or purchase such
products without the direct assistance of a pharmacist or other authorized
employee of the retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs;
         B.   With regard to each time a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product is sold or otherwise provided without a valid prescription:
            1.   Determine, by examination of a valid proof of age, that the
purchaser or recipient is at least 18 years of age;
            2.   a.   Using any information available, including information
from the national precursor log exchange if the information is accessible, make
a reasonable attempt to ensure that no individual purchases or receives an
amount of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product that is greater than
either of the following:
                  i.   Three and six tenths grams within a period of a single
day;
                  ii.   Nine grams within a period of 30 consecutive days.
               b.   The maximum amounts specified in divisions (e)(2)B.2.a.i.
and (e)(2)B.2.a.ii. of this section apply to the total amount of base
pseudoephedrine or base ephedrine in the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product, respectively. The maximum amounts do not apply to the product’s
overall weight.
         (c)   Maintain a log book of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product purchases, in accordance with R.C. § 3715.051;
         (d)   If required to comply with section R.C. § 3715.052, submit the
information specified in divisions (a)(1)A. to (a)(1)D. of that section to the
national precursor log exchange.
      (3)   Prescriptions, orders, and records maintained pursuant to this
section and stocks of pseudoephedrine products and ephedrine products shall be
open for inspection to federal, state, county, and municipal officers, and
employees of the State Board of Pharmacy whose duty it is to enforce the laws
of this state or of the United States relating to controlled substances. Such
prescriptions, orders, records, and stocks shall be open for inspection by the
State Medical Board and its employees for purposes of enforcing R.C. Chapter
4731.
(ORC 3715.05)
   (f)   Theft or Loss; Reporting Requirements.
      (1)   Each retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, pharmacy,
prescriber, or wholesaler that sells, offers to sell, holds for sale, delivers,
or otherwise provides any pseudoephedrine product and that discovers the theft
or loss of any pseudoephedrine product in an amount of more than nine grams per
incident of theft or loss shall notify all of the following upon discovery of
the theft or loss:
         A.   The State Board of Pharmacy, by telephone immediately upon
discovery of the theft or loss;
         B.   Law enforcement authorities. If the incident is a theft and the
theft constitutes a felony, the retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous
drugs, pharmacy, prescriber, or wholesaler shall report the theft to the law
enforcement authorities in accordance with Ohio R.C. 2921.22.
      (2)   Within 30 days after making a report by telephone to the State
Board of Pharmacy pursuant to division (f)(1)A. of this section, a retailer,
terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, pharmacy, prescriber, or wholesaler
shall send a written report to the State Board of Pharmacy.
      (3)   The reports required under this section shall identify the product
that was stolen or lost, the amount of the product stolen or lost, and the date
and time of discovery of the theft or loss.
(ORC 3715.06)
§ 624.20 REIMBURSEMENT FOR DRUG TEST FEES.
   (a)   In addition to the financial sanctions authorized or required under
the provision of this chapter of the Village Code of Ordinances or the Ohio
Revised Code, and to any costs otherwise authorized or required under any
provision of law, the Woodlawn Mayor's Court imposing sentence upon an offender
who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a drug abuse offense may order the
offender to pay to the state, municipal, or county law enforcement agencies
that handled the investigation and prosecution of all the costs that the state,
municipal corporation, or county reasonably incurred in having tests performed
under Chapter 624 of the Village Code of Ordinances, Ohio R.C. § 2925.51, or in
any other manner on any substance that was the basis of or involved in the
offense to determine whether the substance contained any amount of a controlled
substance if the results of the test indicate that the substance tested
contained any controlled substance. The Mayor's Court shall not order an
offender under this section to pay the cost of the tests performed on a
substance if the results of the test do not indicate that the substance tested
contained any controlled substance.
   (b)   The Mayor's Court shall hold a hearing to determine the amount of
costs to be imposed under this section. The Mayor's court may hold the hearing
as part of the sentencing hearing for the offender.
(Ord. 25-2012, passed 10-30-2012)
§ 624.21 SALE OF PURE CAFFEINE PRODUCT.
   (a)   As used in this section, PURE CAFFEINE PRODUCT means:
      (1)   Subject to division (a)(2) of this section, a product that consists
solely or primarily of caffeine and is manufactured into a crystalline, liquid,
or powdered form.
      (2)   The phrase does not include any of the following that contains
caffeine and is formulated, manufactured, and labeled in accordance with the
laws
and regulations enforced by the United States Food and Drug Administration:
         A.   Coffee, tea, any soft drink, any energy drink, or any other
caffeine- containing beverage;
         B.   Any energy product.
   (b)   Except as provided in division (c) of this section, no person shall
knowingly sell or offer for sale a pure caffeine product.
   (c)   Division (b) of this section does not prohibit a person from selling
or offering for sale any product manufactured in a unit-dose form such as a
pill, tablet, or caplet, but only if each unit dose of the product contains not
more than 250 milligrams of caffeine.
   (d)   Nothing in this section prohibits either of the following:
      (1)   Possession of a product described in division (c) of this section;
      (2)   Possession of a pure caffeine product by any of the following:
         A.   A food processing establishment, as defined in R.C. § 3715.021;
         B.   A manufacturer of a drug that is available without a
prescription;
         C.   A laboratory that holds a current, valid category III terminal
distributor of dangerous drugs license issued by the state board of pharmacy
under R.C. § 4729.54;
         D.   A laboratory of any agency or department of this state that
performs testing, analysis, and other laboratory services on behalf of the
state;
         E.   A postal or delivery service that transports or delivers a pure
caffeine product to an entity specified in divisions (d)(2)A. to (d)(2)D. of
this section.
   (e)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of illegal
sale of pure caffeine, a minor misdemeanor on a first offense and a misdemeanor
of the third degree on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 2925.34)
§ 624.22 SALE OF DEXTROMETHORPHAN.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   DEXTROMETHORPHAN. Means the dextrorotatory isomer of 3-methoxy- N-
methylmorphinan, including its salts, but not including its racemic or
levorotatory forms.
      (2)   EVIDENCE OF MAJORITY AND IDENTITY. Means a document issued by the
federal government or a state, county, or municipal government, or a
subdivision or agency of any of the foregoing, including a driver's or
commercial driver's license, an identification card issued under R.C. §§
4507.50 to 4507.52, a military identification card, or any other form of
identification that bears the name, date of birth, description, and picture of
the person identified.
      (3)   RETAILER. Means a place of business that offers consumer products
for sale to the general public, including a terminal distributor of dangerous
drugs that is licensed under R.C. Chapter 4729 and operated as a pharmacy.
   (b)   No retailer or employee of a retailer shall knowingly supply, deliver,
give, or otherwise provide a drug, material, compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance containing any quantity of dextromethorphan through the sale of any
product to a person under 18 years of age, unless the person has been issued a
prescription for the product being purchased.
   (c)   For purposes of division (b) of this section, the person making the
sale of a product containing dextromethorphan shall require and obtain evidence
of majority and identity from the purchaser, unless from the purchaser's
outward appearance the person making the sale would reasonably presume the
purchaser to be 25 years of age or older. Proof that the person making the sale
demanded, was shown, and acted in reasonable reliance on the purchaser's
evidence of majority and identity is a defense to any charge of a violation of
division (b) of this section.
   (d)   A retailer or employee of a retailer is not liable for damages in a
civil action for injury, death, or loss to person or property that allegedly
arises from an act or omission associated with a failure to prevent the sale of
a product containing dextromethorphan to a person under 18 years of age, unless
the act or omission constitutes willful or wanton misconduct.
   (e)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of illegally
selling dextromethorphan, a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 2925.62)
§ 624.23 PROHIBITING ADULT USE CANNABIS OPERATIONS.
   Pursuant to R.C. § 3780.25, Council hereby prohibits all adult use cannabis
operations in the Village of Woodlawn, including adult use cultivators, adult
use processors, and adult use dispensaries. The terms "cannabis," "adult use
cultivator," "adult use processor," and "adult use dispensary" shall have the
same meanings as set forth in R.C. § 3780.01. Nothing herein shall prohibit
home grow activities as provided in R.C. § 3780.29.
(Ord. 23-2024, passed 8-27-2024)
CHAPTER 630: GAMBLING
630.01   Definitions.
630.02   Gambling in general.
630.03   Operating a gambling house.
630.04   Public gaming.
630.05   Cheating.
630.06   Responsibility of charitable organization conducting bingo game.
630.07   Maintenance of records by charitable organizations.
630.08   Qualifications of bingo game operator.
630.09   Exemption for bingo games conducted for amusement.
630.10   Prohibitions where instant bingo game is conducted.
630.11   Raffle drawings.
630.12   Instant bingo other than at bingo sessions.
630.13   Restrictions on owner or lessor of location at instant bingo.
630.14   Skill-based amusement machines; prohibited conduct.
630.15   Electronic instant bingo; prohibited conduct.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar State law
   Power to prohibit gambling - see Ohio R.C. 715.49
   Power to destroy devices - see Ohio R.C. 715.51
   Definitions generally - see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property held by Police Division - see
GEN. OFF.
606.24
§ 630.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   BET. The hazarding of anything of value upon the result of an event,
undertaking, or contingency, but does not include a bona fide business risk.
   (b)   BINGO. Either of the following:
      (1)   A game with all of the following characteristics:
         A.   The participants use bingo cards or sheets, including paper
formats and electronic representation or image formats, that are divided into
25 spaces arranged in 5 horizontal and 5 vertical rows of spaces, with each
space, except the central space, being designated by a combination of a letter
and a number and with the central space being designated as a free space;
         B.   The participants cover the spaces on the bingo cards or sheets
that correspond to combinations of letters and numbers that are announced by a
bingo game operator;
         C.   A bingo game operator announces combinations of letters and
numbers that appear on objects that a bingo game operator selects by chance,
either manually or mechanically, from a receptacle that contains 75 objects at
the beginning of each game, each object marked by a different combination of a
letter and a number that corresponds to one of the 75 possible combinations of
a letter and a number that can appear on the bingo cards or sheets;
         D.   The winner of the bingo game includes any participant who
properly announces during the interval between the announcements of letters and
numbers, as described in division (1)C. of this definition, that a
predetermined and pre-announced pattern of spaces has been covered on a bingo
card or sheet being used by the participant.
      (2)   Instant bingo, electronic instant bingo, and raffles.
   (c)   BINGO GAME OPERATOR. Any person, except security personnel, who
performs work or labor at the site of bingo including but not limited to
collecting money from participants, handing out bingo cards or sheets or
objects to cover spaces on bingo cards or sheets, selecting from a receptacle
the objects that contain the combination of letters and numbers that appear on
bingo cards or sheets, calling out the combinations of letters and numbers,
distributing prizes, selling or redeeming instant bingo tickets or cards,
selling or redeeming electronic instant bingo tickets, credits, or vouchers,
accessing an electronic instant bingo system other than as a participant,
supervising the operation of a punch board, selling raffle tickets, selecting
raffle tickets from a receptacle and announcing the winning numbers in a
raffle, and preparing, selling, and serving food or beverages. BINGO GAME
OPERATOR does not include a person who is installing, maintaining, updating, or
repairing an electronic instant bingo system.
   (d)   BINGO SESSION. A period that includes both of the following:
      (1)   Not to exceed five continuous hours for the conduct of one or more
games described in division (1) of the definition of “bingo” in this section,
instant bingo and electronic instant bingo;
      (2)   A period for the conduct of instant bingo and electronic instant
bingo for not more than two hours before and not more than two hours after the
period described in division (1) of this definition.
   (e)   BINGO SUPPLIES. Bingo cards or sheets; instant bingo tickets or cards;
electronic bingo aids; raffle tickets; punch boards; seal cards; instant bingo
ticket dispensers; electronic instant bingo systems; and devices for selecting
or displaying the combination of bingo letters and numbers or raffle tickets.
Items that are “bingo supplies” are not gambling devices if sold or otherwise
provided, and used, in accordance with this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915. For
purposes of this chapter, BINGO SUPPLIES are not to be considered equipment
used to conduct a bingo game.
   (f)   BOOKMAKING. The business of receiving or paying off bets.
   (g)   CHAMBER OF COMMERCE. Any organization of individuals, professionals
and businesses that has the purpose to advance the commercial, financial,
industrial and civic interests of the community and that is, and has received
from the Internal Revenue Service a determination letter that currently is in
effect stating that the organization is, exempt from federal income taxation
under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(6).
   (h)   CHARITABLE BINGO GAME. Any bingo game described in divisions (1) or
(2) of the definition of “bingo” in this section that is conducted by a
charitable organization that has obtained a license pursuant to R.C. § 2915.08
and the proceeds of which are used for a charitable purpose.
   (i)   CHARITABLE INSTANT BINGO ORGANIZATION. An organization that is exempt
from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(3)
and is a charitable organization as defined in this section. A CHARITABLE
INSTANT BINGO ORGANIZATION does not include a charitable organization that is
exempt from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501
(c)(3) and that is created by a veteran’s organization, a fraternal
organization, or a sporting organization in regards to  bingo conducted or
assisted by a veteran’s organization, a fraternal organization or a sporting
organization pursuant to R.C. § 2915.13, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
   (j)   CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, CHARITABLE
ORGANIZATION means either of the following:
         A.   An organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under
IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3);
         B.   A volunteer rescue service organization, volunteer firefighter’s
organization, veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC §§ 501(c)
(4), 501(c)(7), 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10) or 501(c)(19).
      (2)   To qualify as a charitable organization, an organization shall have
been in continuous existence as such in this state for a period of two years
immediately preceding either the making of an application for a bingo license
under R.C. § 2915.08 or the conducting of any game of chance as provided in
R.C. § 2915.02(D), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (k)   CHARITABLE PURPOSE. The net profit of bingo, other than instant bingo
or electronic instant bingo, is used by, or is given, donated or otherwise
transferred to, any of the following:
      (1)   Any organization that is described in IRC 509(a)(1), (a)(2) or (a)
(3) and is either a governmental unit or an organization that is tax exempt
under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(3);
      (2)   A veteran’s organization that is a post, chapter or organization of
veterans, or an auxiliary unit or society of, or a trust or foundation for, any
such post, chapter or organization organized in the United States or any of its
possessions, at least 75% of the members of which are veterans and
substantially all of the other members of which are individuals who are
spouses, widows or widowers of veterans, or those individuals, provided that no
part of the net earnings of the post, chapter or organization inures to the
benefit of any private shareholder or individual, and further provided that the
net profit is used by the post, chapter or organization for the charitable
purposes set forth in R.C. § 5739.02(B)(12), is used for awarding scholarships
to or for attendance at an institution mentioned in that division of the
Revised Code, is donated to a governmental agency, or is used for nonprofit
youth activities, the purchase of United States or Ohio flags that are donated
to schools, youth groups or other bona fide nonprofit organizations, promotion
of patriotism or disaster relief;
      (3)   A fraternal organization that has been in continuous existence in
this state for 15 years and that uses the net profit exclusively for religious,
charitable, scientific, literary or educational purposes, or for the prevention
of cruelty to children or animals, if contributions for that use would qualify
as a deductible charitable contribution under IRC 170;
      (4)   A volunteer firefighter’s organization that uses the net profit for
the purposes set forth in the definition of “volunteer firefighter’s
organization” in this section.
   (l)   COMMUNITY ACTION AGENCY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 122.66.
   (m)   CONDUCT. To back, promote, organize, manage, carry on, sponsor or
prepare for the operation of bingo or a game of chance, a scheme of chance, or
a sweepstakes.
   (n)   DEAL. A single game of instant bingo tickets, or a single game of
electronic instant bingo tickets, all with the same serial number.
   (o)   DISTRIBUTOR. Any person who purchases or obtains bingo supplies and
who does either of the following:
      (1)   Sells, offers for sale or otherwise provides or offers to provide
the bingo supplies to another person for use in this state;
      (2)   Modifies, converts, adds to or removes parts from the bingo
supplies to further their promotion or sale for use in this state.
   (p)   ELECTRONIC BINGO AID.
      (1)   ELECTRONIC BINGO AID means an electronic device used by a
participant to monitor bingo cards or sheets purchased at the time and place of
a bingo session and that does all of the following:
         A.   It provides a means for a participant to input numbers and
letters announced by a bingo caller.
         B.   It compares the numbers and letters entered by the participant to
the bingo faces previously stored in the memory of the device.
         C.   It identifies a winning bingo pattern.
      (2)   ELECTRONIC BINGO AID does not include any device into which a coin,
currency, token or an equivalent is inserted to activate play.
   (q)   ELECTRONIC INSTANT BINGO.
      (1)   A form of bingo that consists of an electronic or digital
representation of instant bingo in which a participant wins a prize if the
participant’s electronic instant bingo ticket contains a combination of numbers
or symbols that was designated in advance as a winning combination, and to
which all of the following apply:
         A.   Each deal has a predetermined, finite number of winning and
losing tickets and a predetermined prize amount and deal structure, provided
that there may be multiple winning combinations in each deal and multiple
winning tickets.
         B.   Each electronic instant bingo ticket within a deal has a unique
serial number that is not regenerated.
         C.   Each electronic instant bingo ticket within a deal is sold for
the same price.
         D.   After a participant purchases an electronic instant bingo ticket,
the combination of numbers or symbols on the ticket is revealed to the
participant.
         E.   The reveal of numbers or symbols on the ticket may incorporate an
entertainment or bonus theme, provided that the reveal does not include
spinning reels that resemble a slot machine.
         F.   The reveal theme, if any, does not require additional
consideration or award any prize other than any predetermined prize associated
with the electronic instant bingo ticket.
      (2)   ELECTRONIC INSTANT BINGO shall not include any of the following:
         A.   Any game, entertainment, or bonus theme that replicates or
simulates any of the following:
            1.   The gambling games of keno, blackjack, roulette, poker, craps,
other casino-style table games;
            2.   Horse racing;
            3.   Gambling games offered in this state on slot machines or video
lottery terminals. As used in this division, “video lottery terminal” has the
same meaning as in R.C. § 3770.21.
         B.   Any device operated by dropping one or more coins or tokens into
a slot and pulling a handle or pushing a button or touchpoint on a touchscreen
to activate one to three or more rotating reels marked into horizontal segments
by varying symbols, where the predetermined prize amount depends on how and how
many of the symbols line up when the rotating reels come to a rest;
         C.   Any device that includes a coin or token slot, tray, or hopper
and the ability to dispense coins, cash, tokens, or anything of value other
than a credit ticket voucher.
   (r)   ELECTRONIC INSTANT BINGO SYSTEM. Means both of the following:
      (1)   A mechanical, electronic, digital, or video device and associated
software to which all of the following apply:
         A.   It is used by not more than one player at a time to play
electronic instant bingo on a single screen that is physically connected to the
device;
         B.   It is located on the premises of the principal place of business
of a veteran’s or fraternal organization that holds a type II or type III bingo
license to conduct electronic instant bingo at that location issued under R.C.
§ 2915.08.
      (2)   Any associated equipment or software used to manage, monitor, or
document any aspect of electronic instant bingo.
   (s)   EXPENSES. The reasonable amount of gross profit actually expended for
all of the following:
      (1)   The purchase or lease of bingo supplies;
      (2)   The annual license fee required under R.C. § 2915.08;
      (3)   Bank fees and service charges for a bingo session or game account
described in R.C. § 2915.10;
      (4)   Audits and accounting services;
      (5)   Safes;
      (6)   Cash registers;
      (7)   Hiring security personnel;
      (8)   Advertising bingo;
      (9)   Renting premises in which to conduct a bingo session;
      (10)   Tables and chairs;
      (11)   Expenses for maintaining and operating a charitable organization’s
facilities, including but not limited to a post home, club house, lounge,
tavern or canteen and any grounds attached to the post home, club house,
lounge, tavern or canteen;
      (12)   Payment of real property taxes and assessments that are levied on
a premises on which bingo is conducted;
      (13)   Any other product or service directly related to the conduct of
bingo that is authorized in rules adopted by the Attorney General under R.C. §
2915.08(F)(1).
   (t)   FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION. Any society, order, state headquarters or
association within this state, except a college or high school fraternity, that
is not organized for profit, that is a branch, lodge or chapter of a national
or state organization, that exists exclusively for the common business or
sodality of its members.
   (u)   GAMBLING DEVICE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A book, totalizer or other equipment used for recording bets;
      (2)   A ticket, token or other device representing a chance, share or
interest in a scheme of chance or evidencing a bet;
      (3)   A deck of cards, dice, gaming table, roulette wheel, slot machine
or other apparatus designed for use in connection with a game of chance;
      (4)   Any equipment, device, apparatus or paraphernalia specially
designed for gambling purposes;
      (5)   Bingo supplies sold or otherwise provided, or used, in violation of
this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915.
   (v)   GAMBLING OFFENSE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. Chapter 2915;
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or of the United States substantially equivalent to any
provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915 or a violation of R.C. § 2915.06
as it existed prior to July 1, 1996;
      (3)   An offense under an existing or former municipal ordinance or law
of this or any other state or of the United States, of which gambling is an
element;
      (4)   A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in committing, any
offense under division (1), (2) or (3) of this definition.
   (w)   GAME FLARE. The board or placard, or electronic representation of a
board or placard, that accompanies each deal of instant bingo or electronic
instant bingo tickets and that includes the following information for the game:
      (1)   The name of the game;
      (2)   The manufacturer’s name or distinctive logo;
      (3)   The form number;
      (4)   The ticket count;
      (5)   The prize structure, including the number of winning tickets by
denomination and the respective winning symbol or number combinations for the
winning tickets;
      (6)   The cost per play;
      (7)   The serial number of the game.
   (x)   GAME OF CHANCE. Poker, craps, roulette or other game in which a player
gives anything of value in the hope of gain, the outcome of which is determined
largely by chance, but does not include bingo.
   (y)   GAME OF CHANCE CONDUCTED FOR PROFIT. Any game of chance designed to
produce income for the person who conducts or operates the game of chance, but
does not include bingo.
   (z)   GROSS ANNUAL REVENUES. The annual gross receipts derived from the
conduct of bingo described in division (1) of the definition of “bingo” in this
section plus the annual net profit derived from the conduct of bingo described
in division (2) of the definition of “bingo” in this section.
   (aa)   GROSS PROFIT. Gross receipts minus the amount actually expended for
the payment of prize awards.
   (bb)   GROSS RECEIPTS. All money or assets, including admission fees, that a
person receives from bingo without the deduction of any amounts for prizes paid
out or for the expenses of conducting bingo. GROSS RECEIPTS does not include
any money directly taken in from the sale of food or beverages by a charitable
organization conducting bingo, or by a bona fide auxiliary unit or society of a
charitable organization conducting bingo, provided all of the following apply:
      (1)   The auxiliary unit or society has been in existence as a bona fide
auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization for at least two years
prior to conducting bingo.
      (2)   The person who purchases the food or beverage receives nothing of
value except the food or beverage and items customarily received with the
purchase of that food or beverage.
      (3)   The food and beverages are sold at customary and reasonable prices.
   (cc)   HISTORIC RAILROAD. All or a portion of the tracks and right-of-way of
a railroad that was owned and operated by a for-profit common carrier in this
state at any time prior to January 1, 1950.
   (dd)   INSTANT BINGO. A form of bingo that shall use folded or banded
tickets or paper cards with perforated break-open tabs, a face of which is
covered or otherwise hidden from view to conceal a number, letter, or symbol,
or set of numbers, letters, or symbols, some of which have been designated in
advance as prize winners, and may also include games in which some winners are
determined by the random selection of one or more bingo numbers by the use of a
seal card or bingo blower. INSTANT BINGO also includes a punch board game. In
all INSTANT BINGO the prize amount and structure shall be predetermined. The
term does not include electronic instant bingo or any device that is activated
by the insertion of a coin, currency, token, or an equivalent, and that
contains as one of its components a video display monitor that is capable of
displaying numbers, letters, symbols, or characters in winning or losing
combinations.
   (ee)   INSTANT BINGO TICKET DISPENSER. A mechanical device that dispenses an
instant bingo ticket or card as the sole item of value dispensed and that has
the following characteristics:
      (1)   It is activated upon the insertion of United States currency.
      (2)   It performs no gaming functions.
      (3)   It does not contain a video display monitor or generate noise.
      (4)   It is not capable of displaying any numbers, letters, symbols or
characters in winning or losing combinations.
      (5)   It does not simulate or display rolling or spinning reels.
      (6)   It is incapable of determining whether a dispensed bingo ticket or
card is a winning or non-winning ticket or card and requires a winning ticket
or card to be paid by a bingo game operator.
      (7)   It may provide accounting and security features to aid in
accounting for the instant bingo tickets or cards it dispenses.
      (8)   It is not part of an electronic network and is not interactive.
   (ff)   IRC or INTERNAL REVENUE CODE. The Internal Revenue Code of 1986, 100
Stat. 2085, 26 U.S.C. §§ 1 et seq., as now or hereafter amended.
   (gg)   MANUFACTURER. Any person who assembles completed bingo supplies from
raw materials, other items or subparts or who modifies, converts, adds to or
removes parts from bingo supplies to further their promotion or sale.
   (hh)   Merchandise prize. Any item of value, but shall not include any of
the following:
      (1)   Cash, gift cards or any equivalent thereof;
      (2)   Plays on games of chance, state lottery tickets, or bingo;
      (3)   Firearms, tobacco or alcoholic beverages; or
      (4)   A redeemable voucher that is redeemable for any of the items listed
in division (1), (2) or (3) of this definition.
   (ii)   NET PROFIT. Gross profit minus expenses.
   (jj)   NET PROFIT FROM THE PROCEEDS OF THE SALE OF INSTANT BINGO OR
ELECTRONIC INSTANT BINGO. Gross profit minus the ordinary, necessary, and
reasonable expense expended for the purchase of bingo supplies for the purpose
of conducting instant bingo or  electronic instant bingo, and, in the case of
instant bingo or electronic instant bingo conducted by a veteran’s, fraternal,
or sporting organization, minus the payment by that organization of real
property taxes and assessments levied on a premises on which instant bingo or
electronic instant bingo is conducted.
   (kk)   PARTICIPANT. Any person who plays bingo.
   (ll)   PERSON. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1.59 and includes any firm
or any other legal entity, however organized.
   (mm)   POOL NOT CONDUCTED FOR PROFIT. A scheme in which a participant gives
a valuable consideration for a chance to win a prize and the total amount of
consideration wagered is distributed to a participant or participants.
   (nn)   PUNCH BOARD. A form of instant bingo that uses a board containing a
number of holes or receptacles of uniform size in which are placed,
mechanically and randomly, serially numbered slips of paper that may be punched
or drawn from the hole or receptacle. A player may punch or draw the numbered
slips of paper from the holes or receptacles and obtain the prize established
for the game if the number drawn corresponds to a winning number or, if the
punch board includes the use of a seal card, a potential winning number.
   (oo)   RAFFLE. A form of bingo in which the one or more prizes are won by
one or more persons who have purchased a raffle ticket. The one or more winners
of the raffle are determined by drawing a ticket stub or other detachable
section from a receptacle containing ticket stubs or detachable sections
corresponding to all tickets sold for the raffle. The term does not include the
drawing of a ticket stub or other detachable section of a ticket purchased to
attend a professional sporting event if both of the following apply:
      (1)   The ticket stub or other detachable section is used to select the
winner of a free prize given away at the professional sporting event; and
      (2)   The cost of the ticket is the same as the cost of a ticket to the
professional sporting event on days when no free prize is given away.
   (pp)   REDEEMABLE VOUCHER. Any ticket, token, coupon, receipt or other
noncash representation of value.
   (qq)   RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATION. Any church, body of communicants, or group
that is not organized or operated for profit and that gathers in common
membership for regular worship and religious observances.
   (rr)   REVOKE. To void permanently all rights and privileges of the holder
of a license issued under R.C. § 2915.08, 2915.081 or 2915.082 or a charitable
gaming license issued by another jurisdiction.
   (ss)   SCHEME OF CHANCE.
      (1)   A slot machine unless authorized under R.C. Chapter 3772, lottery
unless authorized under R.C. Chapter 3770, numbers game, pool conducted for
profit, or other scheme in which a participant gives a valuable consideration
for a chance to win a prize, but does not include bingo, a skill-based
amusement machine, or a pool not conducted for profit. “Scheme of chance”
includes the use of an electronic device to reveal the results of a game entry
if valuable consideration is paid, directly or indirectly, for a chance to win
a prize. Valuable consideration is deemed to be paid for a chance to win a
prize in the following instances:
         A.   Less than 50% of the goods or services sold by a scheme of chance
operator in exchange for game entries are used or redeemed by participants at
any one location;
         B.   Less than 50% of participants who purchase goods or services at
any one location do not accept, use, or redeem the goods or services sold or
purportedly sold;
         C.   More than 50% of prizes at any one location are revealed to
participants through an electronic device simulating a game of chance or a
“casino game” as defined in R.C. § 3772.01;
         D.   The good or service sold by a scheme of chance operator in
exchange for a game entry cannot be used or redeemed in the manner advertised;
         E.   A participant pays more than fair market value for goods or
services offered by a scheme of chance operator in order to receive one or more
game entries;
         F.   A participant may use the electronic device to purchase
additional game entries;
         G.   A participant may purchase additional game entries by using
points or credits won as prizes while using the electronic device;
         H.   A scheme of chance operator pays out in prize money more than 20%
of the gross revenue received at one location; or
         I.   A participant makes a purchase or exchange in order to obtain any
good or service that may be used to facilitate play on the electronic device.
      (2)   As used in this division, “electronic device” means a mechanical,
video, digital, or electronic machine or device that is capable of displaying
information on a screen or other mechanism and that is owned, leased, or
otherwise possessed by any person conducting a scheme of chance, or by that
person’s partners, affiliates, subsidiaries, or contractors. “Electronic
device” does not include an electronic instant bingo system.
   (tt)   SEAL CARD. A form of instant bingo that uses instant bingo tickets in
conjunction with a board or placard that contains one or more seals that, when
removed or opened, reveal predesignated winning numbers, letters or symbols.
   (uu)   SECURITY PERSONNEL. Any person who either is a Sheriff, Deputy
Sheriff, Marshal, Deputy Marshal, township constable, or member of an
organized police department of a municipal corporation or has successfully
completed a peace officer’s training course pursuant to R.C. §§ 109.71 to
109.79 and who is hired to provide security for the premises on which bingo is
conducted.
   (vv)   SKILL-BASED AMUSEMENT MACHINE.
      (1)   A.   A mechanical, video, digital or electronic device that rewards
the player or players, if at all, only with merchandise prizes or with
redeemable vouchers redeemable only for merchandise prizes, provided that with
respect to rewards for playing the game all of the following apply:
            1.   The wholesale value of a merchandise prize awarded as a result
of the single play of a machine does not exceed $10;
            2.   Redeemable vouchers awarded for any single play of a machine
are not redeemable for a merchandise prize with a wholesale value of more than
$10;
            3.   Redeemable vouchers are not redeemable for a merchandise prize
that has a wholesale value of more than $10 times the fewest number of single
plays necessary to accrue the redeemable vouchers required to obtain that
prize; and
            4.   Any redeemable vouchers or merchandise prizes are distributed
at the site of the skill-based amusement machine at the time of play.
         B.   A card for the purchase of gasoline is a redeemable voucher for
purposes of division (1) of this definition even if the skill-based amusement
machine for the play of which the card is awarded is located at a place where
gasoline may not be legally distributed to the public or the card is not
redeemable at the location of, or at the time of playing, the skill-based
amusement machine.
      (2)   A device shall not be considered a skill-based amusement machine
and shall be considered a slot machine if it pays cash or one or more of the
following apply:
         A.   The ability of a player to succeed at the game is impacted by the
number or ratio of prior wins to prior losses of players playing the game;
         B.   Any reward of redeemable vouchers is not based solely on the
player achieving the object of the game or the player’s score;
         C.   The outcome of the game, or the value of the redeemable voucher
or merchandise prize awarded for winning the game, can be controlled by a
source other than any player playing the game;
         D.   The success of any player is or may be determined by a chance
event that cannot be altered by player actions;
         E.   The ability of any player to succeed at the game is determined by
game features not visible or known to the player;
         F.   The ability of the player to succeed at the game is impacted by
the exercise of a skill that no reasonable player could exercise.
      (3)   All of the following apply to any machine that is operated as
described in division (1) of this definition:
         A.   As used in this definition of “skill-based amusement machine”,
“game” and “play” mean one event from the initial activation of the machine
until the results of play are determined without payment of additional
consideration. An individual utilizing a machine that involves a single game,
play, contest, competition or tournament may be awarded redeemable vouchers or
merchandise prizes based on the results of play.
         B.   Advance play for a single game, play, contest, competition or
tournament participation may be purchased. The cost of the contest, competition
or tournament participation may be greater than a single non-contest,
competition or tournament play.
         C.   To the extent that the machine is used in a contest, competition
or tournament, that contest, competition or tournament has a defined starting
and ending date and is open to participants in competition for scoring and
ranking results toward the awarding of redeemable vouchers or merchandise
prizes that are stated prior to the start of the contest, competition, or
tournament.
      (4)   For purposes of division (1) of this definition, the mere presence
of a device, such as a pin-setting, ball-releasing or scoring mechanism, that
does not contribute to or affect the outcome of the play of the game does not
make the device a skill-based amusement machine.
   (ww)   SLOT MACHINE.
      (1)   Either of the following:
         A.   Any mechanical, electronic, video or digital device that is
capable of accepting anything of value, directly or indirectly, from or on
behalf of a player who gives the thing of value in the hope of gain;
         B.   Any mechanical, electronic, video or digital device that is
capable of accepting anything of value, directly or indirectly, from or on
behalf of a player to conduct bingo or a scheme or game of chance.
      (2)   SLOT MACHINE does not include a skill-based amusement machine, an
instant bingo ticket dispenser, or an electronic instant bingo system.
   (xx)   SPORTING ORGANIZATION. A hunting, fishing or trapping organization,
other than a college or high school fraternity or sorority, that is not
organized for profit, that is affiliated with a state or national sporting
organization, including but not limited to the League of Ohio Sportsmen, and
that has been in continuous existence in this state for a period of three
years.
   (yy)   SUSPEND. To interrupt temporarily all rights and privileges of the
holder of a license issued under R.C. § 2915.08, 2915.081 or 2915.082 or a
charitable gaming license issued by another jurisdiction.
   (zz)   SWEEPSTAKES. Any game, contest, advertising scheme or plan, or other
promotion where consideration is not required for a person to enter to win or
become eligible to receive any prize, the determination of which is based upon
chance. SWEEPSTAKES does not include bingo as authorized under R.C. Chapter
2915, pari-mutuel wagering as authorized by R.C. Chapter 3769, lotteries
conducted by the State Lottery Commission as authorized by R.C. Chapter 3770,
and casino gaming as authorized by R.C. Chapter 3772.
   (aaa)   SWEEPSTAKES TERMINAL DEVICE.
      (1)   A mechanical, video, digital, or electronic machine or device that
is owned, leased, or otherwise possessed by any person conducting a
sweepstakes, or by that person’s partners, affiliates, subsidiaries, or
contractors, that is intended to be used by a sweepstakes participant, and that
is capable of displaying information on a screen or other mechanism. A device
is a sweepstakes terminal device if any of the following apply:
         A.   The device uses a simulated game terminal as a representation of
the prizes associated with the results of the sweepstakes entries.
         B.   The device utilizes software such that the simulated game
influences or determines the winning of or value of the prize.
         C.   The device selects prizes from a predetermined finite pool of
entries.
         D.   The device utilizes a mechanism that reveals the content of a
predetermined sweepstakes entry.
         E.   The device predetermines the prize results and stores those
results for delivery at the time the sweepstakes entry results are revealed.
         F.   The device utilizes software to create a game result.
         G.   The device reveals the prize incrementally, even though the
device does not influence the awarding of the prize or the value of any prize
awarded.
         H.   The device determines and associates the prize with an entry or
entries at the time the sweepstakes is entered.
      (2)   As used in this definition and in §
630.02:
         A.   “Enter.” The act by which a person becomes eligible to receive
any prize offered in a sweepstakes.
         B.   “Entry.” One event from the initial activation of the sweepstakes
terminal device until all the sweepstakes prize results from that activation
are revealed.
         C.   “Prize.” Any gift, award, gratuity, good, service, credit,
reward, or any other thing of value that may be transferred to a person,
whether possession of the prize is actually transferred, or placed on an
account or other record as evidence of the intent to transfer the prize.
         D.   “Sweepstakes terminal device facility.” Any location in this
state where a sweepstakes terminal device is provided to a sweepstakes
participant, except as provided in § 630.02(g) and R.C. § 2915.02(G).
   (bbb)   VETERAN’S ORGANIZATION. Any individual post or state headquarters of
a national veteran’s association or an auxiliary unit of any individual post of
a national veteran’s association,  which post, state headquarters or auxiliary
unit is incorporated as a nonprofit corporation and either has received a
letter from the state headquarters of the national veteran’s association
indicating that the individual post or auxiliary unit is in good standing with
the national veteran’s association or has received a letter from the national
veteran’s association indicating that the state headquarters is in good
standing with the national veteran’s association. As used in this division,
“national veteran’s association” means any veteran’s association that has been
in continuous existence as such for a period of at least five years and either
is incorporated by an act of the United States Congress or has a national dues-
paying membership of at least 5,000 persons.
   (ccc)   VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTER’S ORGANIZATION. Any organization of volunteer
firefighters, as defined in R.C. § 146.01, that is organized and operated
exclusively to provide financial support for a volunteer fire department or a
volunteer fire company and that is recognized or ratified by a county,
municipal corporation or township.
   (ddd)   VOLUNTEER RESCUE SERVICE ORGANIZATION. Any organization of
volunteers organized to function as an emergency medical service organization,
as defined in R.C. § 4765.01.
   (eee)   YOUTH ATHLETIC ORGANIZATION. Any organization, not organized for
profit, that is organized and operated exclusively to provide financial support
to, or to operate, athletic activities for persons who are 21 years of age or
younger by means of sponsoring, organizing, operating or contributing to the
support of an athletic team, club, league or association.
   (fff)   YOUTH ATHLETIC PARK ORGANIZATION. Any organization, not organized
for profit, that satisfies both of the following:
      (1)   It owns, operates and maintains playing fields that satisfy both of
the following:
         A.   The playing fields are used for athletic activities by one or
more organizations, not organized for profit, each of which is organized and
operated exclusively to provide financial support to, or to operate, athletic
activities for persons who are 18 years of age or younger by means of
sponsoring, organizing, operating or contributing to the support of an athletic
team, club, league, or association.
         B.   The playing fields are not used for any profit-making activity at
any time during the year.
      (2)   It uses the proceeds of bingo it conducts exclusively for the
operation, maintenance, and improvement of its playing fields of the type
described in division (1) of this definition.
(R.C. § 2915.01)
§ 630.02 GAMBLING IN GENERAL.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Engage in bookmaking, or knowingly engage in conduct that
facilitates bookmaking.
      (2)   Establish, promote or operate or knowingly engage in conduct that
facilitates any game of chance conducted for profit or any scheme of chance.
      (3)   Knowingly procure, transmit, exchange or engage in conduct that
facilitates the procurement, transmission or exchange of information for use in
establishing odds or determining winners in connection with bookmaking or with
any game of chance conducted for profit or any scheme of chance.
      (4)   Engage in betting or in playing any scheme or game of chance as a
substantial source of income or livelihood.
      (5)   Conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a sweepstakes with the
use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a sweepstakes terminal device facility
and either:
         A.   Give to another person any item described in R.C. § 2915.01(VV)
(1), (VV)(2), (VV)(3), or (VV)(4) as a prize for playing or participating in a
sweepstakes; or
         B.   Give to another person any merchandise prize, or a redeemable
voucher for a merchandise prize, the wholesale value of which is in excess of
$10 and which is awarded as a single entry for playing or participating in a
sweepstakes. Redeemable vouchers shall not be redeemable for a merchandise
prize that has a wholesale value of more than $10.
      (6)   Conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a sweepstakes with the
use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a sweepstakes terminal device facility
without first obtaining a current annual “certificate of registration” from the
Attorney General as required by R.C. § 2915.02(F).
      (7)   With purpose to violate division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4),
(a)(5), or (a)(6) of this section, acquire, possess, control or operate any
gambling device.
   (b)   For purposes of division (a)(1) of this section, a person facilitates
bookmaking if the person in any way knowingly aids an illegal bookmaking
operation, including without limitation placing a bet with a person engaged in
or facilitating illegal bookmaking. For purposes of division (a)(2) of this
section, a person facilitates a game of chance conducted for profit or a scheme
of chance if the person in any way knowingly aids in the conduct or operation
of any such game or scheme, including without limitation playing any such game
or scheme.
   (c)   This section does not prohibit conduct in connection with gambling
expressly permitted by law.
   (d)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   Games of chance, if all of the following apply:
         A.   The games of chance are not craps for money or roulette for
money.
         B.   The games of chance are conducted by a charitable organization
that is and has received from the Internal Revenue Service a determination
letter that is currently in effect, stating that the organization is exempt
from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(3).
         C.   The games of chance are conducted at festivals of the charitable
organization that are conducted not more than a total of five days a calendar
year, and are conducted on premises owned by the charitable organization for a
period of no less than one year immediately preceding the conducting of the
games of chance, on premises leased from a governmental unit, or on premises
that are leased from a veteran’s or fraternal organization and that have been
owned by the lessor veteran’s or fraternal organization for a period of no less
than one year immediately preceding the conducting of the games of chance. A
charitable organization shall not lease premises from a veteran’s or fraternal
organization to conduct a festival described in this division, if the veteran’s
or fraternal organization already has leased the premises 12 times during the
preceding year to charitable organizations for that purpose. If a charitable
organization leases premises from a veteran’s or fraternal organization to
conduct a festival described in this division, the charitable organization
shall not pay a rental rate for the premises per day of the festival that
exceeds the rental rate per bingo session that a charitable organization may
pay under R.C. § 2915.09(B)(1) or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance when it leases premises from another charitable organization to
conduct bingo games.
         D.   All of the money or assets received from the games of chance
after deduction only of prizes paid out during the conduct of the games of
chance are used by, given, donated or otherwise transferred to any organization
that is described in IRC 509(a)(1), (a)(2) or (a)(3) and is either a
governmental unit or an organization that is tax exempt under IRC 501(a) and
described in IRC 501(c)(3).
         E.   The games of chance are not conducted during or within ten hours
of a bingo game conducted for amusement purposes only pursuant to R.C. §
2915.12 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance. No person shall
receive any commission, wage, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity or other
form of compensation, directly or indirectly, for operating or assisting in the
operation of any game of chance.
      (2)   Any tag fishing tournament, as defined in R.C. § 1531.01, operated
under a permit issued under R.C. § 1533.92.
      (3)   Bingo conducted by a charitable organization that holds a license
issued under R.C. § 2915.08.
   (e)   Division (d) of this section shall not be construed to authorize the
sale, lease or other temporary or permanent transfer of the right to conduct
games of chance, as granted by that division, by any charitable organization
that is granted that right.
   (f)   Any person desiring to conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a
sweepstakes with the use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a sweepstakes
terminal device facility shall first register with the Office of the Attorney
General and obtain an annual certificate of registration by providing a filing
fee of $200 and all information as required by rule adopted under R.C. §
2915.02(H). Not later than the tenth day of each month, each sweepstakes
terminal device operator shall file a sweepstakes terminal device monthly
report with the Attorney General and provide a filing fee of $50 and all
information required by rule adopted under R.C. § 2915.02(H). All information
provided to the Attorney General under this division shall be available to law
enforcement upon request.
   (g)   (1)   A person may apply to the Attorney General, on a form prescribed
by the Attorney General, for a certificate of compliance that the person is not
operating a sweepstakes terminal device facility. The form shall require the
person to include the address of the business location where sweepstakes
terminal devices will be used and to make the following certifications:
         A.   That the person will not use more than two sweepstakes terminal
devices at the business location;
         B.   That the retail value of sweepstakes prizes to be awarded at the
business location using sweepstakes terminal devices during a reporting period
will be less than 3% of the gross revenue received at the business location
during the reporting period;
         C.   That no other form of gaming except lottery ticket sales as
authorized under R.C. Chapter 3770 will be conducted at the business location
or in an adjoining area of the business location;
         D.   That any sweepstakes terminal device at the business location
will not allow any deposit of any money, coin, or token, or the use of any
credit card, debit card, prepaid card, or any other method of similar payment
to be used, directly or indirectly, to participate in a sweepstakes;
         E.   That notification of any prize will not take place on the same
day as a participant’s sweepstakes entry; and
         F.   That the person consents to provide any other information to the
Attorney General as required by rule adopted under R.C. § 2915.02(H).
      (2)   The filing fee for a certificate of compliance is $250. The
Attorney General may charge up to an additional $250 for reasonable expenses
resulting from any investigation related to an application for a certificate of
compliance.
      (3)   A certificate of compliance is effective for one year. The
certificate holder may reapply for a certificate of compliance. A person issued
a certificate of compliance shall file semiannual reports with the
Attorney General stating the number of sweepstakes terminal devices at the
business location and that the retail value of prizes awarded at the business
location using sweepstakes terminal devices is less than 3% of the gross
revenue received at the business location.
   (h)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of gambling, a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of any gambling
offense, gambling is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
Notwithstanding this division, failing to file a sweepstakes terminal device
monthly report as required by division (f) of this section or the semiannual
report required by division (g) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 2915.02(A) - (G), (K))
§ 630.03 OPERATING A GAMBLING HOUSE.
   (a)   No person, being the owner or lessee, or having custody, control, or
supervision of premises, shall:
      (1)   Use or occupy the premises for gambling in violation of Ohio R.C.
2915.02 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (2)   Recklessly permit the premises to be used or occupied for gambling
in violation of Ohio R.C. 2915.02 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of operating a
gambling house, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously
has been convicted of a gambling offense, operating a gambling house is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate State law.
   (c)   Premises used or occupied in violation of this section constitute a
nuisance subject to abatement under Ohio R.C. Chapter 3767.
(ORC 2915.03)
§ 630.04 PUBLIC GAMING.
   (a)   No person, while at a hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall,
or other place of public accommodation, business, amusement, or resort shall
make a bet or play any game of chance or scheme of chance.
   (b)   No person, being the owner or lessee, or having custody, control, or
supervision of a hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall, or other place
of public accommodation, business, amusement, or resort shall recklessly permit
those premises to be used or occupied in violation of division (a) of this
section.
   (c)   Divisions (a) and (b) of this section do not prohibit conduct in
connection with gambling expressly permitted by law.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of public gaming. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, public gaming is a minor misdemeanor. If
the offender previously has been convicted of any gambling offense, public
gaming is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (e)   Premises used or occupied in violation of division (b) of this section
constitute a nuisance subject to abatement under R.C. Chapter 3767.
(ORC 2915.04)
§ 630.05 CHEATING.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall engage in conduct designed to corrupt the outcome
of any of the following:
      (1)   The subject of a bet.
      (2)   A contest of knowledge, skill, or endurance that is not an athletic
or sporting event.
      (3)   A scheme or game of chance.
      (4)   Bingo.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Offer, give, solicit, or accept anything of value to corrupt the
outcome of an athletic or sporting event.
      (2)   Engage in conduct designed to corrupt the outcome of an athletic or
sporting event.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
cheating. Except as otherwise provided in this division, cheating is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the potential gain from the cheating is one
thousand dollars ($1,000) or more or if the offender previously has been
convicted of any gambling offense or of any theft offense as defined in Ohio
R.C. 2913.01, cheating is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate State
law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of
corrupting sports. Corrupting sports is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate State law.
(ORC 2915.05)
§ 630.06 RESPONSIBILITY OF CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION CONDUCTING BINGO GAME.
   (a)   No charitable organization that conducts bingo shall fail to do any of
the following:
      (1)   Own all of the equipment used to conduct bingo or lease that
equipment from a charitable organization that is licensed to conduct bingo, or
from the landlord of a premises where bingo is conducted, for a rental rate
that is not more than is customary and reasonable for that equipment;
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (a)(3) of this section,
use all of the gross receipts from bingo for paying prizes, for reimbursement
of expenses for or for renting premises in which to conduct bingo, for
reimbursement of expenses for or for purchasing or leasing bingo supplies used
in conducting bingo, for reimbursement of expenses for or for hiring security
personnel, for reimbursement of expenses for or for advertising bingo, or for
reimbursement of other expenses or for other expenses listed in the definition
for “expenses” in R.C. § 2915.01, provided that the amount of the receipts so
spent is not more than is customary and reasonable for a similar purchase,
lease, hiring, advertising or expense. If the building in which bingo is
conducted is owned by the charitable organization conducting bingo and the
bingo conducted includes a form of bingo described in division (1) of the
definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01, the charitable organization may deduct
from the total amount of the gross receipts from each session a sum equal to
the lesser of $600 or 45% of the gross receipts from the bingo described in
that division as consideration for the use of the premises;
      (3)   Use, or give, donate, or otherwise transfer, all of the net profit
derived from bingo described in R.C. § 2915.01(O)(1) for a charitable purpose
listed in its license application and described in R.C. § 2915.01(V), or
distribute all of the net profit from the proceeds of the sale of instant bingo
or electronic instant bingo as stated in its license application and in
accordance with R.C. § 2915.101, as applicable.
   (b)   No charitable organization that conducts a bingo game described in
division (1) of the definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01 shall fail to do
any of the following:
      (1)   Conduct the bingo game on premises that are owned by the charitable
organization, on premises that are owned by another charitable organization and
leased from that charitable organization for a rental rate not in excess of the
lesser of $650 per bingo session or 45% of the gross receipts of the bingo
session, on premises that are leased from a person other than a charitable
organization for a rental rate that is not more than is customary and
reasonable for premises that are similar in location, size and quality but not
in excess of $450 per bingo session, or on premises that are owned by a person
other than a charitable organization, that are leased from that person by
another charitable organization, and that are subleased from that other
charitable organization by the charitable organization for a rental rate not in
excess of $450 per bingo session. No charitable organization is required to pay
property taxes or assessments on premises that the charitable organization
leases from another person to conduct bingo sessions. If the charitable
organization leases from a person other than a charitable organization the
premises on which it conducts bingo sessions, the lessor of the premises shall
provide only the premises to the organization and shall not provide the
organization with bingo game operators, security personnel, concessions or
concession operators, bingo supplies, or any other type of service. A
charitable organization shall not lease or sublease premises that it owns or
leases to more than three other charitable organizations per calendar week for
the purpose of conducting bingo sessions on the premises. A person that is not
a charitable organization shall not lease premises that it owns, leases or
otherwise is empowered to lease to more than three charitable organizations per
calendar week for conducting bingo sessions on the premises. In no case shall
more than nine bingo sessions be conducted on any premises in any calendar
week;
      (2)   Display its license conspicuously at the premises where the bingo
session is conducted;
      (3)   Conduct the bingo session in accordance with division (1) of the
definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01.
   (c)   No charitable organization that conducts a bingo game described in
division (1) of the definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01 shall do any of the
following:
      (1)   Pay any compensation to a bingo game operator for operating a bingo
session that is conducted by the charitable organization or for preparing,
selling or serving food or beverages at the site of the bingo session, permit
any auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization to pay
compensation to any bingo game operator who prepares, sells or serves food or
beverages at a bingo session conducted by the charitable organization, or
permit any auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization to prepare,
sell or serve food or beverages at a bingo session conducted by the charitable
organization, if the auxiliary unit or society pays any compensation to the
bingo game operators who prepare, sell or serve the food or beverages;
      (2)   Pay consulting fees to any person for any services performed in
relation to the bingo session;
      (3)   Pay concession fees to any person who provides refreshments to the
participants in the bingo session;
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(4) of this section,
conduct more than three bingo sessions in any seven-day period. A volunteer
firefighter’s organization or a volunteer rescue service organization that
conducts not more than five bingo sessions in a calendar year may conduct more
than three bingo sessions in a seven-day period after notifying the Attorney
General when it will conduct the sessions;
      (5)   Pay out more than $6,000 in prizes for bingo games described in
R.C. § 2915.01(S)(1) during any bingo session that is conducted by the
charitable organization. PRIZES does not include awards from the conduct of
instant bingo;
      (6)   Conduct a bingo session at any time during the eight-hour period
between 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m., at any time during, or within ten hours of, a
bingo game conducted for amusement only pursuant to R.C. § 2915.12 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, at any premises not specified on
its license, or on any day of the week or during any time period not specified
on its license. This division does not prohibit the sale of instant bingo
tickets beginning at 9:00 a.m. for a bingo session that begins at 10:00 a.m. If
circumstances make it impractical for the charitable organization to conduct a
bingo session at the premises, or on the day of the week or at the time
specified on its license or if a charitable organization wants to conduct bingo
sessions on a day of the week or at a time other than the day or time specified
on its license, the charitable organization may apply in writing to the
Attorney General for an amended license pursuant to R.C. § 2915.08(J). A
charitable organization may apply twice in each calendar year for an amended
license to conduct bingo sessions on a day of the week or at a time other than
the day or time specified on its license. If the amended license is granted,
the organization may conduct bingo sessions at the premises, on the day of the
week, and at the time specified on its amended license;
      (7)   Permit any person whom the charitable organization knows, or should
have known, is under the age of 18 to work as a bingo game operator;
      (8)   Permit any person whom the charitable organization knows, or should
have known, has been convicted of a felony or gambling offense in any
jurisdiction to be a bingo game operator;
      (9)   Permit the lessor of the premises on which the bingo session is
conducted, if the lessor is not a charitable organization, to provide the
charitable organization with bingo game operators, security personnel,
concessions, bingo supplies or any other type of service;
      (10)   Purchase or lease bingo supplies from any person except a
distributor issued a license under R.C. § 2915.081;
      (11)   A.   Use or permit the use of electronic bingo aids except under
the following circumstances:
            1.   For any single participant, not more than 90 bingo faces can
be played using an electronic bingo aid or aids.
            2.   The charitable organization shall provide a participant using
an electronic bingo aid with corresponding paper bingo cards or sheets.
            3.   The total price of bingo faces played with an electronic bingo
aid shall be equal to the total price of the same number of bingo faces played
with a paper bingo card or sheet sold at the same bingo session but without an
electronic bingo aid.
            4.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be part of an electronic
network other than a network that includes only bingo aids and devices that are
located on the premises at which the bingo is being conducted or be interactive
with any device not located on the premises at which the bingo is being
conducted.
            5.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be used to participate in bingo
that is conducted at a location other than the location at which the bingo
session is conducted and at which the electronic bingo aid is used.
            6.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be used to provide for the
input of numbers and letters announced by a bingo caller other than the bingo
caller who physically calls the numbers and letters at the location at which
the bingo session is conducted and at which the electronic bingo aid is used.
         B.   The Attorney General may adopt rules in accordance with R.C.
Chapter 119 that govern the use of electronic bingo aids. The rules may include
a requirement that an electronic bingo aid be capable of being audited by the
Attorney General to verify the number of bingo cards or sheets played during
each bingo session.
      (12)   Permit any person the charitable organization knows, or should
have known, to be under 18 years of age to play bingo described in division (1)
of the definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01.
   (d)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (d)(3) of this section,
no charitable organization shall provide to a bingo game operator, and no bingo
game operator shall receive or accept, any commission, wage, salary, reward,
tip, donation, gratuity or other form of compensation, directly or indirectly,
regardless of the source, for conducting bingo or providing other work or labor
at the site of bingo during a bingo session.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (d)(3) of this section, no
charitable organization shall provide to a bingo game operator any commission,
wage, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity, or other form of compensation,
directly or indirectly regardless of the source, for conducting instant bingo,
electronic instant bingo, or both other than at a bingo session at the site of
instant bingo, electronic instant bingo, or both other than at a bingo session.
      (3)   Nothing in this division (d) of this section prohibits an employee
of a fraternal organization, veteran’s organization or sporting organization
from selling instant bingo tickets or cards to the organization’s members or
invited guests, as long as no portion of the employee’s compensation is paid
from any receipts of bingo.
   (e)   Notwithstanding division (b)(1) of this section, a charitable
organization that, prior to December 6, 1977, has entered into written
agreements for the lease of premises it owns to another charitable organization
or other charitable organizations for the conducting of bingo sessions so that
more than two bingo sessions are conducted per calendar week on the premises,
and a person that is not a charitable organization and that, prior to December
6, 1977, has entered into written agreements for the lease of premises it owns
to charitable organizations for the conducting of more than two bingo sessions
per calendar week on the premises, may continue to lease the premises to those
charitable organizations, provided that no more than four sessions are
conducted per calendar week, that the lessor organization or person has
notified the Attorney General in writing of the organizations that will conduct
the sessions and the days of the week and the times of the day on which the
sessions will be conducted, that the initial lease entered into with each
organization that will conduct the sessions was filed with the Attorney General
prior to December 6, 1977, and that each organization that will conduct the
sessions was issued a license to conduct bingo games by the Attorney General
prior to December 6, 1977.
   (f)   This section does not prohibit a bingo licensed charitable
organization or a game operator from giving any person an instant bingo ticket
as a prize.
   (g)   Whoever violates division (a)(2) of this section is guilty of
illegally conducting a bingo game, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law. Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a)(1), (a)(3), (b)(1), (b)(2), (b)(3), (c)(1) to (c)(11), or (d) of
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has
been convicted of a violation of division (a)(1), (a)(3), (b)(1), (b)(2), (b)
(3), (c)(1) to (c)(11), or (d) of this section, a violation of division (a)(1),
(a)(3), (b)(1), (b)(2), (b)(3), (c)(1) to (c)(11), or (d) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. Whoever violates division (c)(12) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted of a violation of division (c)(12) of this
section, a violation of division (c)(12) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.09)
§ 630.07 MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS BY CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS.
   (a)   No charitable organization that conducts bingo or a game of chance
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2915.02(D), or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, shall fail to maintain the following records for at least three
years from the date on which the bingo or game of chance is conducted:
      (1)   An itemized list of the gross receipts of each bingo session, each
game of instant bingo by serial number, each electronic instant bingo game by
serial number, each raffle, each punch board game, and each game of chance, and
an itemized list of the gross profits of each game of instant bingo by serial
number and each electronic instant bingo game by serial number;
      (2)   An itemized list of all expenses, other than prizes, that are
incurred in conducting bingo, the name of each person to whom the expenses are
paid, and a receipt for all of the expenses;
      (3)   A list of all prizes awarded during each bingo session, each
raffle, each punch board game, and each game of chance conducted by the
charitable organization, the total prizes awarded from each game of instant
bingo by serial number and each electronic instant bingo game by serial number,
and the name, address, and social security number of all persons who are
winners of prizes of $600 or more in value;
      (4)   An itemized list of the recipients of the net profit of bingo or
game of chance, including the name and address of each recipient to whom the
money is distributed, and if the organization uses the net profit of bingo, or
the money or assets received from a game of chance, for any charitable or other
purpose set forth in Ohio R.C. 2915.01(V), Ohio R.C. 2915.02(D), or Ohio R.C.
2915.101, a list of each purpose and an itemized list of each expenditure for
each purpose;
      (5)   The number of persons who participate in any bingo session or game
of chance that is conducted by the charitable organization;
      (6)   A list of receipts from the sale of food and beverages by the
charitable organization or one of its auxiliary units or societies, if the
receipts were excluded from “gross receipts” under Ohio R.C. 2915.01(T);
      (7)   An itemized list of all expenses incurred at each bingo session,
each raffle, each punch board game or each game of instant bingo or electronic
instant bingo conducted by the charitable organization in the sale of food and
beverages by the charitable organization or by an auxiliary unit or society of
the charitable organization, the name of each person to whom the expenses are
paid, and a receipt for all of the expenses.
   (b)   A charitable organization shall keep the records that it is required
to maintain pursuant to division (a) of this section at its principal place of
business in this State or at its headquarters in this State and shall notify
the Attorney General of the location at which those records are kept.
   (c)   The gross profit from each bingo session or game described in division
(1) or (2) of the definition of “bingo” in Ohio R.C. 2915.01 shall be deposited
into a checking account devoted exclusively to the bingo session or game.
Payments for allowable expenses incurred in conducting the bingo session or
game and payments to recipients of some or all of the net profit of the bingo
session or game shall be made only by checks or electronic fund transfers drawn
on the bingo session or game account.
   (d)   Each charitable organization shall conduct and record an inventory of
all of its bingo supplies as of the first day of November of each year.
   (e)   The Attorney General may adopt rules in accordance with Ohio R.C.
Chapter 119 that establish standards of accounting, record keeping, and
reporting to ensure that gross receipts from bingo or games of chance are
properly accounted for.
   (f)   A distributor shall maintain, for a period of three years after the
date of its sale or other provision, a record of each instance of its selling
or otherwise providing to another person bingo supplies for use in this State.
The record shall include all of the following for each instance:
      (1)   The name of the manufacturer from which the distributor purchased
the bingo supplies and the date of the purchase;
      (2)   The name and address of the charitable organization or other
distributor to which the bingo supplies were sold or otherwise provided;
      (3)   A description that clearly identifies the bingo supplies;
      (4)   Invoices that include the nonrepeating serial numbers of all paper
bingo cards and sheets and all instant bingo deals sold or otherwise provided
to each charitable organization.
   (g)   A manufacturer shall maintain, for a period of three years after the
date of its sale or other provision, a record of each instance of its selling
or otherwise providing bingo supplies for use in this State. The record shall
include all of the following for each instance:
      (1)   The name and address of the distributor to whom the bingo supplies
were sold or otherwise provided;
      (2)   A description that clearly identifies the bingo supplies, including
serial numbers;
      (3)   Invoices that include the nonrepeating serial numbers of all paper
bingo cards and sheets and all instant bingo deals sold or otherwise provided
to each distributor.
   (h)   (1)   The Attorney General or any law enforcement agency may do all of
the following:
         A.   Investigate any charitable organization, distributor, or
manufacturer or any officer, agent, trustee, member, or employee of the
organization, distributor, or manufacturer;
         B.   Examine the accounts and records of the charitable organization,
distributor, or manufacturer or of any officer, agent, trustee, member, or
employee of the organization, distributor, or manufacturer;
         C.   Conduct inspections, audits and observations of bingo or games of
chance;
         D.   Conduct inspections of the premises where bingo or games of
chance are conducted or where bingo supplies are manufactured or distributed;
         E.   Take any other necessary and reasonable action to determine if a
violation of any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915 has occurred
and to determine whether R.C. § 2915.11, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, has been complied with.
      (2)   If any law enforcement agency has reasonable grounds to believe
that a charitable organization, distributor, or manufacturer or an officer,
agent, trustee, member, or employee of the organization, distributor, or
manufacturer has violated any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915,
the law enforcement agency may proceed by action in the proper court to enforce
this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915, provided that the law enforcement agency
shall give written notice to the Attorney General when commencing an action as
described in this division.
   (i)   No person shall destroy, alter, conceal, withhold, or deny access to
any accounts or records of a charitable organization, distributor, or
manufacturer that have been requested for examination, or obstruct, impede, or
interfere with any inspection, audit, or observation of bingo or a game of
chance, of premises where bingo or a game of chance is conducted, or of
premises where bingo supplies are manufactured or distributed, or refuse to
comply with any reasonable request of, or obstruct, impede, or interfere with
any other reasonable action undertaken by, the Attorney General or a law
enforcement agency pursuant to division (h) of this section.
   (j)   Whoever violates division (a) or (i) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2915.10)
§ 630.08 QUALIFICATIONS OF BINGO GAME OPERATOR.
   (a)   No person shall be a bingo game operator unless the person is 18 years
of age or older.
   (b)   No person who has been convicted of a felony or a gambling offense in
any jurisdiction shall be a bingo game operator.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(ORC 2915.11)
§ 630.09 EXEMPTION FOR BINGO GAMES CONDUCTED FOR AMUSEMENT.
   (a)   Sections
630.06 to
630.13 and
630.15 do not apply to bingo games that are conducted for the purpose of
amusement only. A bingo game is conducted for the purpose of amusement only if
it complies with all of the requirements specified in either division (a)(1) or
(a)(2) of this section.
      (1)   A.   The participants do not pay any money or any other thing of
value, including an admission fee or any fee, for bingo cards or sheets,
objects to cover the spaces, or other devices used in playing bingo, for the
privilege of participating in the bingo game, or to defray any costs of the
game, or pay tips or make donations during or immediately before or after the
bingo game.
         B.   All prizes awarded during the course of the game are non-
monetary, and in the form of merchandise, goods, or entitlement to goods or
services only, and the total value of all prizes awarded during the game is
less than one hundred dollars ($100.00).
         C.   No commission, wages, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity, or
other form of compensation, either directly or indirectly, and regardless of
the source, is paid to any bingo game operator for work or labor performed at
the site of the bingo game.
         D.   The bingo game is not conducted either during or within ten hours
of any of the following:
            1.   A bingo session during which a charitable bingo game is
conducted pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2915.07 through 2915.11 or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
            2.   A scheme or game of chance, or bingo described in Ohio R.C.
2915.01(O)(2).
         E.   The number of players participating in the bingo game does not
exceed 50.
      (2)   A.   The participants do not pay money or any other thing of value
as an admission fee, and no participant is charged more than twenty-five cents
($0.25) to purchase a bingo card or sheet, objects to cover the spaces, or
other devices used in playing bingo.
         B.   The total amount of money paid by all of the participants for
bingo cards or sheets, objects to cover the spaces, or other devices used in
playing bingo does not exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00).
         C.   All of the money paid for bingo cards or sheets, objects to cover
spaces, or other devices used in playing bingo is used only to pay winners
monetary and nonmonetary prizes and to provide refreshments.
         D.   The total value of all prizes awarded during the game does not
exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00).
         E.   No commission, wages, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity, or
other form of compensation, either directly or indirectly, and regardless of
the source, is paid to any bingo game operator for work or labor performed at
the site of the bingo game.
         F.   The bingo game is not conducted during or within ten hours of
either of the following:
            1.   A bingo session during which a charitable bingo game is
conducted pursuant to R.C. §§ 2915.07 through 2915.15 or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance;
            2.   A scheme of chance or a game of chance, or bingo described in
Ohio R.C. 2915.01(O)(2).
         G.   All of the participants reside at the premises where the bingo
game is conducted.
         H.   The bingo games are conducted on different days of the week and
not more than twice in a calendar week.
   (b)   The Attorney General or any local law enforcement agency may
investigate the conduct of a bingo game that purportedly is conducted for
purposes of amusement only if there is reason to believe that the purported
amusement bingo game does not comply with the requirements of either division
(a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section. A local law enforcement agency may proceed by
action in the proper court to enforce this section if the local law enforcement
agency gives written notice to the Attorney General when commencing the action.
(ORC 2915.12)
§ 630.10 PROHIBITIONS WHERE INSTANT BINGO GAME IS CONDUCTED.
   (a)   No charitable organization that conducts instant bingo shall do any of
the following:
      (1)   Fail to comply with the requirements of R.C. § 2915.09(A)(1), (A)
(2) and (A)(3), or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (2)   Conduct instant bingo unless either of the following applies:
         A.   That organization is, and has received from the Internal Revenue
Service a determination letter that is currently in effect stating that the
organization is, exempt from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a), is
described in IRC 501(c)(3), is a charitable organization as defined in R.C. §
2915.01, is in good standing in the state pursuant to R.C. § 2915.08, and is in
compliance with R.C. Chapter 1716;
         B.   That organization is, and has received from the Internal Revenue
Service a determination letter that is currently in effect stating that the
organization is, exempt from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a), is
described in IRC 501(c)(7), (c)(8), (c)(10) or (c)(19) or is a veteran’s
organization described in IRC 501(c)(4), and conducts instant bingo under R.C.
§ 2915.13.
      (3)   Conduct instant bingo on any day, at any time, or at any premises
not specified on the organization’s license issued pursuant to R.C. § 2915.08;
      (4)   Permit any person whom the organization knows or should have known
has been convicted of a felony or gambling offense in any jurisdiction to be a
bingo game operator in the conduct of instant bingo;
      (5)   Purchase or lease supplies used to conduct instant bingo or punch
board games from any person except a distributor licensed under R.C. §
2915.081;
      (6)   Sell or provide any instant bingo ticket or card for a price
different from the price printed on it by the manufacturer on either the
instant bingo ticket or card or on the game flare;
      (7)   Sell an instant bingo ticket or card to a person under 18 years of
age;
      (8)   Fail to keep unsold instant bingo tickets or cards for less than
three years;
      (9)   Pay any compensation to a bingo game operator for conducting
instant bingo that is conducted by the organization or for preparing, selling
or serving food or beverages at the site of the instant bingo game, permit any
auxiliary unit or society of the organization to pay compensation to any bingo
game operator who prepares, sells or serves food or beverages at an instant
bingo game conducted by the organization, or permit any auxiliary unit or
society of the organization to prepare, sell or serve food or beverages at an
instant bingo game conducted by the organization, if the auxiliary unit or
society pays any compensation to the bingo game operators who prepare, sell or
serve the food or beverages;
      (10)   Pay fees to any person for any services performed in relation to
an instant bingo game, except as provided in R.C. § 2915.093(D);
      (11)   Pay fees to any person who provides refreshments to the
participants in an instant bingo game;
      (12)   A.   Allow instant bingo tickets or cards to be sold to bingo game
operators at a premises at which the organization sells instant bingo tickets
or cards or to be sold to employees of a D permit holder who are working at a
premises at which instant bingo tickets or cards are sold;
         B.   Division (a)(12)A. of this section does not prohibit a licensed
charitable organization or a bingo game operator from giving any person an
instant bingo ticket as a prize in place of a cash prize won by a participant
in an instant bingo game. In no case shall an instant bingo ticket or card be
sold or provided for a price different from the price printed on it by the
manufacturer on either the instant bingo ticket or card or on the game flare.
      (13)   Fail to display its bingo license, and the serial numbers of the
deal of instant bingo tickets or cards to be sold, conspicuously at each
premises at which it sells instant bingo tickets or cards;
      (14)   Possess a deal of instant bingo tickets or cards that was not
purchased from a distributor licensed under R.C. § 2915.081 as reflected on an
invoice issued by the distributor that contains all of the information required
by R.C. § 2915.10(E);
      (15)   Fail, once it opens a deal of instant bingo tickets or cards, to
continue to sell the tickets or cards in that deal until the tickets or cards
with the top two highest tiers of prizes in that deal are sold;
      (16)   Possess bingo supplies that were not obtained in accordance with
R.C. Chapter 2915.
   (b)   A charitable organization may purchase, lease, or use instant bingo
ticket dispensers to sell instant bingo tickets or cards.
   (c)   Pursuant to R.C. § 2915.091(C), the Attorney General may adopt rules
in accordance with R.C. Chapter 119 that govern the conduct of instant bingo by
charitable organizations.
   (d)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section or a rule adopted under
division (c) of this section is guilty of illegal instant bingo conduct. Except
as otherwise provided in this division, illegal instant bingo conduct is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted
of a violation of division (a) of this section or of such a rule adopted under
division (c) of this section, illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2915.091)
§ 630.11 RAFFLE DRAWINGS.
   (a)   (1)   Subject to division (a)(2) of this section, a person or entity
may conduct a raffle to raise money for the person or entity and does not need
a license to conduct bingo in order to conduct a raffle drawing that is not for
profit if the person or entity is any of the following:
         A.   Exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and
described in IRC § 501(c)(3);
         B.   A school district, community school established under R.C.
Chapter 3314, STEM school established under R.C. Chapter 3326, college-
preparatory boarding school established under R.C. Chapter 3328, or chartered
nonpublic school;
         C.   Exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and
described in IRC § 501(c)(4), 501(c)(6), 501(c)(7), 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10), or
501(c)(19).
      (2)   If a person or entity that is described in division (a)(1)C. of
this section conducts a raffle, the person or entity shall distribute at least
50% of the net profit from the raffle to a charitable purpose described in R.C.
§ 2915.01(V) or to a department or agency of the federal government, the state,
or any political subdivision.
   (b)   Except as provided in division (a) of this section, no person shall
conduct a raffle drawing that is for profit or a raffle drawing that is not for
profit.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of illegal
conduct of a raffle. Except as otherwise provided in this division, illegal
conduct of a raffle is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted of a violation of division (b) of this section,
illegal conduct of a raffle is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(R.C. § 2915.092)
§ 630.12 INSTANT BINGO OTHER THAN AT BINGO SESSIONS.
   (a)   As used in this section, RETAIL INCOME FROM ALL COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY
means the income that a person receives from the provision of goods, services
or activities that are provided at the location where instant bingo other than
at a bingo session is conducted, including the sale of instant bingo tickets. A
religious organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC
501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(3), at not more than one location at which
it conducts its charitable programs, may include donations from its members and
guests as retail income.
   (b)   (1)   If a charitable instant bingo organization conducts instant
bingo other than at a bingo session under a type III license issued under R.C.
§ 2915.08, the charitable instant bingo organization shall enter into a written
contract with the owner or lessor of the location at which the instant bingo is
conducted to allow the owner or lessor to assist in the conduct of instant
bingo other than at a bingo session, identify each location where the instant
bingo other than at a bingo session is being conducted, and identify the owner
or lessor of each location.
      (2)   A charitable instant bingo organization that conducts instant bingo
other than at a bingo session under a type III license issued under R.C. §
2915.08 is not required to enter into a written contract with the owner or
lessor of the location at which the instant bingo is conducted, provided that
the owner or lessor is not assisting in the conduct of the instant bingo other
than at a bingo session and provided that the conduct of the instant bingo
other than at a bingo session at that location is not more than five days per
calendar year and not more than ten hours per day.
   (c)   Except as provided in division (f) of this section, no charitable
instant bingo organization shall conduct instant bingo other than at a bingo
session at a location where the primary source of retail income from all
commercial activity at that location is the sale of instant bingo tickets.
   (d)   (1)   The owner or lessor of a location that enters into a contract
pursuant to division (b) of this section shall pay the full gross profit to the
charitable instant bingo organization, in return for the deal of instant bingo
tickets. The owner or lessor may retain the money that the owner or lessor
receives for selling the instant bingo tickets, provided, however, that after
the deal has been sold, the owner or lessor shall pay to the charitable instant
bingo organization the value of any unredeemed instant bingo prizes remaining
in the deal of instant bingo tickets. As used in this division, FULL GROSS
PROFIT means the amount by which the total receipts of all instant bingo
tickets, if the deal has been sold in full, exceeds the amount that would be
paid out if all prizes were redeemed.
      (2)   The charitable instant bingo organization shall pay 6% of the total
gross receipts of any deal of instant bingo tickets for the purpose of
reimbursing the owner or lessor for expenses described in this division.
      (3)   As used in this division, EXPENSES means those items provided for
in R.C. § 2915.01(GG)(4), (GG)(5), (GG)(6), (GG)(7), (GG)(8), (GG)(12), and
(GG)(13) and that percentage of the owner’s or lessor’s rent for the location
where instant bingo is conducted. Expenses, in the aggregate, shall not exceed
6% of the total gross receipts of any deal of instant bingo tickets.
   (e)   A charitable instant bingo organization shall provide the Attorney
General with all of the following information:
      (1)   That the charitable instant bingo organization has terminated a
contract entered into pursuant to division (b) of this section with an owner or
lessor of a location;
      (2)   That the charitable instant bingo organization has entered into a
written contract pursuant to division (b) of this section with a new owner or
lessor of a location;
      (3)   That the charitable instant bingo organization is aware of conduct
by the owner or lessor of a location at which instant bingo is conducted that
is in violation of R.C. Chapter 2915.
   (f)   Division (c) of this section does not apply to a volunteer
firefighter’s organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under
IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(3), that conducts instant bingo other
than at a bingo session on the premises where the organization conducts
firefighter training, that has conducted instant bingo continuously for at
least five years prior to July 1, 2003, and that, during each of those five
years, had gross receipts of at least $1,500,000.
(R.C. § 2915.093)
   (g)   (1)   Subject to the requirements of R.C. §§ 2915.14 and 2915.15
concerning electronic instant bingo, a veteran's organization, a fraternal
organization, or a sporting organization authorized to conduct a bingo session
pursuant to R.C. Chapter 2915 may conduct instant bingo, electronic instant
bingo, or both other than at a bingo session under a type III license issued
under R.C. § 2915.08 if all of the following apply:
         A.   The veteran's organization, fraternal organization or sporting
organization limits the sale of instant bingo or electronic instant bingo to 12
hours during any day, provided that the sale does not begin earlier than 10:00
a.m. and ends not later than 2:00 a.m.
         B.   The veteran's organization, fraternal organization or sporting
organization limits the sale of instant bingo or electronic instant bingo to
its own premises and to its own members and invited guests.
         C.   The veteran's organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization is raising money for an organization that is described in IRC 509
(a)(1), (a)(2) or (a)(3) and is either a governmental unit or an organization
that maintains its principal place of business in this state, that is exempt
from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(3),
and that is in good standing in this state and executes a written contract with
that organization as required in division (g)(2) of this section.
      (2)   If a veteran's organization, fraternal organization or sporting
organization authorized to conduct instant bingo or electronic instant bingo
pursuant to division (g)(1) of this section is raising money for another
organization that is described in IRC 509(a)(1), (a)(2) or (a)(3) and is either
a governmental unit or an organization that maintains its principal place of
business in this state, that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC
501(a) and described in IRC 501(c), and that is in good standing in this state,
the veteran's organization, fraternal organization, or sporting organization
shall execute a written contract with the organization that is described in IRC
509(a)(1), (a)(2) or (a)(3) and is either a governmental unit or an
organization that maintains its principal place of business in this state, that
is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC
501(c), and that is in good standing in this state in order to conduct instant
bingo or electronic instant bingo. That contract shall include a statement of
the percentage of the net proceeds that the veteran's, fraternal or sporting
organization will be distributing to the charitable organization that is
described in IRC 509(a)(1), (a)(2) or (a)(3) and is either a governmental unit
or an organization that maintains its principal place of business in this
state, that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a) and
described in IRC 501(c), and that is in good standing in this state.
      (3)   A.   If a veteran's organization, fraternal organization or
sporting organization authorized to conduct instant bingo or electronic instant
bingo pursuant to division (g)(1) of this section has been issued a liquor
permit under R.C. Chapter 4303, that permit may be subject to suspension,
revocation or cancellation if the veteran's organization, fraternal
organization or sporting organization violates a provision of this chapter or
R.C. Chapter 2915.
         B.   No veteran's organization, fraternal organization or sporting
organization that enters into a written contract pursuant to division (g)(2) of
this section shall violate any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915,
or permit, aid or abet any other person in violating any provision of this
chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915.
      (4)   A veteran's organization, fraternal organization or sporting
organization shall give all required proceeds earned from the conduct of
instant bingo or electronic instant bingo to the organization with which the
veteran's organization, fraternal organization or sporting organization has
entered into a written contract.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (g) of this section is guilty of illegal
instant bingo or electronic instant bingo conduct. Except as otherwise provided
in this division, illegal instant bingo or electronic instant bingo conduct is
a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been
convicted of a violation of division (g) of this section, illegal instant bingo
or electronic instant bingo conduct is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.13)
§ 630.13 RESTRICTIONS ON OWNER OR LESSOR OF LOCATION AT INSTANT BINGO.
   (a)   No owner or lessor of a location shall assist a charitable instant
bingo organization in the conduct of instant bingo other than at a bingo
session at that location unless the owner or lessor has entered into a written
contract, as described in Ohio R.C. 2915.093, with the charitable instant bingo
organization to assist in the conduct of instant bingo other than at a bingo
session.
   (b)   The location of the lessor or owner shall be designated as a location
where the charitable instant bingo organization conducts instant bingo other
than at a bingo session.
   (c)   No owner or lessor of a location that enters into a written contract
as prescribed in division (a) of this section shall violate any provision of
this chapter or Ohio R.C. Chapter 2915, or permit, aid, or abet any other
person in violating any provision of this chapter or Ohio R.C. Chapter 2915.
   (d)   No owner or lessor of a location that enters into a written contract
as prescribed in division (a) of this section shall violate the terms of the
contract.
   (e)   (1)   Whoever violates division (c) or (d) of this section is guilty
of illegal instant bingo conduct. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, illegal instant bingo conduct is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of division (c) or
(d) of this section, illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate State law.
      (2)   If an owner or lessor of a location knowingly, intentionally, or
recklessly violates division (c) or (d) of this section, any license that the
owner or lessor holds for the retail sale of any goods on the owner’s or
lessor’s premises that is issued by the State or a political subdivision is
subject to suspension, revocation, or payment of a monetary penalty at the
request of the Attorney General.
(ORC 2915.094)
§ 630.14 SKILL-BASED AMUSEMENT MACHINES; PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   (a)   No person shall give to another person any item described in division
(ff)(1), (ff)(2), (ff)(3) or (ff)(4) of §
630.01 in exchange for a noncash prize, toy, or novelty received as a reward
for playing or operating a skill-based amusement machine or for a free or
reduced-price game won on a skill-based amusement machine.
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of skill-based
amusement machine prohibited conduct. A violation of division (a) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree for each redemption of a prize
that is involved in the violation. If the offender previously has been
convicted of a violation of division (a) of this section, a violation of that
division is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate State law.
(ORC 2915.06)
   (c)   Any regulation of skill-based amusement machines shall be governed by
this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915 and not by R.C. Chapter 1345.
(R.C. § 2915.061)
§ 630.15 ELECTRONIC INSTANT BINGO; PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   (a)   No charitable organization shall conduct electronic instant bingo
unless all of the following are true:
      (1)   The organization is a veteran's organization described in R.C. §
2915.01(J), or is a fraternal organization described in R.C. § 2915.01(L), and
the organization qualified as a veteran's organization or fraternal
organization, as applicable, on or before June 30, 2021.
      (2)   The organization is a veteran's organization described in IRC 501
(c)(4) or is, and has received from the Internal Revenue Service a
determination letter that is currently in effect stating that the organization
is, exempt from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a), and is described in
IRC 501(c)(7), 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10), or 501(c)(19).
      (3)   The organization has not conducted a raffle in violation of R.C. §
2915.092(B) using an electronic raffle machine, as described in Ohio Veterans
and Fraternal Charitable Coalition v. DeWine, Case No. 13-CV-13610 (C.P.
Franklin Co. February 23, 2018), at any time on or after January 1, 2022.
   (b)   No charitable organization that conducts electronic instant bingo
shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Possess an electronic instant bingo system that was not obtained in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 2915 or with any rule adopted under R.C. Chapter
2915;
      (2)   Conduct electronic instant bingo on any day, at any time, or on any
premises not specified on the organization's type II or type III license issued
under R.C. § 2915.08;
      (3)   Hold more than one valid license to conduct electronic instant
bingo at any one time;
      (4)   Conduct electronic instant bingo on more than one premises or on
any premises other than the charitable organization's principal place of
business;
      (5)   Operate more than ten electronic bingo systems at the premises on
which the charitable organization conducts electronic instant bingo under its
license;
      (6)   Fail to display both of the following conspicuously at the premises
on which the charitable organization conducts electronic instant bingo:
         A.   The charitable organization's bingo license;
         B.   The serial number of each deal of electronic instant bingo
tickets being sold.
      (7)   Permit any person the charitable organization knows, or should have
known, to be under 18 years of age to play electronic instant bingo;
      (8)   Sell or provide to any person an electronic instant bingo ticket
for a price different from the price displayed on the game flare for that deal,
except that the charitable organization may give a participant who wins an
electronic instant bingo game an electronic instant bingo ticket as a prize in
place of a cash prize;
      (9)   Fail, once an electronic instant bingo deal is begun, to continue
to sell tickets in that deal until all prizes have been awarded;
      (10)   Permit any person whom the organization knows, or should have
known, has been convicted of a felony or gambling offense in any jurisdiction
to be a bingo game operator in the conduct of electronic instant bingo;
      (11)   Permit a bingo game operator to play electronic instant bingo;
      (12)   A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(12)B. of this
section, pay compensation to a bingo game operator for conducting electronic
instant bingo.
         B.   Division (b)(12)A. of this section does not prohibit an employee
of a veteran's organization or fraternal organization from redeeming electronic
instant bingo tickets or vouchers for the organization's members or invited
guests, so long as no portion of the employee's compensation is paid from any
bingo receipts.
      (13)   Pay consulting fees to any person in relation to electronic
instant bingo.
   (c)   No person shall sell, offer to sell, or otherwise provide or offer to
provide an electronic instant bingo system to any person for use in this
municipality unless the electronic instant bingo system has been approved under
R.C. § 2915.15.
   (d)   Whoever knowingly violates division (a), (b), or (c) of this section
or a rule adopted under R.C. § 2915.14(D) is guilty of illegal electronic
instant bingo conduct. Illegal electronic instant bingo conduct is a
misdemeanor of the first degree, except that if the offender previously has
been convicted of a violation of division (a) or (b) of this section, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or state law, or of a rule adopted
under R.C. § 2915.14(D), illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.14)
CHAPTER 636: OFFENSES RELATING TO PERSONS
636.001   Definitions.
636.01   Negligent homicide.
636.02   Assault.
636.03   Negligent assault.
636.04   Aggravated menacing.
636.045   Menacing by stalking.
636.05   Menacing.
636.06   Unlawful restraint.
636.07   Child stealing. (Repealed)
636.075   Criminal child enticement. (Repealed)
636.08   Coercion.
636.09   Curfew.
636.10   Abusing police, traffic control or corrections officers.
636.11   Endangering children.
636.12   Interference with custody.
636.125   Contributing to the unruliness or delinquency of a child.
636.13   Failing to provide for a person with a functional impairment.
636.14   Party lines to be yielded in emergencies. (Repealed)
636.15   Threatening or harassing telecommunications.
636.16   Placing harmful substance or objects in food or confection.
636.17   Domestic violence.
636.18   Safety of crowds attending live entertainment performances.
636.19   Hazing.
636.20   Illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products; transaction scans.
636.21   Ethnic intimidation.
636.22   Illegal use of a tracking device or application.
636.23   Unlawful collection of bodily substances.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar State law
   Juvenile Court - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 2151
   Parents’ liability for destructive acts of their children - see Ohio R.C.
3109.09
   Shelters for victims of domestic violence - see Ohio R.C. 3113.33 et seq.
   Vehicular homicide and vehicular manslaughter - see TRAF.
434.08
   Definitions generally - see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   “Physical harm to persons” defined - see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   “Serious physical harm to persons” defined - see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   Personal accountability for organizational conduct - see GEN. OFF.
606.09
   Sales of alcohol to underage persons; prohibitions and misrepresentations -
see GEN. OFF.
612.02,
612.10
   Drugs - see GEN. OFF. Ch.
624
   Disorderly conduct - see GEN. OFF.
648.04
   Sex related offenses - see GEN. OFF.
Ch. 666
§ 636.001 DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   As used in this chapter and any other provision of these Codified
Ordinances:
      (1)   ANOTHER’S UNBORN. or OTHER PERSON’S UNBORN. A member of the species
Homo sapiens who is or was carried in the womb of another during a period that
begins with fertilization and that continues unless and until live birth
occurs.
      (2)   UNLAWFUL TERMINATION OF ANOTHER’S PREGNANCY. Causing the death of
an unborn member of the species Homo sapiens who is or was carried in the womb
of another, as a result of injuries inflicted during the period that begins
with fertilization and that continues unless and until live birth occurs.
   (b)   Notwithstanding division (a) of this section, in no case shall the
definitions of the terms ANOTHER’S UNBORN, OTHER PERSON’S UNBORN. and UNLAWFUL
TERMINATION OF ANOTHER’S PREGNANCY. that are set forth in division (a) of this
section be applied or construed in any of the following manners:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(1) of this section, in
a manner so that the offense prohibits or is construed as prohibiting any
pregnant woman or her physician from performing an abortion with the consent of
the pregnant woman, with the consent of the pregnant woman implied by law in a
medical emergency, or with the approval of one otherwise authorized by law to
consent to medical treatment on behalf of the pregnant woman. An abortion that
violates the conditions described in the immediately preceding sentence may be
punished as any violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.01, 2903.02, 2903.03, 2903.04,
2903.05, 2903.06, 2903.08, 2903.11, 2903.12, 2903.13, 2903.14, 2903.21 or
2903.22, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, as applicable. An
abortion that does not violate the conditions described in the second
immediately preceding sentence but that does violate Ohio R.C. 2919.12, 2919.13
(B), 2919.15, 2919.151, 2919.17 or 2919.18, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, may be punished as a violation of such section, as
applicable.
      (2)   In a manner so that the offense is applied or is construed as
applying to a woman based on an act or omission of the woman that occurs while
she is or was pregnant and that results in any of the following:
         A.   Her delivery of a stillborn baby.
         B.   Her causing, in any other manner, the death in utero of a viable,
unborn human that she is carrying.
         C.   Her causing the death of her child who is born alive but who dies
from one or more injuries that are sustained while the child is a viable,
unborn human.
         D.   Her causing her child who is born alive to sustain one or more
injuries while the child is a viable, unborn human.
         E.   Her causing, threatening to cause, or attempting to cause, in any
other manner, an injury, illness, or other psychological illness or condition,
regardless of its duration or gravity, to a viable, unborn human that she is
carrying.
(ORC 2903.09)
§ 636.01 NEGLIGENT HOMICIDE.
   (a)   No person shall negligently cause the death of another or the unlawful
termination of another’s pregnancy by means of a deadly weapon or dangerous
ordnance, as defined in Ohio R.C. 2923.11.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of negligent homicide, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 2903.05)
Statutory reference:
   Reckless homicide, felony offense, see Ohio R.C. 2903.041
§ 636.02 ASSAULT.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly cause or attempt to cause physical harm to
another or to another’s unborn.
   (b)   No person shall recklessly cause serious physical harm to another or
to another’s unborn.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a) or (b) of this section is guilty of
assault. Except as provided in Ohio R.C. 2903.13(C), assault is a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
   (d)   If an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to assault when it
is a misdemeanor also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a specification as
described in R.C. § 2941.1423 (victim of the offense was a woman whom the
defendant knew was pregnant at the time of the offense) that was included in
the indictment, count in the indictment or information charging the offense,
the court shall sentence the offender to a mandatory jail term as provided in
R.C. § 2929.24(F).
   (e)   A prosecution for a violation of division (a) or (b) of this section
does not preclude a prosecution of a violation of any other section of the Ohio
Revised Code. One or more acts, a series of acts, or a course of behavior that
can be prosecuted under division (a) or (b) of this section or any other
section of the Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under division (a) or (b) of
this section, the other section of the Ohio Revised Code, the municipal
ordinance, or both sections. However, if an offender is convicted of or pleads
guilty to a violation of division (a) or (b) of this section and also is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of R.C. § 2903.22, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, based on the same conduct
involving the same victim that was the basis of the violation of division (a)
or (b) of this section, the offenses are allied offenses of similar import
under R.C. § 2941.25.
(ORC 2903.13)
Statutory reference:
   Aggravated and felonious assault, see Ohio R.C. 2903.11 and 2903.12
   Aggravated vehicular assault, felony, see Ohio R.C. 2903.08
   Felony assault offenses, see R.C. § 2903.13(C)
   Permitting child abuse, felony offense, see Ohio R.C. 2903.15
   Persons who may seek relief under anti-stalking protection order; ex parte
orders, see Ohio R.C. 2903.214
   Protection order as pretrial condition of release, see Ohio R.C. 2903.213
   Strangulation, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.18
   Vehicular assault and aggravated vehicular assault, felony offenses, see
R.C. § 2903.08
§ 636.03 NEGLIGENT ASSAULT.
   (a)   No person shall negligently, by means of a deadly weapon or dangerous
ordnance as defined in Ohio R.C. 2923.11, cause physical harm to another or to
another’s unborn.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of negligent assault, a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 2903.14)
§ 636.04 AGGRAVATED MENACING.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly cause another to believe that the offender
will cause serious physical harm to the person or property of the other person,
such other person’s unborn, or a member of that other person’s immediate
family. In addition to any other basis for the other person’s belief that the
offender will cause serious physical harm to the person or property of the
other person, the other person’s unborn, or a member of the other person’s
immediate family, the other person’s belief may be based on words or conduct of
the offender that are directed at or identify a corporation, association, or
other organization that employs the other person or to which the other person
belongs.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of aggravated menacing. Except
as otherwise provided in this division (b), aggravated menacing is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the victim of the offense is an officer or
employee of a public children services agency or a private child placing agency
and the offense relates to the officer’s or employee’s performance or
anticipated performance of official responsibilities or duties, aggravated
menacing is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate State law or, if the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to an offense of
violence, the victim of that prior offense was an officer or employee of a
public children services agency or private child placing agency, and that prior
offense related to the officer’s or employee’s performance or anticipated
performance of official responsibilities or duties, a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate State law.
   (c)   As used in this section, ORGANIZATION includes an entity that is a
governmental employer.
(ORC 2903.21)
§ 636.045 MENACING BY STALKING.
   (a)   Prohibited conduct.
      (1)   A.   No person by engaging in a pattern of conduct shall knowingly
cause another person to believe that the offender will cause physical harm to
the other person or a family or household member of the other person or cause
mental distress to the other person or a family or household member of the
other person. In addition to any other basis for the other person’s belief that
the offender will cause physical harm to the other person or the other person’s
family or household member or mental distress to the other person or the other
person’s family or household member, the other person’s belief or mental
distress may be based on words or conduct of the offender that are directed at
or identify a corporation, association, or other organization that employs the
other person or to which the other person belongs.
         B.   No person, through the use of any form of written communication
or any electronic method of remotely transferring information, including but
not limited to any computer, computer network, computer program, computer
system, or telecommunication device, shall post a message or use any
intentionally written or verbal graphic gesture with purpose to do either of
the following:
            1.   Violate division (a)(1)A. of this section;
            2.   Urge or incite another to commit a violation of division (a)
(1)A. of this section.
         C.   No person, with a sexual motivation, shall violate division (a)
(1)A. or (a)(1)B. of this section.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (a)(1) of this section is guilty of
menacing by stalking.
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (a)(2)B. of this
section, menacing by stalking is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         B.   Menacing by stalking is a felony, to be prosecuted under
appropriate State law, if any of the following applies:
            1.   The offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.211 or a violation of Ohio R.C.
2911.211, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to either of these
offenses.
            2.   In committing the offense under division (a)(1)A., (a)(1)B. or
(a)(1)C. of this section, the offender made a threat of physical harm to or
against the victim, or as a result of an offense committed under division (a)
(1)B. or (a)(1)C. of this section, a third person induced by the offender's
posted message made a threat of physical harm to or against the victim.
            3.   In committing the offense under division (a)(1)A., (a)(1)B. or
(a)(1)C. of this section, the offender trespassed on the land or premises where
the victim lives, is employed, or attends school, or as a result of an offense
committed under division (a)(1)B. or (a)(1)C. of this section, a third person
induced by the offender's posted message trespassed on the land or premises
where the victim lives, is employed, or attends school.
            4.   The victim of the offense is a minor.
            5.   The offender has a history of violence towards the victim or
any other person or a history of other violent acts towards the victim or any
other person.
            6.   While committing the offense under division (a)(1)A. of this
section or a violation of division (a)(1)C. of this section based on conduct in
violation of division (a)(1)A. of this section, the offender had a deadly
weapon on or about the offender's person or under the offender's control.
Division (a)(2)B.6. of this section does not apply in determining the penalty
for a violation of division (a)(1)B. of this section or a violation of division
(a)(1)C. of this section based on conduct in violation of division (a)(1)B. of
this section.
            7.   At the time of the commission of the offense, the offender was
the subject of a protection order issued under Ohio R.C. 2903.213 or Ohio R.C.
2903.214, regardless of whether or not the person to be protected under the
order is the victim of the offense or another person.
            8.   In committing the offense under division (a)(1)A., (a)(1)B. or
(a)(1)C. of this section, the offender caused serious physical harm to the
premises at which the victim resides, to the real property on which that
premises is located, or to any personal property located on that premises, or
as a result of an offense committed under division (a)(1)B. of this section or
an offense committed under division (a)(1)C. of this section based on a
violation of division (a)(1)B. of this section, a third person induced by the
offender's posted message caused serious physical harm to that premises, that
real property, or any personal property on that premises.
            9.   Prior to committing the offense, the offender had been
determined to represent a substantial risk of physical harm to others as
manifested by evidence of then-recent homicidal or other violent behavior,
evidence of then-recent threats that placed another in reasonable fear of
violent behavior and serious harm, or other evidence of then- present
dangerousness.
            10.   The victim of the offense is an officer or employee of a
public children services agency or a private child placing agency and the
offense relates to the officer’s or employee’s performance or anticipated
performance of official responsibilities or duties.
            11.   The offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to an offense of violence, the victim of that prior offense was an
officer or employee of a public children services agency or private child
placing agency, and that prior offense related to the officer’s or employee’s
performance or anticipated performance of official responsibilities or duties.
      (3)   Ohio R.C. 2919.271 applies in relation to a defendant charged with
a violation of this section.
      (4)   As used in division (a) of this section:
         A.   COMPUTER, COMPUTER NETWORK, COMPUTER PROGRAM, COMPUTER SYSTEM,
and TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. The same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 2913.01.
         B.   EMERGENCY FACILITY PERSON. The singular of EMERGENCY FACILITY
PERSONNEL as defined in Ohio R.C. 2909.04
         C.   EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSON. The singular of EMERGENCY
MEDICAL SERVICES PERSONNEL as defined in Ohio R.C. 2133.21.
         D.   FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER. Means any of the following:
            1.   Any of the following who is residing or has resided with the
person against whom the act prohibited in division (a)(1) of this section is
committed:
               a.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse, or a former spouse
of the person;
               b.   A parent, a foster parent, or a child of the person, or
another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the person;
               c.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person living as a spouse,
or former spouse of the person, or another person related by consanguinity or
affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse, or former spouse of the
person.
            2.   The natural parent of any child of whom the person against
whom the act prohibited in division (a)(1) of this section is committed is the
other natural parent or is the putative other natural parent.
         E.   MENTAL DISTRESS. Any of the following:
            1.   Any mental illness or condition that involves some temporary
substantial incapacity;
            2.   Any mental illness or condition that would normally require
psychiatric treatment, psychological treatment, or other mental health
services, whether or not any person requested or received psychiatric
treatment, psychological treatment, or other mental health services.
         F.   ORGANIZATION. Includes an entity that is a governmental employer.
         G.   PATTERN OF CONDUCT. Two or more actions or incidents closely
related in time, whether or not there has been a prior conviction based on any
of those actions or incidents, or two or more actions or incidents closely
related in time, whether or not there has been a prior conviction based on any
of those actions or incidents, directed at one or more persons employed by or
belonging to the same corporation, association, or other organization. Actions
or incidents that prevent, obstruct, or delay the performance by a public
official, firefighter, rescuer, emergency medical services person, or emergency
facility person of any authorized act within the public official’s,
firefighter’s, rescuer’s, emergency medical services person’s, or emergency
facility person’s official capacity, or the posting of messages, use of
intentionally written or verbal graphic gestures, or receipt of information or
data through the use of any form of written communication or an electronic
method of remotely transferring information, including but not limited to a
computer, computer network, computer program, computer system, or
telecommunications device, may constitute a PATTERN OF CONDUCT.
         H.   PERSON LIVING AS A SPOUSE. Means a person who is living or has
lived with the person against whom the act prohibited in division (a)(1) of
this section is committed in a common law marital relationship, who otherwise
is cohabiting with that person, or who otherwise has cohabited with the person
within five years prior to the date of the alleged commission of the act in
question.
         I.   POST A MESSAGE. Transferring, sending, posting, publishing,
disseminating, or otherwise communicating, or attempting to transfer, send,
post, publish, disseminate, or otherwise communicate, any message or
information, whether truthful or untruthful, about an individual, and whether
done under one’s own name, under the name of another, or while impersonating
another.
         J.   PUBLIC OFFICIAL. The same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2921.01.
         K.   SEXUAL MOTIVATION.  The same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2971.01.
         L.   THIRD PERSON. In relation to conduct as described in division (a)
(1)B. of this section, an individual who is neither the offender nor the victim
of the conduct.
      (5)   The prosecution does not need to prove in a prosecution under
division (a) of this section that a person requested or received psychiatric
treatment, psychological treatment, or other mental health services in order to
show that the person was caused mental distress as described in division (a)
(4)D.2. of this section.
      (6)   A.   Division (a) of this section does not apply to a person solely
because the person provided access or connection to or from an electronic
method of remotely transferring information not under that person’s control,
including having provided capabilities that are incidental to providing access
or connection to or from the electronic method of remotely transferring the
information, and that do not include the creation of the content of the
material that is the subject of the access or connection. In addition, any
person providing access or connection to or from an electronic method of
remotely transferring information not under that person’s control shall not be
liable for any action voluntarily taken in good faith to block the receipt or
transmission through its service of any information that it believes is or will
be sent in violation of division (a) of this section.
         B.   Division (a)(6)A. of this section does not create an affirmative
duty for any person providing access or connection to or from an electronic
method of remotely transferring information not under that person’s control to
block the receipt or transmission through its service of any information that
it believes is or will be sent in violation of division (a) of this section
except as otherwise provided by law.
         C.   Division (a)(6)A. of this section does not apply to a person who
conspires with a person actively involved in the creation or knowing
distribution of material in violation of division (a) of this section or who
knowingly advertises the availability of material of that nature.
(R.C. § 2903.211)
   (b)   Protection order. Consult Ohio R.C. 2903.213 for current provisions
regarding protection orders, consent agreements, anti-stalking protection
orders and orders issued by a court of another State.
   (c)   Violating a protection order, consent agreement, anti-stalking
protection order or order issued by a court of another state.
      (1)   No person shall recklessly violate the terms of any of the
following:
         A.   A protection order issued or consent agreement approved pursuant
to R.C. § 2919.26 or 3113.31;
         B.   A protection order issued pursuant to R.C. § 2151.34, 2903.213 or
2903.214;
         C.   A protection order issued by a court of another state.
      (2)   A.   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of
violating a protection order.
         B.   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(2)C. or (c)(2)D. of
this section, violating a protection order is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
         C.   Violating a protection order is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law if the offender previously has been convicted of, pleaded
guilty to, or been adjudicated a delinquent child for any of the following:
            1.   A violation of a protection order issued or consent agreement
approved pursuant to R.C. § 2151.34, 2903.213, 2903.214, 2919.26, or 3113.31,
or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance;
            2.   Two or more violations of R.C. § 2903.21, 2903.211, 2903.22,
or 2911.211, or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
or any combination of those offenses, that involved the same person who is the
subject of the protection order or consent agreement;
            3.   One or more violations of this section, or any substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance.
         D.   If the offender violates a protection order or consent agreement
while committing a felony offense, violating a protection order is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         E.   If the protection order violated by the offender was an order
issued pursuant to R.C. § 2151.34 or 2903.214 that required electronic
monitoring of the offender pursuant to that section, the court may require in
addition to any other sentence imposed upon the offender that the offender be
electronically monitored for a period not exceeding five years by a law
enforcement agency designated by the court. If the court requires under this
division that the offender be electronically monitored, unless the court
determines that the offender is indigent, the court shall order that the
offender pay the costs of the installation of the electronic monitoring device
and the cost of monitoring the electronic monitoring device.
      (3)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (c)(1)C. of
this section that the protection order issued by a court of another state does
not comply with the requirements specified in 18 U.S.C. 2265(b) for a
protection order that must be accorded full faith a credit by a court of this
state or that it is not entitled to full faith and credit under 18 U.S.C. 2265
(c).
      (4)   In a prosecution for a violation of this section, it is not
necessary for the prosecution to prove that the protection order or consent
agreement was served on the defendant if the prosecution proves that the
defendant was shown the protection order or consent agreement or a copy of
either or a judge, magistrate, or law enforcement officer informed the
defendant that a protection order or consent agreement had been issued, and
proves that the defendant recklessly violated the terms of the order or
agreement.
      (5)    As used in this section, PROTECTION ORDER ISSUED BY A COURT OF
ANOTHER STATE means an injunction or another order issued by a criminal court
of another state for the purpose of preventing violent or threatening acts or
harassment against, contact or communication with, or physical proximity to
another person including a temporary order, and means an injunction or order of
that nature issued by a civil court of another state, including a temporary
order and a final order issued in an independent action or as a pendente lite
order in a proceeding for other relief, if the court issued it in response to a
complaint, petition or motion filed by or on behalf of a person seeking
protection. The term does not include an order for support or for custody of a
child issued pursuant to the divorce and child custody laws of another state,
except to the extent that the order for support or for custody of a child is
entitled to full faith and credit under the laws of the United States.
(ORC 2919.27)
§ 636.05 MENACING.
   (a)   (1)   (1)   No person shall knowingly cause another to believe that
the offender will cause physical harm to the person or property of the other
person, the other person's unborn, or a member of the other person's immediate
family. In addition to any other basis for the other person's belief that the
offender will cause physical harm to the person or property of the other
person, the other person's unborn, or a member of the other person's immediate
family, the other person's belief may be based on words or conduct of the
offender that are directed at or identify a corporation, association, or other
organization that employs the other person or to which the other person
belongs.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly place or attempt to place another in
reasonable fear of physical harm or death by displaying a deadly weapon,
regardless of whether the deadly weapon displayed is operable or inoperable, if
either of the following applies:
         A.   The other person is an emergency service responder, the person
knows or reasonably should know that the other person is an emergency service
responder, and it is the person's specific purpose to engage in the specified
conduct against an emergency service responder.
         B.   The other person is a family or household member or co-worker of
an emergency service responder, the person knows or reasonably should know that
the other person is a family or household member or co-worker of an emergency
service responder, and it is the person's specific purpose to engage in the
specified conduct against a family or household member or co-worker of an
emergency service responder.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of menacing. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, menacing is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. If the victim of the offense is an officer or employee of a public
children services agency or a private child placing agency and the offense
relates to the officer's or employee's performance or anticipated performance
of official responsibilities or duties or if the victim of the offense is an
emergency service responder in the performance of the responder's official
duties, menacing is one of the following:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(2) of this section, a
misdemeanor of the first degree;
      (2)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to an offense of violence, the victim of that prior offense was an officer or
employee of a public children services agency or private child placing agency
or an emergency service responder, and that prior offense related to the
officer's or employee's performance or anticipated performance of official
responsibilities or duties or to the responder's performance of the responder's
official duties, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (c)   A prosecution for a violation of this section does not preclude a
prosecution of a violation of any other section of the Ohio Revised Code. One
or more acts, a series of acts, or a course of behavior that can be prosecuted
under this section or any other section of the Ohio Revised Code may be
prosecuted under this section, the other section of the Ohio Revised Code, or
both sections. However, if an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of this section and also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of R.C. § 2903.13, or any substantially similar municipal ordinance,
based on the same conduct involving the same victim that was the basis of the
violation of this section, the offenses are allied offenses of similar import
under R.C. § 2941.25.
   (d)   As used in this section:
      (1)   CO-WORKER. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 2903.13.
      (2)   EMERGENCY SERVICE RESPONDER. Has the same meanings as in R.C. §
2903.13.
      (3)   FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER. Has the same meanings as in R.C. §
2903.13.
      (4)   ORGANIZATION. Includes an entity that is a governmental employer.
(R.C. § 2903.22)
§ 636.06 UNLAWFUL RESTRAINT.
   (a)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly restrain
another of his or her liberty.
   (b)   No person, without privilege to do so and with a sexual motivation,
shall knowingly restrain another of the other person’s liberty.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful restraint, a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   As used in this section, “sexual motivation” has the same meaning as
in Ohio R.C. 2971.01.
(ORC 2905.03)
§ 636.07 CHILD STEALING. (REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
   Section 636.07 was repealed as part of the 1999 updating and revision of
these Codified Ordinances because substantially equivalent State law (Ohio R.C.
2905.04) was repealed by the Ohio General Assembly by Amended S.B. No. 2,
effective July 1, 1996.
§ 636.075 CRIMINAL CHILD ENTICEMENT. (REPEALED)
Editor’s note: This section was formerly based on R.C. § 2905.05, Criminal
Child Enticement. The Ohio Supreme Court held that R.C. § 2905.05(A) was
unconstitutionally overbroad in violation of the First Amendment. See State v.
Romage, 138 Ohio St. 3d. 390 (2014).
§ 636.08 COERCION.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to coerce another into taking or refraining
from action concerning which he or she has a legal freedom of choice, shall do
any of the following:
      (1)   Threaten to commit any offense.
      (2)   Utter or threaten any slander against any person.
      (3)   Expose or threaten to expose any matter tending to subject any
person to hatred, contempt, or ridicule, or to damage his or her personal or
business repute, or to impair his or her credit.
      (4)   Institute or threaten criminal proceedings against any person.
      (5)   Take or withhold, or threaten to take or withhold official action,
or cause or threaten to cause official action to be taken or withheld.
   (b)   Divisions (a)(4) and (5) of this section shall not be construed to
prohibit a prosecutor or court from doing any of the following in good faith
and in the interests of justice:
      (1)   Offering or agreeing to grant, or granting immunity from
prosecution pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2945.44.
      (2)   In return for a plea of guilty to one or more offenses charged or
to one or more other or lesser offenses, or in return for the testimony of the
accused in a case to which he or she is not a party, offering or agreeing to
dismiss, or dismissing one or more charges pending against an accused, or
offering or agreeing to impose, or imposing a certain sentence or modification
of sentence.
      (3)   Imposing probation on certain conditions, including without
limitation requiring the offender to make restitution or redress to the victim
of his or her offense.
   (c)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (a)(3), (4),
or (5) of this section that the actor’s conduct was a reasonable response to
the circumstances which occasioned it, and that his or her purpose was limited
to:
      (1)   Compelling another to refrain from misconduct or to desist from
further misconduct.
      (2)   Preventing or redressing a wrong or injustice.
      (3)   Preventing another from taking action for which the actor
reasonably believed the other person to be disqualified.
      (4)   Compelling another to take action which the actor reasonably
believed the other person to be under a duty to take.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of coercion, a misdemeanor of
the second degree.
   (e)   As used in this section, THREAT includes a direct threat and a threat
by innuendo.
(ORC 2905.12)
§ 636.09 CURFEW.
   (a)   Nighttime curfew hours. Sunday through Thursday 11:30 p.m. until 6:00
a.m. Friday and Saturday 12:30 a.m. until 6:00 a.m.
   (b)   Daytime curfew hours. Monday through Friday during the applicable
school's hours.
   (c)   Offenses by minors. A minor commits an offense if he or she remains in
any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the Village of
Woodlawn during nighttime or daytime curfew hours.
   (d)   Defenses. It is a defense to prosecution under §
636.09(c) of this section if the minor was:
      (1)   Not required to attend school on the date and time in questions, as
school was not in session at that time;
      (2)   A participant in a bona fide home schooling program at the time in
question;
      (3)   Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian;
      (4)   On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian
without any detour or stop;
      (5)   The minor was engaged in a work study program or going to or
returning from a work-study program, without any detour or stop;
      (6)   The minor was involved in an emergency;
      (7)   The minor was attending an activity organized and supervised by
adults and sponsored by the Village of Woodlawn, another political
jurisdiction, school district, civic organization or other similar organization
that takes responsibility for the minor or attending an official school or
religious activity; and
      (8)   Going to or coming from, without detour or stop, an activity
organized and supervised by adults and sponsored by the Village of Woodlawn,
another political jurisdiction, school district, civic organization or other
similar organization that takes responsibility for the minor or attending an
official school or religious activity.
   (e)   Enforcement. Before taking any enforcement action, a police officer
shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public place
or on the premises of an establishment. The officer shall not issue a citation
or make an arrest under this Section unless the officer reasonably believes
that an offense has occurred and that based on any response and other
circumstances, no defense in §
636.09 (c) is present.
   (f)   Penalties. Any minor found violating any provision of this section
shall be guilty of being an unruly child and shall be dealt with in accordance
with the juvenile law and procedure.
   (g)   Offenses by parents and/or guardians of minors. A parent or guardian
having the care and custody of a minor commits an offense if he or she
knowingly permits such minor to remain in any public place or on the premises
of any establishment within the Village of Woodlawn during daytime and/or
nighttime curfew hours.
   (h)   Defenses. It is a defense to prosecution under §
636.09(g):
      (1)   That the minor was not required to attend school on the date and
time in questions as school was not in session at that time;
      (2)   That the minor was a participant in a bona fide home schooling
program at the time in question;
      (3)   The parent was with the minor at the time of the alleged violation;
      (4)   The minor was on an errand at the direction of the minor's parent
or guardian without any detour or stop;
      (5)   The minor was engaged in a work study program or going to or
returning from a work-study program, without any detour or stop;
      (6)   The minor was involved in an emergency;
      (7)   The minor was attending an activity organized and supervised by
adults and sponsored by the Village of Woodlawn, another political
jurisdiction, school district, civic organization or other similar organization
that takes responsibility for the minor or attending an official school or
religious activity;
      (8)   The minor was going to or coming from, without detour or stop,
those activities identified in §
636.09 (h)(7) herein; and
      (9)   That the parent or guardian has initiated the jurisdiction of the
Juvenile Court against the minor prior to the time that the minor was found
violating §
636.09(c), herein.
   (i)   Enforcement. Before taking any enforcement action under §
636.09(g), a police officer shall determine whether the parent or guardian had
actual or constructive knowledge of the minor's violation.
The officer shall not issue a citation under §
636.09(g) unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred
and that based on any response and other circumstances, no defense in §
636.09(h) is present.
   (j)   Penalties. Any parent or guardian having the care and custody of a
minor who violates §
636.09 (g) of this section shall for the first offense be warned by the police
officer of the consequences of failing to ensure compliance with this section.
For the second offense under §
636.09(g) of this section such parent or guardian shall be issued a civil
citation in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00). For the third or
subsequent violation of §
636.09(g) of this section, the parent or guardian shall be issued a civil
citation in the amount of two hundred dollars ($200.00). A separate offense
shall be deemed committed for each violation of §
636.09(c) and §
636.09(g) of this section.
   (k)   As used in this section:
      (1)   EMERGENCY means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the
resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes but is not
limited to: a fire, natural disaster, an automobile accident or any situation
requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
      (2)   ESTABLISHMENT means any privately owned place of business operated
for a profit to which the public is invited.
      (3)   WORK STUDY PROGRAM means any bona fide program authorized and
sanctioned by the school attended by the minor, which permits the minor to
leave school premises.
(Ord. 11-2007, passed 5-29-2007)
§ 636.10 ABUSING POLICE, TRAFFIC CONTROL OR CORRECTIONS OFFICERS.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly and willfully challenge to fight, assault,
strike, verbally abuse or make derogatory remarks to a police officer, a
traffic control officer or a corrections officer while such officer is in the
performance of his or her duties.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second
degree.
(Ord. 2000-6, passed 2-1-2000)
§ 636.11 ENDANGERING CHILDREN.
   (a)   No person, who is the parent, guardian, custodian, person having
custody or control, or person in loco parentis of a child under 18 years of age
or a child with a mental or physical disability under 21 years of age, shall
create a substantial risk to the health or safety of the child by violating a
duty of care, protection, or support. It is not a violation of a duty of care,
protection, or support under this division when the parent, guardian,
custodian, or person having custody or control of a child treats the physical
or mental illness or disability of the child by spiritual means through prayer
alone, in accordance with the tenets of a recognized religious body.
   (b)   No person shall do any of the following to a child under 18 years of
age or a child with a mental or physical disability under 21 years of age:
      (1)   Abuse the child.
      (2)   Torture or cruelly abuse the child.
      (3)   Administer corporal punishment or other physical disciplinary
measure, or physically restrain the child in a cruel manner or for a prolonged
period, which punishment, discipline or restraint is excessive under the
circumstances and creates a substantial risk of serious physical harm to the
child.
      (4)   Repeatedly administer unwarranted disciplinary measures to a child
when there is a substantial risk that such conduct, if continued, will
seriously impair or retard the child’s mental health or development.
      (5)   Entice, coerce, permit, encourage, compel, hire, employ, use, or
allow the child to act, model, or in any other way participate in, or be
photographed for, the production, presentation, dissemination, or advertisement
of any material or performance that the offender knows or reasonably should
know is obscene, is sexually oriented matter, or is nudity-oriented matter;
      (6)   Allow the child to be on the same parcel of real property and
within 100 feet of, or, in the case of more than one housing unit on the same
parcel of real property, in the same housing unit and within 100 feet of, any
act in violation of Ohio R.C. 2925.04 or 2925.041 when the person knows that
the act is occurring, whether or not any person is prosecuted for or convicted
of the violation of Ohio R.C. 2925.04 or 2925.041 that is the basis of the
violation of this division.
   (c)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle, as defined by Ohio R.C.
4511.01, within the Municipality and in violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, when one or more children under
18 years of age are in the vehicle. Notwithstanding any other provision of law,
a person may be convicted at the same trial or proceeding of a violation of
this division and a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, that constitutes the basis of the charge of the
violation of this division. For purposes of Ohio R.C. 4511.191 to 4511.197 and
all related provisions of law, a person arrested for a violation of this
division shall be considered to be under arrest for operating a vehicle while
under the influence of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a
controlled substance a the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or
urine.
      (2)   As used in division (c)(1) of this section:
         A.   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
3719.01.
         B.   VEHICLE has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4511.01.
   (d)   (1)   Division (b)(5) of this section does not apply to any material
or performance that is produced, presented, or disseminated for a bona fide
medical, scientific, educational, religious, governmental, judicial, or other
proper purpose, by or to a physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist,
teacher, person pursing bona fide studies for research, librarian, member of
the clergy, prosecutor, judge, or other person having a proper interest in the
material or performance.
      (2)   Mistake of age is not a defense to a charge under division (b)(5)
of this section.
      (3)   In a prosecution under division (b)(5) of this section, the trier
of fact may infer that an actor, model, or participant in the material or
performance involved is a juvenile if the material or performance, through its
title, text, visual representation, or otherwise, represents or depicts the
actor, model, or participant as a juvenile.
      (4)   As used in this division and division (b)(5) of this section:
         A.   MATERIAL, PERFORMANCE, OBSCENE, and SEXUAL ACTIVITY. The same
meanings as in Ohio R.C. 2907.01.
         B.   NUDITY-ORIENTED MATTER. Any material or performance that shows a
minor in a state of nudity and that, taken as a whole by the average person
applying contemporary community standards, appeals to the prurient interest.
         C.   SEXUALLY ORIENTED MATTER. Any material or performance that shows
a minor participating or engaging in sexual activity, masturbation, or
bestiality.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of endangering children.
      (1)   If the offender violates division (a) or (b)(1) of this section,
endangering children is one of the following:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (e)(1)B., C., or D., a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
         B.   If the offender previously has been convicted of an offense under
this section or a substantially equivalent State law or municipal ordinance, or
of any offense involving neglect, abandonment, or contributing to the
delinquency of or physical abuse of a child, except as otherwise provided in
division (e)(1)C. or D. of this section, endangering children is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate State law.
         C.   If the violation is a violation of division (a) of this section
and results in serious physical harm to the child involved, endangering
children is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate State law.
         D.   If the violation is a violation of division (b)(1) of this
section and results in serious physical harm to the child involved, endangering
children is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate State law.
      (2)   If the offender violates division (b)(2), (3), (4), (5) or (6) of
this section, endangering children is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate State law.
      (3)   If the offender violates division (c) of this section, the offender
shall be punished as follows:
         A.   Except as provided in (e)(3)B. or C., endangering children in
violation of division (c) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         B.   If the violation results in serious physical harm to the child or
if the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this section or
a substantially equivalent State law or municipal ordinance, or of any offense
involving neglect, abandonment, or contributing to the delinquency of or
physical abuse of a child, except as otherwise provided in division (e)(3)C. of
this section, endangering children in violation of division (c) of this section
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate State law.
         C.   If the violation results in serious physical harm to the child
and if the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this
section, Ohio R.C. 2903.06, 2903.08, 2919.22(C) or former Ohio R.C. 2903.07 as
it existed prior to March 23, 2000, or Ohio R.C. 2903.04, in a case in which
the offender was subject to the sanctions described in division (D) of that
section, endangering children in violation of division (c) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate State law.
         D.   In addition to any term of imprisonment, fine, or other sentence,
penalty or sanction it imposes upon the offender pursuant to divisions (e)
(3)A., B. or C. of this section or pursuant to any other provision of law and
in addition to any suspension of the offender’s driver’s license or commercial
driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege under Ohio R.C.
Chapter 4506, 4509, 4510, or 4511, or any other provision of law, the court
also may impose upon the offender a class seven suspension of the offender’s
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating
privilege from the range specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(7).
         E.   In addition to any term of imprisonment, fine, or other sentence,
penalty or sanction imposed upon the offender pursuant to division (e)(3)A.,
B., C. or D. of this section or pursuant to any other provision of law for the
violation of division (c) of this section, if as a part of the same trial or
proceeding the offender also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a separate
charge charging the violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, that was the basis of the charge of the
violation of division (c) of this section, the offender also shall be sentenced
in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4511.19, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, for that violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (f)   (1)   If a person violates division (c) of this section and if, at the
time of the violation, there were two or more children under 18 years of age in
the motor vehicle involved in the violation, the offender may be convicted of a
violation of division (c) of this section for each of the children, but the
court may sentence the offender for only one of the violations.
      (2)   A.   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (c) of this section but the person is not also convicted of and does
not also plead guilty to a separate charge of violating Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A),
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that was the basis of the
charge of the violation of division (c) of this section, both the following
apply:
            1.   For purposes of the provisions of Ohio R.C. 4511.19, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that set forth the penalties and
sanctions for a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the conviction of or plea of guilty to the
violation of division (c) of this section shall not constitute a violation of
Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
            2.   For purposes of the provisions of law that refers to a
conviction of or plea of guilty to a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and that is not described in
division (f)(2)A.1. of this section, the conviction of or plea of guilty to the
violation of division (c) of this section shall constitute a conviction or plea
of guilty to a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A), or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
         B.   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (c) of this section and the person also is convicted of or pleads
guilty to a separate charge of violating Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that was the basis of the charge
of the violation of division (c) of this section, the conviction of or plea of
guilty to the violation of division (c) of this section shall not constitute,
for the purposes of any provision of law that refers to a conviction of or a
plea of guilty to a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A) or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, a conviction of or a plea of guilty to a
violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A) or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
(ORC 2919.22(A) - (E), (H))
Statutory reference:
   Community service, requirements, see Ohio R.C. 2919.22(F)
   License suspension, requirements, see Ohio R.C. 2919.22(G)
   Permitting child abuse, felony offense, see Ohio R.C. 2903.15
§ 636.12 INTERFERENCE WITH CUSTODY.
   (a)   No person, knowing that he or she is without privilege to do so or
being reckless in that regard, shall entice, take, keep, or harbor a person
identified in division (a)(1), (2) or (3) of this section from the parent,
guardian, or custodian of the person identified in division (a)(1), (2) or (3)
of this section:
      (1)   A child under the age of 18, or a child with a mental or physical
disability under the age of 21;
      (2)   A person committed by law to an institution for delinquent, unruly,
neglected, abused, or dependent children;
      (3)   A person committed by law to an institution for persons with mental
illnesses or an institution for persons with intellectual disabilities.
   (b)   No person shall aid, abet, induce, cause, or encourage a child or a
ward of the juvenile court who has been committed to the custody of any person,
department, or public or private institution to leave the custody of that
person, department, or institution without legal consent.
   (c)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of enticing or taking under
division (a)(1) of this section that the actor reasonably believed that his or
her conduct was necessary to preserve the child’s health or safety. It is an
affirmative defense to a charge of keeping or harboring under division (a) of
this section that the actor in good faith gave notice to law enforcement or
judicial authorities within a reasonable time after the child or committed
person came under his or her shelter, protection, or influence.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interference with custody.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this subdivision, a violation of
division (a)(1) above is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the child who is
the subject of a violation of division (a)(1) is removed from the State or if
the offender previously has been convicted of an offense under this section or
a substantially equivalent State law or municipal ordinance, a violation of
division (a)(1) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
State law. If the child who is the subject of a violation of division (a)(1)
suffers physical harm as a result of the violation, a violation of division (a)
(1) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate State law.
      (2)   A violation of division (a)(2) or (3) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (3)   A violation of division (b) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. Each day of a violation of division (b) is a separate offense.
(R.C. § 2919.23)
§ 636.125 CONTRIBUTING TO THE UNRULINESS OR DELINQUENCY OF A CHILD.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   DELINQUENT CHILD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2152.02.
      (2)   UNRULY CHILD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2151.022.
   (b)   No person, including a parent, guardian, or other custodian of a
child, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Aid, abet, induce, cause, encourage, or contribute to a child or a
ward of the juvenile court becoming an unruly child or a delinquent child;
      (2)   Act in a way tending to cause a child or a ward of the juvenile
court to become an unruly child or a delinquent child;
      (3)   Act in a way that contributes to an adjudication of the child as a
delinquent child based on the child’s violation of a court order adjudicating
the child an unruly child for being an habitual truant;
      (4)   If the person is the parent, guardian, or custodian of a child who
has the duties under R.C. Chapters 2152 and 2950 to register, register a new
residence address, and periodically verify a residence address, and, if
applicable, to send a notice of intent to reside, and if the child is not
emancipated, as defined in R.C. § 2919.121, fail to ensure that the child
complies with those duties under R.C. Chapters 2152 and 2950.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of contributing to the
unruliness or delinquency of a child, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each
day of violation of this section is a separate offense.
(R.C. § 2919.24)
§ 636.13 FAILING TO PROVIDE FOR A PERSON WITH A FUNCTIONAL IMPAIRMENT.
   (a)   No caretaker shall knowingly fail to provide a person with a
functional impairment under the caretaker's care with any treatment, care,
goods, or service that is necessary to maintain the health or safety of the
person with a functional impairment when this failure results in physical harm
or serious physical harm to the person with a functional impairment.
   (b)   No caretaker shall recklessly fail to provide a person with a
functional impairment under the caretaker's care with any treatment, care,
goods, or service that is necessary to maintain the health or safety of the
person with a functional impairment when this failure results in serious
physical harm to the person with a functional impairment.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
knowingly failing to provide for a person with a functional impairment, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the person with a functional impairment
under the offender's care suffers serious physical harm as a result of the
violation of this section, a violation of division (a) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of
recklessly failing to provide for a person with a functional impairment, a
misdemeanor of the second degree. If the person with a functional impairment
under the offender's care suffers serious physical harm as a result of the
violation of this section, a violation of division (b) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2903.16)
   (d)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   CARETAKER. A person who assumes the duty to provide for the care
and protection of a person with a functional impairment on a voluntary basis,
by contract, through receipt of payment for care and protection, as a result of
a family relationship, or by order of a court of competent jurisdiction. The
term does not include a person who owns, operates, or administers, or who is an
agent or employee of, a care facility, as defined in R.C. § 2903.33.
      (2)   PERSON WITH A FUNCTIONAL IMPAIRMENT. Any person who has a physical
or mental impairment that prevents the person from providing for the person's
own care or protection or whose infirmities caused by aging prevent the person
from providing for the person's own care or protection.
(R.C. § 2903.10)
§ 636.14 PARTY LINES TO BE YIELDED IN EMERGENCIES. (REPEALED)
   (Editor's note:  Section 636.14, based on Ohio R.C. 4931.30, is obsolete and
has been removed as part of the 2008 updating and revision of this Municipal
Code.)
§ 636.15 THREATENING OR HARASSING TELECOMMUNICATIONS.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly make or cause to be made a
telecommunication, or knowingly permit a telecommunication to be made from a
telecommunications device under the person’s control, to another, if the caller
does any of the following:
      (1)   Makes the telecommunication with purpose to harass, intimidate, or
abuse any person at the premises to which the telecommunication is made,
whether or not actual communication takes place between the caller and a
recipient;
      (2)   Describes, suggests, requests or proposes that the caller, the
recipient of the telecommunication, or any other person engage in sexual
activity, and the recipient or another person at the premises to which the
telecommunication is made has requested, in a previous telecommunication or in
the immediate telecommunication, that the caller not make a telecommunication
to the recipient or to the premises to which the telecommunication is made;
      (3)   During the telecommunication, violates R.C. § 2903.21 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (4)   Knowingly states to the recipient of the telecommunication that the
caller intends to cause damage to or destroy public or private property, and
the recipient, any member of the recipient’s family or any other person who
resides at the premises to which the telecommunication is made owns, leases,
resides or works in, will at the time of the destruction or damaging be near or
in, has the responsibility of protecting, or insures the property that will be
destroyed or damaged;
      (5)   Knowingly makes the telecommunication to the recipient of the
telecommunication, to another person at the premises to which the
telecommunication is made, or to those premises, and the recipient or another
person at those premises previously has told the caller not to make a
telecommunication to those premises or to any persons at those premises;
      (6)   Knowingly makes any comment, request, suggestion, or proposal to
the recipient of the telecommunication that is threatening, intimidating,
menacing, coercive, or obscene with the intent to abuse, threaten, or harass
the recipient;
      (7)   Without a lawful business purpose, knowingly interrupts the
telecommunication service of any person;
      (8)   Without a lawful business purpose, knowingly transmits to any
person, regardless of whether the telecommunication is heard in its entirety,
any file, document, or other communication that prevents that person from using
the person’s telephone service or electronic communication device;
      (9)   Knowingly makes any false statement concerning the death, injury,
illness, disfigurement, reputation, indecent conduct, or criminal conduct of
the recipient of the telecommunication or family or household member of the
recipient with purpose to abuse, threaten, intimidate, or harass the recipient;
      (10)   Knowingly incites another person through a telecommunication or
other means to harass or participate in the harassment of a person;
      (11)   Knowingly alarms the recipient by making a telecommunication
without a lawful purpose at an hour or hours known to be inconvenient to the
recipient and in an offensive or repetitive manner.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall make or cause to be made a telecommunication or
permit a telecommunication to be made from a telecommunications device under
the person’s control, with purpose to abuse, threaten or harass another person.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly post a text or audio statement or an
image on an internet web site or web page for the purpose of abusing,
threatening, or harassing another person.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of telecommunications
harassment.
      (2)   A violation of division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(5), (a)(6), (a)
(7), (a)(8), (a)(9), (a)(10), or (a)(11) or (b) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree on a first offense and a felony on each
subsequent offense, which shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (c)(3), a violation
of division (a)(4) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree on a
first offense and a felony on each subsequent offense, to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. If a violation of division (a)(4) of this section
results in economic harm of $1,000 or more, telecommunications harassment is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (d)   No cause of action may be asserted in any court of this municipality
against any provider of a telecommunications service, interactive computer
service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, or against any
officer, employee or agent of a telecommunications service, interactive
computer service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, for any
injury, death or loss to person or property that allegedly arises out of the
provider’s, officer’s, employee’s or agent’s provision of information,
facilities or assistance in accordance with the terms of a court order that is
issued in relation to the investigation or prosecution of an alleged violation
of this section. A provider of a telecommunications service, interactive
computer service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, or an
officer, employee or agent of a telecommunications service, interactive
computer service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, is
immune from any civil or criminal liability for injury, death or loss to person
or property that allegedly arises out of the provider’s, officer’s, employee’s
or agent’s provision of information, facilities or assistance in accordance
with the terms of a court order that is issued in relation to the investigation
or prosecution of an alleged violation of this section.
   (e)   (1)   This section does not apply to a person solely because the
person provided access or connection to or from an electronic method of
remotely transferring information not under that person’s control, including
having provided capabilities that are incidental to providing access or
connection to or from the electronic method of remotely transferring the
information, and that do not include the creation of the content of the
material that is the subject of the access or connection. In addition, any
person providing access or connection to or from an electronic method of
remotely transferring information not under that person’s control shall not be
liable for any action voluntarily taken in good faith to block the receipt or
transmission through its service of any information that the person believes
is, or will be sent, in violation of this section.
      (2)   Division (e)(1) of this section does not create an affirmative duty
for any person providing access or connection to or from an electronic method
of remotely transferring information not under that person’s control to block
the receipt or transmission through its service of any information that it
believes is, or will be sent, in violation of this section except as otherwise
provided by law.
      (3)   Division (e)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who
conspires with a person actively involved in the creation or knowing
distribution of material in violation of this section or who knowingly
advertises the availability of material of that nature.
      (4)   A provider or user of an interactive computer service, as defined
in 47 U.S.C. § 230, shall neither be treated as the publisher or speaker of any
information provided by another information content provider, as defined in 47
U.S.C. § 230, nor held civilly or criminally liable for the creation or
development of information provided by another information content provider, as
defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230. Nothing in this division shall be construed to
protect a person from liability to the extent that the person developed or
created any content in violation of this section.
   (f)   Divisions (a)(5) to (a)(11) and (b)(2) of this section do not apply to
a person who, while employed or contracted by a newspaper, magazine, press
association, news agency, news wire service, cable channel or cable operator,
or radio or television station, is gathering, processing, transmitting,
compiling, editing, or disseminating information for the general public within
the scope of the person’s employment in that capacity or the person’s
contractual authority in that capacity.
   (g)   For the purpose of divisions (a) through (d) of this section, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
      (1)   CABLE OPERATOR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1332.21.
      (2)   CALLER. The person described in division (a) of this section who
makes or causes to be made a telecommunication or who permits a
telecommunication to be made from a telecommunications device under that
person’s control.
      (3)   ECONOMIC HARM. All direct, incidental and consequential pecuniary
harm suffered by a victim as a result of the criminal conduct. The term
includes but is not limited to all of the following:
         A.   All wages, salaries or other compensation lost as a result of the
criminal conduct;
         B.   The cost of all wages, salaries or other compensation paid to
employees for time those employees are prevented from working as a result of
the criminal conduct;
         C.   The overhead costs incurred from the time that a business is shut
down as a result of the criminal conduct;
         D.   The loss of value to tangible or intangible property that was
damaged as a result of the criminal conduct.
      (4)   FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER. Means any of the following:
         A.   Any of the following who is residing or has resided with the
recipient of the telecommunication against whom the act prohibited in division
(a)(9) of this section is committed:
            1.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse, or a former spouse of
the recipient;
            2.   A parent, a foster parent, or a child of the recipient, or
another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the recipient;
            3.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person living as a spouse, or
former spouse of the recipient, or another person related by consanguinity or
affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse, or former spouse of the
recipient.
         B.   The natural parent of any child of whom the recipient of the
telecommunication against whom the act prohibited in division (a)(9) of this
section is committed is the other natural parent or is the putative other
natural parent.
      (5)   PERSON LIVING AS A SPOUSE. Means a person who is living or has
lived with the recipient of the telecommunication against whom the act
prohibited in division (a)(9) of this section is committed in a common law
marital relationship, who otherwise is cohabiting with the recipient, or who
otherwise has cohabited with the recipient within five years prior to the date
of the alleged commission of the act in question.
      (6)   SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.01.
      (7)   TELECOMMUNICATION and TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.
   (h)   Nothing in this section prohibits a person from making a
telecommunication to a debtor that is in compliance with the “Fair Debt
Collection Practices Act”, 15 U.S.C. § 1692, as amended, or the “Telephone
Consumer Protection Act”, 47 U.S.C. § 227, as amended.
(R.C. § 2917.21)
§ 636.16 PLACING HARMFUL SUBSTANCE OR OBJECTS IN FOOD OR CONFECTION.
   (a)   No person shall do either of the following, knowing or having
reasonable cause to believe that any person may suffer physical harm or be
seriously inconvenienced or annoyed thereby:
      (1)   Place a pin, razor blade, glass, laxative, drug of abuse, or other
harmful or hazardous object or substance in any food or confection.
      (2)   Furnish to any person any food or confection which has been
adulterated in violation of division (a)(1) of this section.
(ORC 3716.11)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(ORC 3716.99(C))
§ 636.17 DOMESTIC VIOLENCE.
   (a)   Prohibited conduct.
      (1)   No person shall knowingly cause or attempt to cause physical harm
to a family or household member.
      (2)   No person shall recklessly cause serious physical harm to a family
or household member.
      (3)   No person, by threat of force, shall knowingly cause a family or
household member to believe that the offender will cause imminent physical harm
to the family or household member.
      (4)   A.   Whoever violates this section is guilty of domestic violence,
and the court shall sentence the offender as provided in divisions (a)(4)B. to
(a)(4)E. of this section.
         B.   Except as otherwise provided in division (a)(4)C., (a)(4)D. or
(a)(4)E. of this section, a violation of division (a)(3) is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree and a violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2) is a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
         C.   Except as otherwise provided in division (a)(4)D. of this
section, if the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted of
domestic violence, a violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or
law of this or any other state or the United States that is substantially
equivalent to domestic violence, a violation of R.C. § 2903.14, 2909.06,
2909.07, 2911.12, 2911.211 or 2919.22 if the victim of the violation was a
family or household member at the time of the violation, a violation of an
existing or former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or the
United States that is substantially equivalent to any of those sections if the
victim of the violation was a family or household member at the time of the
commission of the violation, or any offense of violence if the victim of the
offense was a family or household member at the time of the commission of the
offense, a violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2) is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law, and a violation of division (a)(3) is a
misdemeanor of the second degree.
         D.   If the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been
convicted of two or more offenses of domestic violence or two or more
violations or offenses of the type described in division (a)(4)C. of this
section involving a person who was a family or household member at the time of
the violations or offenses, a violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation
of division (a)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted of two or more
offenses of domestic violence or two or more violations or offenses of the type
described in division (a)(4)C. of this section involving a person who was a
family or household member at the time of the violations or offenses, and the
offender knew that the victim of the violation was pregnant at the time of the
violation, a violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         E.   Except as otherwise provided in division (a)(4)C. or (a)(4)D. of
this section, if the offender knew that the victim of the violation was
pregnant at the time of the violation, a violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2)
of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law, and a
violation of division (a)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
      (5)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no court or
unit of state or local government shall charge any fee, cost, deposit or money
in connection with the filing of charges against a person alleging that the
person violated this section or a municipal ordinance substantially equivalent
to this section or in connection with the prosecution of any charges so filed.
      (6)   As used in this section:
         A.   FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER. Any of the following:
            1.   Any of the following who is residing or has resided with the
offender:
               a.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse as defined below, or
a former spouse of the offender;
               b.   A parent, a foster parent, or a child of the offender, or
another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the offender;
               c.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person living as a spouse,
or former spouse of the offender, or another person related by consanguinity or
affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse, or former spouse of the
offender.
            2.   The natural parent of any child of whom the offender is the
other natural parent or is the putative other natural parent.
         B.   PERSON LIVING AS A SPOUSE. A person who is living or has lived
with the offender in a common law marital relationship, who otherwise is
cohabiting with the offender, or who otherwise has cohabited with the offender
within five years prior to the date of the alleged commission of the act in
question.
(ORC 2919.25)
   (b)   Temporary protection order. Consult Ohio R.C. 2919.26 for current
provisions regarding protection orders.
   (c)   Violating a protection order, consent agreement, anti-stalking
protection order or order issued by a court of another state. See §
636.045(c) for current provisions.
§ 636.18 SAFETY OF CROWDS ATTENDING LIVE ENTERTAINMENT PERFORMANCES.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   CONCERT. A musical performance of which the primary component is a
presentation by persons singing or playing musical instruments, that is
intended by its sponsors mainly, but not necessarily exclusively, for the
listening enjoyment of the audience, and that is held in a facility. A CONCERT
does not include any performance in which music is a part of the presentation
and the primary component of which is acting, dancing, a motion picture, a
demonstration of skills or talent other than singing or playing an instrument,
an athletic event, an exhibition or a speech.
      (2)   FACILITY. Any structure that has a roof or partial roof and that
has walls that wholly surround the area on all sides, including, but not
limited to, a stadium, hall, arena, armory, auditorium, ballroom, exhibition
hall, convention center or music hall.
      (3)   LIVE ENTERTAINMENT PERFORMANCE. Any live speech; any live musical
performance, including a concert; any live dramatic performance; any live
variety show; and any other live performance with respect to which the primary
intent of the audience can be construed to be viewing the performers. A LIVE
ENTERTAINMENT PERFORMANCE does not include any form of entertainment with
respect to which the person purchasing a ticket routinely participates in
amusements as well as views performers.
      (4)   PERSON. Includes, in addition to an individual or entity specified
in Ohio R.C. 1.59(C), any governmental entity.
      (5)   RESTRICTED ENTERTAINMENT AREA. Any wholly or partially enclosed
area, whether indoors or outdoors, that has limited access through established
entrances or established turnstiles or similar devices.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall sell, offer to sell, or offer in return for a
donation, any ticket that is not numbered and that does not correspond to a
specific seat for admission to either of the following:
         A.   A live entertainment performance that is not exempted under
division (d) of this section, that is held in a restricted entertainment area,
and for which more than 8,000 tickets are offered to the public;
         B.   A concert that is not exempted under division (d) of this section
and for which more than 3,000 tickets are offered to the public.
      (2)   No person shall advertise any live entertainment performance as
described in division (b)(1)A. of this section or any concert as described in
division (b)(1)B. of this section, unless the advertisement contains the words
RESERVED SEATS ONLY.
   (c)   Unless exempted by division (d)(1) of this section, no person who owns
or operates any restricted entertainment area shall fail to open, maintain and
properly staff at least the number of entrances designated under division (e)
of this section for a minimum of 90 minutes prior to the scheduled start of any
live entertainment performance that is held in the restricted entertainment
area and for which more than 3,000 tickets are sold, offered for sale or
offered in return for a donation.
   (d)   (1)   A live entertainment performance, other than a concert, is
exempted from the provisions of divisions (b) and (c) of this section if both
of the following apply:
         A.   The restricted entertainment area in which the performance is
held has at least eight entrances or, if both entrances and separate admission
turnstiles or similar devices are used, has at least eight turnstiles or
similar devices.
         B.   The eight entrances or, if applicable, the eight turnstiles or
similar devices, are opened, maintained and properly staffed at least one hour
prior to the scheduled start of the performance.
      (2)   A.   The officer responsible for public safety in the Municipality
may, upon application of the sponsor of a concert covered by division (b) of
this section, exempt the concert from the provisions of that division if such
officer finds that the health, safety and welfare of the participants and
spectators would not be substantially affected by failure to comply with the
provisions of that division. In determining whether to grant an exemption, the
officer shall consider the following factors:
            1.   The size and design of the facility in which the concert is
scheduled;
            2.   The size, age and anticipated conduct of the crowd expected to
attend the concert;
            3.   The ability of the sponsor to manage and control the expected
crowd. If the sponsor of any concert desires to obtain an exemption under this
division, the sponsor shall apply to the appropriate official on a form
prescribed by that official. The official shall issue an order that grants or
denies the exemption within five days after receipt of the application. The
sponsor may appeal any order that denies an exemption to the Court of Common
Pleas of the county in which the facility is located.
         B.   If an official grants an exemption under division (d)(2)A. of
this section, the official shall designate an on-duty law enforcement officer
to be present at the concert. The designated officer has authority to issue
orders to all security personnel at the concert to protect the health, safety
and welfare of the participants and spectators.
      (3)   Notwithstanding division (d)(2) of this section, in the case of a
concert held in a facility located on the campus of an educational institution
covered by Ohio R.C. 3345.04, a State university law enforcement officer
appointed pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3345.04 and 3345.21 shall do both of the
following:
         A.   Exercise the authority to grant exemptions provided by division
(d)(2)A. of this section in lieu of an official designated in that division;
         B.   If the officer grants an exemption under division (d)(3)A. of
this section, designate an on-duty State university law enforcement officer to
be present at the concert. The designated officer has authority to issue orders
to all security personnel at the concert to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the participants and spectators.
   (e)   (1)   Unless a live entertainment performance is exempted by division
(d)(1) of this section, the officer responsible for public safety within the
Municipality shall designate, for purposes of division (c) of this section, the
minimum number of entrances required to be opened, maintained and staffed at
each live entertainment performance so as to permit crowd control and reduce
congestion at the entrances. The designation shall be based on such factors as
the size and nature of the crowd expected to attend the live entertainment
performance, the length of time prior to the live entertainment performance
that crowds are expected to congregate at the entrances and the amount of
security provided at the restricted entertainment area.
      (2)   Notwithstanding division (e)(1) of this section, a State university
law enforcement officer appointed pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3345.04 and 3345.21
shall designate the number of entrances required to be opened, maintained and
staffed in the case of a live entertainment performance that is held at a
restricted entertainment area located on the campus of an educational
institution covered by Ohio R.C. 3345.04.
   (f)   No person shall enter into any contract for a live entertainment
performance that does not permit or require compliance with this section.
   (g)   (1)   This section does not apply to a live entertainment performance
held in a restricted entertainment area if one admission ticket entitles the
holder to view or participate in three or more different games, rides,
activities or live entertainment performances occurring simultaneously at
different sites within the restricted entertainment area and if the initial
admittance entrance to the restricted entertainment area, for which the ticket
is required, is separate from the entrance to any specific live entertainment
performance and an additional ticket is not required for admission to the
particular live entertainment performance.
      (2)   This section does not apply to a symphony orchestra performance, a
ballet performance, horse races, dances or fairs.
   (h)   This section does not prohibit the Council from imposing additional
requirements, not in conflict with the section, for the promotion or holding of
live entertainment performances.
   (i)   Whoever violates division (b), (c) or (f) of this section is guilty of
a misdemeanor of the first degree. If any individual suffers physical harm to
his or her person as a result of a violation of this section, the sentencing
court shall consider this factor in favor of imposing a term of imprisonment
upon the offender.
(ORC 2917.40)
§ 636.19 HAZING.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   HAZING. Means doing any act or coercing another, including the
victim, to do any act of initiation into any student or other organization or
any act to continue or reinstate membership in or affiliation with any student
or other organization that causes or creates a substantial risk of causing
mental or physical harm to any person, including coercing another to consume
alcohol or a drug of abuse, as defined in R.C. § 3719.011.
      (2)   ORGANIZATION. Includes a national or international organization
with which a fraternity or sorority is affiliated.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall recklessly participate in the hazing of another.
      (2)   No administrator, employee, faculty member, teacher, consultant,
alumnus, or volunteer of any organization, including any primary, secondary, or
post-secondary school or any other educational institution, public or private,
shall recklessly permit the hazing of any person associated with the
organization.
   (c)   (1)   No person shall recklessly participate in the hazing of another
when the hazing includes coerced consumption of alcohol or drugs of abuse
resulting in serious physical harm to the other person.
      (2)   No administrator, employee, faculty member, teacher, consultant,
alumnus, or volunteer of any organization, including any primary, secondary, or
post-secondary school or any other educational institution, public or private,
shall recklessly permit the hazing of any person associated with the
organization when the hazing includes coerced consumption of alcohol or drugs
of abuse resulting in serious physical harm to that person.
   (d)   Whoever violates divisions (b) or (c) of this section is guilty of
hazing. A violation of division (b)(1) or (b)(2) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the second degree. A violation of division (c)(1) or (c)(2) of
this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2903.31)
   (e)   Reckless failure to immediately report knowledge of hazing.
      (1)   No administrator, employee, faculty member, teacher, consultant,
alumnus, or volunteer of any organization, including any primary, secondary, or
post-secondary school or any other public or private educational institution,
who is acting in an official and professional capacity shall recklessly fail to
immediately report the knowledge of hazing to a law enforcement agency in the
county in which the victim of hazing resides or in which the hazing is
occurring or has occurred.
      (2)   A violation of division (e)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree, except that the violation is a misdemeanor of the first
degree if the hazing causes serious physical harm.
(R.C. § 2903.311(B), (C))
   (f)   (1)   Any person who is subject to hazing, as defined in division (a)
of this section, may commence a civil action for injury or damages, including
mental and physical pain and suffering, that result from the hazing. The action
may be brought against any participant in the hazing, any organization whose
local or national directors, trustees or officers authorized, requested,
commanded or tolerated the hazing, and any local or national director, trustee
or officer of the organization who authorized, requested, commanded or
tolerated the hazing. If the hazing involves students in a primary, secondary
or post- secondary school, university, college or any other educational
institution, an action may also be brought against any administrator, employee
or faculty member of the school, university, college or other educational
institution who knew or reasonably should have known of the hazing and who did
make reasonable attempts to prevent it and against the school, university,
college or other educational institution. If an administrator, employee or
faculty member is found liable in a civil action for hazing, then
notwithstanding Ohio R.C. Chapter 2743, the school, university, college or
other educational institution that employed the administrator, employee or
faculty member may also be held liable.
      (2)   The negligence or consent of the plaintiff or any assumption of the
risk by the plaintiff is not a defense to an action brought pursuant to this
section. In an action against a school, university, college or other
educational institution, it is an affirmative defense that the school,
university, college or other institution was actively enforcing a policy
against hazing at the time the cause of action arose.
(R.C. § 2307.44)
    (g)   The penalty provided for in division (d) shall be in addition to the
civil remedy provided for in division (f) of this section.
(Ord. 083-58, passed 6-21-1983)
Statutory reference:
   Civil liability for hazing, see Ohio R.C. 2307.44
§ 636.20 ILLEGAL DISTRIBUTION OF CIGARETTES, OTHER TOBACCO PRODUCTS, OR
ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS; TRANSACTION SCANS.
   (a)   Illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products.
      (1)   As used in this section:
         A.   AGE VERIFICATION. A service provided by an independent third
party (other than a manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or
retailer of cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products,
or papers used to roll cigarettes) that compares information available from a
commercially available database, or aggregate of databases, that regularly are
used by government and businesses for the purpose of age and identity
verification to personal information provided during an internet sale or other
remote method of sale to establish that the purchaser is 21 years of age or
older.
         B.   ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT.
            1.   Subject to division 2. of this definition, an electronic
smoking device, vapor product, or any other product or device that consists of
or contains nicotine that can be ingested into the body by any means,
including, but not limited to, chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving, or
inhaling.
            2.   The phrase does not include any of the following:
               a.   Any cigarette or other tobacco product;
               b.   Any product that is a “drug” as that term is defined in 21
U.S.C. § 321(g)(1);
               c.   Any product that is a “device” as that term is defined in
21 U.S.C. § 321(h);
               d.   Any product that is a “combination product” as described in
21 U.S.C. § 353(g).
         C.   CIGARETTE. Includes clove cigarettes and hand-rolled cigarettes.
         D.   DISTRIBUTE. Means to furnish, give, or provide cigarettes, other
tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll
cigarettes to the ultimate consumer of the cigarettes, other tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes.
         E.   ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE. Means any device that can be used to
deliver aerosolized or vaporized nicotine or any other substance to the person
inhaling from the device including an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar,
electronic hookah, vaping pen, or electronic pipe. The phrase includes any
component, part, or accessory of such a device, whether or not sold separately,
and includes any substance intended to be aerosolized or vaporized during the
use of the device. The phrase does not include any product that is a drug,
device, or combination product, as those terms are defined or described in 21
U.S.C. §§ 321 and 353(g).
         F.   PROOF OF AGE. Means a driver’s license, a commercial driver’s
license, a military identification card, a passport, or an identification card
issued under R.C. §§ 4507.50 to 4507.52 that shows that a person is 21 years of
age or older.
         G.   TOBACCO PRODUCT. Means any product that is made or derived from
tobacco or that contains any form of nicotine, if it is intended for human
consumption or is likely to be consumed, whether smoked, heated, chewed,
absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, or ingested by any other means, including, but
not limited to, a cigarette, an electronic smoking device, a cigar, pipe
tobacco, chewing tobacco, snuff, or snus. The phrase also means any component
or accessory used in the consumption of a tobacco product, such as filters,
rolling papers, pipes, blunt or hemp wraps, and liquids used in electronic
smoking devices, whether or not they contain nicotine. The phrase does not
include any product that is a drug, device, or combination product, as those
terms are defined or described in 21 U.S.C. §§ 321 and 353(g).
         H.   VAPOR PRODUCT. Means a product, other than a cigarette or other
tobacco product as defined in R.C. Chapter 5743, that contains or is made or
derived from nicotine and that is intended and marketed for human consumption,
including by smoking, inhaling, snorting, or sniffing. The phrase includes any
component, part, or additive that is intended for use in an electronic smoking
device, a mechanical heating element, battery, or electronic circuit and is
used to deliver the product. The phrase does not include any product that is a
drug, device, or combination product, as those terms are defined or described
in 21 U.S.C. §§ 321 and 353(g). The phrase includes any product containing
nicotine, regardless of concentration.
         I.   VENDING MACHINE. Has the same meaning as “coin machine” in R.C. §
2913.01.
      (2)   No manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or retailer of
cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers
used to roll cigarettes, no agent, employee, or representative of a
manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or retailer of cigarettes,
other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll
cigarettes, and no other person shall do any of the following:
         A.   Give, sell, or otherwise distribute cigarettes, other tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes:
            1.   To any person under 21 years of age; or
            2.   Without first verifying proof of age.
         B.   Give away, sell, or distribute cigarettes, other tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes in
any place that does not have posted in a conspicuous place a legibly printed
sign in letters at least one-half inch high stating that giving, selling, or
otherwise distributing cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or papers used to roll cigarettes to a person under 21 years of age
is prohibited by law;
         C.   Knowingly furnish any false information regarding the name, age,
or other identification of any person under 21 years of age with purpose to
obtain cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or
papers used to roll cigarettes for that person;
         D.   Manufacture, sell, or distribute in this state any pack or other
container of cigarettes containing fewer than 20 cigarettes or any package of
roll-your-own tobacco containing less than six-tenths of one ounce of tobacco;
         E.   Sell cigarettes or alternative nicotine products in a smaller
quantity than that placed in the pack or other container by the manufacturer;
         F.   Give, sell, or otherwise distribute alternative nicotine
products, papers used to roll cigarettes, or tobacco products other than
cigarettes over the internet or through another remote method without age
verification;
         G.   Allow an employee under 18 years of age to sell any tobacco
product;
         H.   Give away or otherwise distribute free samples of cigarettes,
other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or coupons redeemable
for cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alterative tobacco products.
      (3)   No person shall sell or offer to sell cigarettes, other tobacco
products, or alternative nicotine products by or from a vending machine, except
in the following locations:
         A.   An area within a factory, business, office, or other place not
open to the general public;
         B.   An area to which persons under 21 years of age are not generally
permitted access;
         C.   Any other place not identified in division (a)(3)A. or (a)(3)B.
of this section, upon all of the following conditions:
            1.   The vending machine is located within the immediate vicinity,
plain view, and control of the person who owns or operates the place, or an
employee of that person, so that all cigarettes, other tobacco product, and
alternative nicotine product purchases from the vending machine will be readily
observed by the person who owns or operates the place or an employee of that
person. For the purpose of this section, a vending machine located in any
unmonitored area, including an unmonitored coatroom, restroom, hallway, or
outer waiting area, shall not be considered located within the immediate
vicinity, plain view, and control of the person who owns or operates the place,
or an employee of that person.
            2.   The vending machine is inaccessible to the public when the
place is closed.
            3.   A clearly visible notice is posted in the area where the
vending machine is located that states the following in letters that are
legibly printed and at least one-half inch high: “It is illegal for any person
under the age of 21 to purchase tobacco or alternative nicotine products.”
      (4)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under division
(a)(2)A. of this section:
         A.   The person under 21 years of age was accompanied by a parent,
spouse who is 21 years of age or older, or legal guardian of the person under
21 years of age.
         B.   The person who gave, sold, or distributed cigarettes, other
tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll
cigarettes to a person under 21 years of age under division (a)(2)A. of this
section is a parent, spouse who is 21 years of age or older, or legal guardian
of the person under 21 years of age.
      (5)   A.   It is not a violation of division (a)(2)A. or (a)(2)B. of this
section for a person to give or otherwise distribute to a person under 21 years
of age cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or
papers used to roll cigarettes while the person under 21 years of age is
participating in a research protocol if all of the following apply:
            1.   The parent, guardian, or legal custodian of the person under
21 years of age has consented in writing to the person under 21 years of age
participating in the research protocol.
            2.   An institutional human subjects protection review board, or an
equivalent entity, has approved the research protocol.
            3.   The person under 21 years of age is participating in the
research protocol at the facility or location specified in the research
protocol.
         B.   It is not a violation of division (a)(2)A. or (a)(2)B. of this
section for an employer to permit an employee 18, 19, or 20 years of age to
sell a tobacco product.
      (6)   A.   No delivery service shall accept from, transport or deliver
to, or allow pick-up by, a person under 21 years of age with respect to any of
the following:
            1.   Alternative nicotine products;
            2.   Papers used to roll cigarettes;
            3.   Tobacco products other than cigarettes.
         B.   A delivery service shall require proof of age as a condition of
accepting, transporting, delivering, or allowing pickup of the items described
in divisions (a)(6)A.1. to 3. of this section.
      (7)   Whoever violates division (a)(2)A., (a)(2)B., (a)(2)D., (a)(2)E.,
(a)(2)F., (a)(2)G., (a)(2)H., (a)(3) or (a)(6) of this section is guilty of
illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative
nicotine products. Except as otherwise provided in this division, illegal
distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine
products is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to illegal distribution of cigarettes,
other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products is a misdemeanor of
the third degree.
      (8)   A.   Notwithstanding R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2), if an offender is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of division (a)(2)A. of this
section, the court shall impose a fine in the following amount:
            1.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (a)(8)A.2., (a)
(8)A.3., (a)(8)A.4., and (a)(8)A.5. of this section, not more than $250;
            2.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (a)(8)A.3., (a)
(8)A.4., and (a)(8)A.5. of this section, if an offender has previously been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (a)(2)A. of this
section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, not
more than $500;
            3.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (a)(8)A.4. and (a)
(8)A.5. of this section, if an offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to two or more violations of division (a)(2)A. of this section
or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, $500;
            4.   Except as otherwise provided in division (a)(8)A.5. of this
section, if an offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
three or more violations of division (a)(2)A. of this section or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, $1,000;
            5.   If an offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to four or more violations of division (a)(2)A. of this section or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, $1,500.
         B.   The financial sanctions required by division (a)(8)A. of this
section are in lieu of the financial sanctions described in R.C. § 2929.28(A)
(2), but are in addition to any other sanctions or penalties that may apply to
the offender, including other financial sanctions under that section or a jail
term under R.C. § 2929.24.
      (9)   Whoever violates division (a)(2)C. of this section is guilty of
permitting a person under 21 years of age to use cigarettes, other tobacco
products, or alternative nicotine products. Except as otherwise provided in
this division, permitting a person under 21 years of age to use cigarettes,
other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation
of division (a)(2)C. of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, permitting a person under 21 years of age to use
cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products is a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (10)   Any cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or papers used to roll cigarettes that are given, sold, or otherwise
distributed to a person under 21 years of age in violation of this section and
that are used, possessed, purchased, or received by a person under 21 years of
age in violation of R.C. § 2151.87 are subject to seizure and forfeiture as
contraband under R.C. Chapter 2981.
(R.C. § 2927.02)
   (b)   Transaction scan.
      (1)   As used in this division and division (c) of this section:
         A.   CARD HOLDER. Means any person who presents a driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or an identification card to a seller, or an agent
or employee of a seller, to purchase or receive cigarettes, other tobacco
products, or alternative nicotine products from a seller, agent, or employee.
         B.   IDENTIFICATION CARD. Means an identification card issued under
R.C. §§ 4507.50 through 4507.52.
         C.   SELLER. Means a seller of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products and includes any person whose gift of or other
distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine
products is subject to the prohibitions of division A. of this section.
         D.   TRANSACTION SCAN. Means the process by which a seller or an agent
or employee of a seller checks, by means of a transaction scan device, the
validity of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification card
that is presented as a condition for purchasing or receiving cigarettes, other
tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products.
         E.   TRANSACTION SCAN DEVICE. Means any commercial device or
combination of devices used at a point of sale that is capable of deciphering
in an electronically readable format the information encoded on the magnetic
strip or bar code of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an
identification card.
      (2)   A.   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may perform a
transaction scan by means of a transaction scan device to check the validity of
a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a
card holder as a condition for selling, giving away, or otherwise distributing
to the card holder cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine
products.
         B.   If the information deciphered by the transaction scan performed
under division (b)(2)A. of this section fails to match the information printed
on the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented
by the card holder, or if the transaction scan indicates that the information
so printed is false or fraudulent, neither the seller nor any agent or employee
of the seller shall sell, give away, or otherwise distribute any cigarettes,
other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products to the card holder.
         C.   Division (b)(2)A. of this section does not preclude a seller or
an agent or employee of a seller from using a transaction scan device to check
the validity of a document other than a driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or identification card, if the document includes a bar code or magnetic strip
that may be scanned by the device, as a condition for selling, giving away, or
otherwise distributing cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative
nicotine products to the person presenting the document.
      (3)   Rules adopted by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles under R.C. §
4301.61(C) apply to the use of transaction scan devices for purposes of this
division (b) and division (c) of this section.
      (4)   A.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall
electronically or mechanically record or maintain any information derived from
a transaction scan, except for the following:
            1.   The name and date of birth of the person listed on the
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by the
card holder;
            2.   The expiration date and identification number of the driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by the card
holder.
         B.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use the
information that is derived from a transaction scan or that is permitted to be
recorded and maintained under division (b)(4)A. of this section, except for
purposes of division (c) of this section.
         C,   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use a
transaction scan device for a purpose other than the purpose specified in
division (c)(2)A. of this section.
         D.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall sell or
otherwise disseminate the information derived from a transaction scan to any
third party, including but not limited to selling or otherwise disseminating
that information for any marketing, advertising, or promotional activities, but
a seller or agent or employee of a seller may release that information pursuant
to a court order or as specifically authorized by division (c) of this section
or another section of this code or the Ohio Revised Code.
      (5)   Nothing in this division (b) or division (c) of this section
relieves a seller or an agent or employee of a seller of any responsibility to
comply with any other applicable local, state or federal laws or rules
governing the sale, giving away, or other distribution of cigarettes, other
tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products.
      (6)   Whoever violates division (b)(2)B. or (b)(4) of this section is
guilty of engaging in an illegal tobacco product or alternative nicotine
product transaction scan, and the court may impose upon the offender a civil
penalty of up to $1,000 for each violation. The Clerk of the Court shall pay
each collected civil penalty to the County Treasurer for deposit into the
County Treasury.
(R.C. § 2927.021)
   (c)   Affirmative defenses.
      (1)   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may not be found
guilty of a charge of a violation of division (a) of this section in which the
age of the purchaser or other recipient of cigarettes, other tobacco products,
or alternative nicotine products is an element of the alleged violation, if the
seller, agent, or employee raises and proves as an affirmative defense that all
of the following occurred:
         A.   A card holder attempting to purchase or receive cigarettes, other
tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products presented a driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or an identification card.
         B.   A transaction scan of the driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or identification card that the card holder presented indicated that the
license or card was valid.
         C.   The cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine
products were sold, given away, or otherwise distributed to the card holder in
reasonable reliance upon the identification presented and the completed
transaction scan.
      (2)   In determining whether a seller or an agent or employee of a seller
has proven the affirmative defense provided by division (c)(1) of this section,
the trier of fact in the action for the alleged violation of division (a) of
this section shall consider any written policy that the seller has adopted and
implemented and that is intended to prevent violations of division (a) of this
section. For purposes of division (c)(1)C. of this section, the trier of fact
shall consider that reasonable reliance upon the identification presented and
the completed transaction scan may require a seller or an agent or employee of
a seller to exercise reasonable diligence to determine, and that the use of a
transaction scan device does not excuse a seller or an agent or employee of a
seller from exercising reasonable diligence to determine, the following:
         A.   Whether a person to whom the seller or agent or employee of a
seller sells, gives away, or otherwise distributes cigarettes, other tobacco
products, or alternative nicotine products is 21 years of age or older;
         B.   Whether the description and picture appearing on the driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a card holder
is that of the card holder.
      (3)   In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense provided by
division (c)(1) of this section is raised, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a
deputy registrar who issued an identification card under R.C. §§ 4507.50
through 4507.52 shall be permitted to submit certified copies of the records of
that issuance in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of or contractors with
the Bureau of Motor Vehicles in the action.
(R.C. § 2927.022)
   (d)   Shipment of tobacco products.
      (1)   As used in this division (d):
         A.   AUTHORIZED RECIPIENT OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS. Means:
            1.   In the case of cigarettes, a person who is:
               a.    Licensed as a cigarette wholesale dealer under R.C. §
5743.15;
               b.    Licensed as a retail dealer as long as the person
purchases cigarettes with the appropriate tax stamp affixed;
               c.   An export warehouse proprietor as defined in Internal
Revenue Code § 5702;
               d.   An operator of a customs bonded warehouse under 19 U.S.C. §
1311 or 19 U.S.C. § 1555;
               e.   An officer, employee, or agent of the federal government or
of this state acting in the person's official capacity;
               f.   A department, agency, instrumentality, or political
subdivision of the federal government or of this state;
               g.   A person having a consent for consumer shipment issued by
the Ohio Tax Commissioner under R.C. § 5743.71.
            2.   In the case of electronic smoking devices or vapor products, a
person who is:
               a.    Licensed as a distributor of tobacco or vapor products
under R.C. § 5743.61;
               b.   A retail dealer of vapor products, as defined in R.C. §
5741.01(C)(3), that is not licensed as a vapor distributor, as long as the tax
levied by R.C. § 5743.51, 5743.62, or 5743.63, as applicable, has been paid;
               c.   An operator of a customs bonded warehouse under 19 U.S.C. §
1311 or 19 U.S.C. § 1555;
               d.   An officer, employee, or agent of the federal government or
of this state acting in the person's official capacity;
               e.   A department, agency, instrumentality, or political
subdivision of the federal government or of this state.
         B.   MOTOR CARRIER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4923.01.
      (2)   The purpose of this section is to prevent the sale of cigarettes,
electronic smoking devices, and vapor products to minors and to ensure
compliance with the Master Settlement Agreement, as defined in R.C. § 1346.01.
      (3)   A.   No person shall cause to be shipped any cigarettes, electronic
smoking devices, and vapor products to any person in this municipality other
than an authorized recipient of tobacco products.
         B.   No motor carrier, or other person shall knowingly transport
cigarettes, electronic smoking devices, and vapor products to any person in
this municipality that the carrier or other person reasonably believes is not
an authorized recipient of tobacco products. If cigarettes, electronic smoking
devices, and vapor products are transported to a home or residence, it shall be
presumed that the motor carrier, or other person knew that the person to whom
the cigarettes, electronic smoking devices, and vapor products were delivered
was not an authorized recipient of tobacco products.
      (4)   No person engaged in the business of selling cigarettes, electronic
smoking devices, and vapor products who ships or causes to be shipped
cigarettes, electronic smoking devices, and vapor products to any person in
this municipality in any container or wrapping other than the original
container or wrapping shall fail to plainly and visibly mark the exterior of
the container or wrapping in which the cigarettes, electronic smoking devices,
and vapor products are shipped with the words “cigarettes”, “electronic smoking
devices”, or “vapor products”, as applicable.
      (5)   A court shall impose a fine of up to $1,000 for each violation of
division (d)(3)A., (d)(3)B. or (d)(4) of this section.
(R.C. § 2927.023)
   (e)   Furnishing false information to obtain tobacco products.
      (1)   No person who is 18 years of age or older but younger than 21 years
of age shall knowingly furnish false information concerning that person’s name,
age, or other identification for the purpose of obtaining tobacco products.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (e)(1) of this section is guilty of
furnishing false information to obtain tobacco products. Except as otherwise
provided in this division, furnishing false information to obtain tobacco
products is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (e)(1) of this
section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
furnishing false information to obtain tobacco products is a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
(R.C. § 2927.024)
§ 636.21 ETHNIC INTIMIDATION.
   (a)   No person shall violate Ohio R.C. 2903.21, 2903.22, 2909.06, or
2909.07, or Ohio R.C. 2917.21(A)(3), (4), or (5), or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance to any of these sections, by reason of the race,
color, religion, or national origin of another person or group of persons.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of ethnic intimidation. Ethnic
intimidation is an offense of the next higher degree than the offense the
commission of which is a necessary element of ethnic intimidation. In the case
of an offense that is a misdemeanor of the first degree, ethnic intimidation is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate State law.
(ORC 2927.12)
§ 636.22 ILLEGAL USE OF A TRACKING DEVICE OR APPLICATION.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   BUSINESS ENTITY. Means any form of corporation, partnership,
association, cooperative, joint venture, business trust, or sole proprietorship
that conducts business in this state.
      (2)   BUSINESS OF PRIVATE INVESTIGATION. Has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 4749.01.
      (3)   DISABLED ADULT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      (4)   ELDERLY PERSON. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      (5)   ELECTRONIC MONITORING. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      (6)   ELECTRONIC MONITORING DEVICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2929.01.
      (7)   LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. Means any organization or unit comprised of
law enforcement officers, and also includes any federal or military law
enforcement agency.
      (8)   OHIO PROTECTION ORDER. Means a protection order filed or issued or
a consent agreement approved pursuant to R.C. § 2919.26 or 3113.31, a
protection order filed or issued pursuant to R.C. § 2151.34, 2903.213, or
2903.214, or a no contact order issued as any of the following:
         A.   As part of a person’s sentence under a community control sanction
imposed under R.C. § 2929.16, 2929.17, 2929.26, or 2929.27;
         B.   As a term or condition of a person’s release under R.C. §
2929.20;
         C.   As a post-release control sanction imposed as a condition of a
person’s post-release control under R.C. § 2967.28;
         D.   As a term of supervision for a person transferred to transitional
control under R.C. § 2967.26;
         E.   As a term or condition of the intervention plan of a person
granted intervention in lieu of conviction under R.C. § 2951.041.
      (9)   PERSON. Means an individual, but does not include a business
entity.
      (10)   PRIVATE INVESTIGATOR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4749.01.
      (11)   PROTECTION ORDER ISSUED BY A COURT OF ANOTHER STATE. Has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 2919.27.
      (12)   TRACKING APPLICATION. Means any software program that permits a
person to remotely determine or track the position or movement of another
person or another person’s property.
      (13)   TRACKING DEVICE. Means an electronic or mechanical device that
permits a person to remotely determine or track the position or movement of
another person or another person’s property, including an electronic monitoring
device.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in division (d) of this section, no
person shall knowingly do either of the following:
      (1)   Install a tracking device or tracking application on another
person’s property without the other person’s consent or cause a tracking device
or tracking application to track the position or movement of another person or
another person’s property without the other person’s consent;
      (2)   If the person installed a tracking device or tracking application
on another’s property with the other person’s consent and the other person
subsequently revokes that consent, fail to remove or ensure the removal of the
device or application after the other person revokes the consent.
   (c)   (1)   For purposes of this section, if a person has given consent for
another to install a tracking device or tracking application on the consenting
person’s property, it is presumed that the consenting person has revoked that
consent if any of the following applies:
         A.   The consenting person and the person to whom consent was given
are lawfully married and one of them files a complaint for divorce or a
petition for dissolution of marriage from the other. Not later than 72 hours
after being served with a complaint for divorce or a petition for dissolution
of marriage, the person to whom consent was given shall lawfully uninstall or
discontinue use of the tracking device or tracking application. If the person
to whom consent was given cannot lawfully uninstall or discontinue use of the
tracking device or tracking application, the person to whom consent was given
shall notify the court in which the complaint for divorce or the petition for
dissolution of marriage was filed in writing.
         B.   The consenting person or the person to whom consent was given
files an Ohio protection order against the other person or an Ohio protection
order is issued against the other person, and the person to be protected under
the order is the consenting person. Not later than 72 hours after being served
with the Ohio protection order, the person to whom consent was given shall
lawfully uninstall or discontinue use of the tracking device or tracking
application. If the person to whom consent was given cannot lawfully uninstall
or discontinue use of the tracking device or tracking application, the person
to whom consent was given shall notify the court that issued the Ohio
protection order in writing that the person to whom consent was given has
installed or is using a tracking device or tracking application on the
previously consenting person’s person or the person’s property and cannot
uninstall or discontinue its use without violating the Ohio protection order.
      (2)   Revocation of consent under this division is effective upon the
service of the petition or motion or an Ohio protection order.
   (d)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   A law enforcement officer, or any law enforcement agency, that
installs a tracking device or tracking application on another person’s property
or causes a tracking device or tracking application to track the position or
movement of another person or another person’s property as part of a criminal
investigation, or a probation officer, parole officer, or employee of the
department of rehabilitation and correction, a halfway house, or a community-
based correctional facility when engaged in the lawful performance of the
officer’s or employee’s official duties;
      (2)   A parent or legal guardian of a minor child who installs or uses a
tracking device or tracking application to track the minor child if any of the
following applies:
         A.   The parents or legal guardians of the child are lawfully married
to each other and are not separated or otherwise living apart, and either of
those parents or legal guardians consents to the installation of the tracking
device or tracking application;
         B.   The parent or legal guardian of the child is the sole surviving
parent or legal guardian of the child;
         C.   The parent or legal guardian of the child has sole custody of the
child;
         D.   The parents or legal guardians of the child are divorced,
separated, or otherwise living apart and neither parent has sole custody of the
child, and both consent to the installation of the tracking device or tracking
application;
         E.   The parents or legal guardians of the child are divorced,
separated, or otherwise living apart, neither parent has sole custody of the
child, and either only one parent consents to the installation of the tracking
device or tracking application or one parent revokes consent, if the consenting
parent only uses the tracking device or tracking application during that
parent’s parenting or custodial time and disables or removes the tracking
device or application during the nonconsenting parent’s parenting or custodial
time.
      (3)   A caregiver of an elderly person or disabled adult, if the elderly
person’s or disabled adult’s treating physician certifies that the installation
of a tracking device or tracking application onto the elderly person’s or
disabled adult’s property is necessary to ensure the safety of the elderly
person or disabled adult;
      (4)   A person acting in good faith on behalf of a business entity for a
legitimate business purpose, provided that this division does not apply to a
private investigator engaged in the business of private investigation on behalf
of another person;
      (5)   A.   A private investigator or other person licensed under R.C. §
4749.03, who is acting in the normal course of the investigator’s business of
private investigation on behalf of another person and who has the consent of
the owner of the property upon which the tracking device or tracking
application is installed, for the purpose of obtaining information with
reference to any of the following:
            1.   Criminal offenses committed, threatened, or suspected against
the United States, a territory of the United States, a state, or any person or
legal entity;
            2.   Locating an individual known to be a fugitive from justice;
            3.   Locating lost or stolen property or other assets that have
been awarded by the court;
            4.   Investigating claims related to workers’ compensation.
         B.   This division does not apply if the person on whose behalf the
private investigator is working is the subject of an Ohio protection order or a
protection order issued by a court of another state or if the private
investigator knows or reasonably should know that the person on whose behalf
the private investigator is working seeks the investigator’s services to aid in
the commission of a crime.
      (6)   An owner or lessee of a motor vehicle who installs, or directs the
installation of, a tracking device or tracking application on the vehicle
during the period of ownership or lease, if any of the following applies:
         A.   The tracking device or tracking application is removed before the
vehicle’s title is transferred or the vehicle’s lease expires;
         B.   The new owner of the vehicle, in the case of a sale, or the
lessor of the vehicle, in the case of an expired lease, consents in writing to
the non-removal of the tracking device or tracking application;
         C.   The owner of the vehicle at the time of the installation of the
tracking device or tracking application was the original manufacturer of the
vehicle.
      (7)   A person who installs a tracking device or application on property
in which the person has an ownership or contractual interest, unless the person
is the subject of a protective order and the property is likely to be used by
the person who obtained the protective order;
      (8)   A person or business entity that installs a tracking device or
tracking application on any fixed wing aircraft or rotorcraft operated or
managed by the person or business entity pursuant to 14 C.F.R. part 91 or part
135 to track the position or movement of the fixed wing aircraft or rotorcraft;
      (9)   A surety bail bond agent, or any employee or contractor of a surety
bail bond agent, that installs a tracking device or tracking application on
another person’s property or causes a tracking device or tracking application
to track the position or movement of another person or another person’s
property as part of the surety bail bond agent’s, employee’s, or contractor’s
official responsibilities or duties.
   (e)   For purposes of division (d)(1) of this section, a probation officer,
parole officer, or employee of the department of rehabilitation and correction,
a halfway house, or a community-based correctional facility is engaged in the
lawful performance of the officer’s or employee’s duties if both of the
following apply:
      (1)   The court or the Department of Rehabilitation and Correction
imposes electronic monitoring on a person.
      (2)   The officer or employee installs or uses an electronic monitoring
device on that person in accordance with the court’s or department’s imposition
of electronic monitoring of that person.
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal use of a tracking
device or application.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (f)(2) of this section,
illegal use of a tracking device or application is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
      (2)   Illegal use of a tracking device or application is a felony to be
prosecuted under state law if any of the following applies:
         A.   The offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a violation of this section, R.C. § 2903.216, or R.C. § 2903.211 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
         B.   At the time of the commission of the offense, the offender was
the subject of a protection order issued under R.C. § 2903.213 or 2903.214,
regardless of whether the person to be protected under the order is the victim
of the offense or another person.
         C.   Prior to committing the offense, the offender had been determined
to represent a substantial risk of physical harm to others as manifested by
evidence of then-recent homicidal or other violent behavior, evidence of then-
recent threats that placed another in reasonable fear of violent behavior and
serious physical harm, or other evidence of then-present dangerousness.
         D.   The offender has a history of violence toward the victim or a
history of other violent acts towards the victim.
(R.C. § 2903.216)
§ 636.23 UNLAWFUL COLLECTION OF BODILY SUBSTANCES.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly collect any blood, urine, tissue, or other
bodily substance of another person without privilege or consent to do so.
   (b)   (1)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to any of the
following:
         A.   The collection of any bodily substance of a person by a law
enforcement officer, or by another person pursuant to the direction or advice
of a law enforcement officer, for purposes of a chemical test or tests of the
substance under R.C. § 1547.111(A)(1) or R.C. § 4511.191(A)(2) to determine the
alcohol, drug, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled substance, or
combination content of the bodily substance;
         B.   The collection of any bodily substance of a person by a peace
officer, or by another person pursuant to the direction or advice of a peace
officer, for purposes of a test or tests of the substance as provided in R.C. §
4506.17(A) to determine the person’s alcohol concentration or the presence of
any controlled substance or metabolite of a controlled substance.
      (2)   Division (b)(1) of this section shall not be construed as implying
that the persons identified in divisions (b)(1)A. and B. of this section do not
have privilege to collect the bodily substance of another person as described
in those divisions or as limiting the definition of PRIVILEGE set forth in R.C.
§ 2901.01.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of unlawful
collection of a bodily substance. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, unlawful collection of a bodily substance is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (a) of this section or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, unlawful collection of a bodily
substance is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2927.15)
CHAPTER 642: OFFENSES RELATING TO PROPERTY
642.01   Definitions.
642.02   Theft.
642.03   Degree of offense when certain property involved.
642.035   Evidence of theft of rented property.
642.04   Unauthorized use of a vehicle; vehicle trespass.
642.05   Unauthorized use of property.
642.06   Injuring vines, bushes, trees or crops.
642.07   Desecration.
642.08   Assaulting police dog or horse or assistance dog.
642.09   Arson.
642.10   Criminal damaging or endangering; vehicular vandalism.
642.11   Criminal mischief.
642.12   Criminal trespass.
642.125   Aggravated trespass.
642.13   Tampering with coin machines.
642.14   Passing bad checks.
642.145   Forging or selling forged identification cards.
642.146   Criminal simulation.
642.15   Misuse of credit cards.
642.155   Recording credit card, telephone or Social Security numbers.
642.16   Making or using slugs.
642.17   Prima facie evidence of purpose to defraud.
642.18   Tampering with records.
642.19   Securing writings by deception.
642.20   Personating an officer.
642.205   Identity fraud. (Repealed)
642.21   Defrauding creditors.
642.22   Receiving stolen property.
642.23   Purchase from minors of secondhand builders’ and plumbers’ hardware.
642.24   Billposting.
642.25   Theft of C.A.T.V. (Repealed)
642.26   Prosecutions for theft of utilities.
642.27   Food stamps. (Repealed)
642.28   Insurance fraud.
642.29   Diminishing or interfering with forfeitable property.
642.30   Misconduct involving a public transportation system.
642.31   Workers’ compensation fraud.
642.32   Medicaid fraud.
642.33   Motion picture piracy.
642.34   Railroad vandalism; criminal trespass; interference with operation of
train; grade crossing device vandalism.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar State law
   Value of written instrument or evidence of debt - see Ohio R.C. 1.07
   Determining property value or amount of physical harm in arson - see Ohio
R.C. 2909.11
   Value of stolen property - see Ohio R.C. 2913.61
   Parents’ liability for destructive acts of their children - see Ohio R.C.
3109.09
   Alteration, injury, removal of traffic control devices - see TRAF.
414.08
   Offenses relating to theft of motor vehicles - see TRAF. Ch.
444
   Removing, altering, etc. bicycle frame numbers or license plates - see TRAF.
474.17
   Definitions generally - see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   “Physical harm to property” defined - see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   “Property” defined - see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   “Serious physical harm to property” defined - see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   Detention of shoplifters and those committing motion picture piracy - see
GEN. OFF.
606.23
   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property held by Police Division - see
GEN. OFF.
606.24
   Endangering aircraft and airport operations - see GEN. OFF.
672.14
§ 642.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   ACTIVE DUTY SERVICE MEMBER. Any member of the armed forces of the
United States performing active duty under Title 10 of the United States Code.
   (b)   ANHYDROUS AMMONIA. A compound formed by the combination of two gaseous
elements, nitrogen and hydrogen, in the manner described below. Anhydrous
ammonia is one part nitrogen to three parts hydrogen (NH3). Anhydrous ammonia
by weight is fourteen parts nitrogen to three parts hydrogen, which is
approximately 82% nitrogen to 18% hydrogen.
   (c)   ASSISTANCE DOG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 955.011.
   (d)   CABLE TELEVISION SERVICE. Any services provided by or through the
facilities of any cable television system or other similar closed circuit
coaxial cable communications system, or any microwave or similar transmission
service used in connection with any cable television system or other similar
closed circuit coaxial cable communications system.
   (e)   COIN MACHINE. Any mechanical or electronic device designed to do both
of the following:
      (1)   Receive a coin or bill, or token made for that purpose;
      (2)   In return for the insertion or deposit of a coin, bill, or token,
automatically dispense property, provide a service, or grant a license.
   (f)   COMPUTER. An electronic device that performs logical, arithmetic, and
memory functions by the manipulation of electronic or magnetic impulses. The
term includes but is not limited to all input, output, processing, storage,
computer program, or communication facilities that are connected, or related,
in a computer system or network to an electronic device of that nature.
   (g)   COMPUTER CONTAMINANT. Means a computer program that is designed to
modify, damage, destroy, disable, deny or degrade access to, allow unauthorized
access to, functionally impair, record, or transmit information within a
computer, computer system, or computer network without the express or implied
consent of the owner or other person authorized to give consent and that is of
a type or kind described in divisions (1) through (4) of this definition or of
a type or kind similar to a type or kind described in divisions (1) through (4)
of this definition:
      (1)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “viruses” and
“worms” that are self-replicating or self-propagating and that are designed to
contaminate other computer programs, compromise computer security, consume
computer resources, modify, destroy, record, or transmit data, or disrupt the
normal operation of the computer, computer system, or computer network;
      (2)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “Trojans” or “Trojan
horses” that are not self-replicating or self-propagating and that are designed
to compromise computer security, consume computer resources, modify, destroy,
record, or transmit data, or disrupt the normal operation of the computer,
computer system, or computer network;
      (3)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “zombies” that are
designed to use a computer without the knowledge and consent of the owner, or
other person authorized to give consent, and that are designed to send large
quantities of data to a targeted computer network for the purpose of degrading
the targeted computer’s or network’s performance, or denying access through the
network to the targeted computer or network, resulting in what is commonly
known as “denial of service” or “distributed denial of service” attacks;
      (4)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “trap doors”, “back
doors”, or “root kits” that are designed to bypass standard authentication
software and that are designed to allow access or use of a computer without the
knowledge or consent of the owner, or other person authorized to give consent.
   (h)   COMPUTER HACKING.
      (1)   The term means any of the following:
         A.   Gaining access or attempting to gain access to all or part of a
computer, computer system, or a computer network without express or implied
authorization with the intent to defraud or with intent to commit a crime;
         B.   Misusing computer or network services including but not limited
to mail transfer programs, file transfer programs, proxy servers, and web
servers by performing functions not authorized by the owner of the computer,
computer system, or computer network or other person authorized to give
consent. As used in this division, “misuse of computer and network services”
includes but is not limited to the unauthorized use of any of the following:
            1.   Mail transfer programs to send mail to persons other than the
authorized users of that computer or computer network;
            2.   File transfer program services or proxy servers to access
other computers, computer systems, or computer networks;
            3.   Web servers to redirect users to other web pages or web
servers.
         C.   1.   Subject to division (1)C.2. of this definition, using a
group of computer programs commonly known as “port scanners” or “probes” to
intentionally access any computer, computer system, or computer network without
the permission of the owner of the computer, computer system, or computer
network or other person authorized to give consent. The group of computer
programs referred to in this division includes but is not limited to those
computer programs that use a computer network to access a computer, computer
system, or another computer network to determine any of the following: the
presence or types of computers or computer systems on a network; the computer
network’s facilities and capabilities; the availability of computer or network
services; the presence or versions of computer software including but not
limited to operating systems, computer services, or computer contaminants; the
presence of a known computer software deficiency that can be used to gain
unauthorized access to a computer, computer system, or computer network; or any
other information about a computer, computer system, or computer network not
necessary for the normal and lawful operation of the computer initiating the
access.
            2.   The group of computer programs referred to in division (1)C.1.
of this definition does not include standard computer software used for the
normal operation, administration, management, and test of a computer, computer
system, or computer network including but not limited to domain name services,
mail transfer services, and other operating system services, computer programs
commonly called “ping”, “tcpdump”, and “traceroute” and other network
monitoring and management computer software, and computer programs commonly
knows as “nslookup” and “whois” and other systems administration computer
software.
         D.   The intentional use of a computer, computer system, or a computer
network in a manner that exceeds any right or permission granted by the owner
of the computer, computer system, or computer network or other person
authorized to give consent.
      (2)   The term does not include the introduction of a computer
contaminant, as defined in this section, into a computer, computer system,
computer program, or computer network.
   (i)   COMPUTER NETWORK. A set of related and remotely-connected computers
and communication facilities that includes more than one computer system that
has the capability to transmit among the connected computers and communication
facilities through the use of computer facilities.
   (j)   COMPUTER PROGRAM. An ordered set of data representing coded
instructions or statements that, when executed by a computer, causes the
computer to process data.
   (k)   COMPUTER SERVICES. Includes but is not limited to the use of a
computer system, computer network, computer program, data that is prepared for
computer use, or data that is contained within a computer system or computer
network.
   (l)   COMPUTER SOFTWARE. Computer programs, procedures, and other
documentation associated with the operation of a computer system.
   (m)   COMPUTER SYSTEM. A computer and related devices, whether connected or
unconnected, including but not limited to data input, output, and storage
devices, data communications links, and computer programs and data that make
the system capable of performing specified special purpose data processing
tasks.
   (n)   COUNTERFEIT TELECOMMUNI- CATIONS DEVICE. A telecommunications device
that, alone or with another telecommunications device, has been altered,
constructed, manufactured, or programmed to acquire, intercept, receive, or
otherwise facilitate the use of a telecommunications service or information
service without the authority or consent of the provider of the
telecommunications service or information service. The phrase includes but is
not limited to a clone telephone, clone microchip, tumbler telephone, or
tumbler microchip; a wireless scanning device capable of acquiring,
intercepting, receiving, or otherwise facilitating the use of
telecommunications service or information service without immediate detection;
or a device, equipment, hardware, or software designed for, or capable of,
altering or changing the electronic serial number in a wireless telephone.
   (o)   CREATE A SUBSTANTIAL RISK OF SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM TO ANY PERSON.
Includes the creation of a substantial risk of serious physical harm to any
emergency personnel.
   (p)   CREDIT CARD. Includes but is not limited to a card, code, device, or
other means of access to a customer’s account for the purpose of obtaining
money, property, labor, or services on credit, or for initiating an electronic
fund transfer at a point-of-sale terminal, an automated teller machine, or a
cash dispensing machine. It also includes a county procurement card issued
under R.C. § 301.29.
   (q)   DANGEROUS DRUG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   (r)   DANGEROUS ORDNANCE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2923.11.
   (s)   DATA. A representation of information, knowledge, facts, concepts, or
instructions that are being or have been prepared in a formalized manner and
that are intended for use in a computer, computer system, or computer network.
   (t)   DECEPTION. To knowingly deceive another or cause another to be
deceived by any false or misleading representation, by withholding information,
by preventing another from acquiring information, or by any other conduct, act,
or omission that creates, confirms, or perpetuates a false impression in
another, including a false impression as to law, value, state of mind, or other
objective or subjective fact.
   (u)   DEFRAUD. To knowingly obtain, by deception, some benefit for oneself
or another, or to knowingly cause, by deception, some detriment to another.
   (v)   DEPRIVE. To do any of the following:
      (1)   To withhold property of another permanently, or for a period that
appropriates a substantial portion of its value or use, or with purpose to
restore it only upon payment of a reward or other consideration;
      (2)   To dispose of property so as to make it unlikely that the owner
will recover it;
      (3)   To accept, use, or appropriate money, property, or services, with
purpose not to give proper consideration in return for the money, property, or
services, and without reasonable justification or excuse for not giving proper
consideration.
   (w)   DISABLED ADULT. A person who is 18 years of age or older and has some
impairment of body or mind that makes the person unable to work at any
substantially remunerative employment that the person otherwise would be able
to perform and that will, with reasonable probability, continue for a period of
at least 12 months without any present indication of recovery from the
impairment, or who is 18 years of age or older and has been certified as
permanently and totally disabled by an agency of this state or the  United
States that has the function of so classifying persons.
   (x)   DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.
   (y)   ELDERLY PERSON. A person who is 65 years of age or older.
   (z)   ELECTRONIC FUND TRANSFER. Has the same meaning as in 92 Stat. 3728, 15
U.S.C. § 1693a, as amended.
      (aa)   EMERGENCY PERSONNEL. Means any of the following persons:
      (1)   A peace officer, as defined in R.C. § 2935.01;
      (2)   A member of a fire department or other firefighting agency of a
municipal corporation, township, township fire district, joint fire district,
other political subdivision, or combination of political subdivisions;
      (3)   A member of a private fire company, as defined in R.C. § 9.60, or a
volunteer firefighter;
      (4)    A member of a joint ambulance district or joint emergency medical
services district;
      (5)   An emergency medical technician-basic, emergency medical
technician-intermediate, emergency medical technician-paramedic, ambulance
operator, or other member of an emergency medical service that is owned or
operated by a political subdivision or a private entity;
      (6)   The State Fire Marshal, the Chief Deputy State Fire Marshal, or an
assistant state fire marshal;
      (7)   A fire prevention officer of a political subdivision or an arson,
fire, or similar investigator of a political subdivision.
   (bb)   FEDERALLY-LICENSED FIREARMS DEALER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5502.63.
   (cc)   FIREARM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2923.11.
   (dd)   FORGE. To fabricate or create, in whole or in part and by any means,
any spurious writing, or to make, execute, alter, complete, reproduce, or
otherwise purport to authenticate any writing, when the writing in fact is not
authenticated by that conduct.
   (ee)   GAIN ACCESS. To approach, instruct, communicate with, store data in,
retrieve data from, or otherwise make use of any resources of a computer,
computer system, or computer network, or any cable service or cable system both
as defined in R.C. § 2913.04.
   (ff)   INFORMATION SERVICE.
      (1)   Subject to division (2) of this definition, the offering of a
capability for generating, acquiring, storing, transforming, processing,
retrieving, utilizing, or making available information via telecommunications,
including but not limited to electronic publishing.
      (2)   The term does not include any use of a capability of a type
described in division (1) of this definition for the management, control, or
operation of a telecommunications system or the management of a
telecommunications service.
   (gg)   INTERNET. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 341.42.
   (hh)   MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
   (ii)   OCCUPIED STRUCTURE. Means any house, building, outbuilding,
watercraft, aircraft, railroad car, truck, trailer, tent, or other structure,
vehicle, or shelter, or any portion thereof, to which any of the following
applies:
      (1)   It is maintained as a permanent or temporary dwelling, even though
it is temporarily unoccupied and whether nor not any person is actually
present;
      (2)   At the time, it is occupied as the permanent or temporary
habitation of any person, whether or not any person is actually present;
      (3)   At the time, it is specially adapted for the overnight
accommodation of any person, whether or not any person is actually present;
      (4)   At the time, any person is present or likely to be present in it.
   (jj)   OWNER. Unless the context requires a different meaning, any person,
other than the actor, who is the owner of, who has possession or control of, or
who has any license or interest in property or services, even though the
ownership, possession, control, license, or interest is unlawful.
   (kk)   POLICE DOG OR HORSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2921.321.
   (ll)   POLITICAL SUBDIVISION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2744.01.
   (mm)   RENTED PROPERTY. Personal property in which the right of possession
and use of the property is for a short and possibly indeterminate term in
return for consideration; the rentee generally controls the duration of
possession of the property within any applicable minimum or maximum term; and
the amount of consideration is generally determined by the duration of
possession of the property.
   (nn)   SERVICES. Includes labor, personal services, professional services,
rental services, public utility services including wireless service as defined
in R.C. § 128.01(F)(1), common carrier services, and food, drink,
transportation, entertainment, and cable television services and, for purposes
of R.C. § 2913.04 or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, includes
cable services as defined in that section.
   (oo)   SLUG. An object that, by virtue of its size, shape, composition, or
other quality, is capable of being inserted or deposited in a coin machine as
an improper substitute for a genuine coin, bill, or token made for that
purpose.
   (pp)   STATE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2744.01.
   (qq)   TELECOMMUNICATION. The origination, emission, dissemination,
transmission, or reception of data, images, signals, sounds, or other
intelligence or equivalence or intelligence of any nature over any
communications system by any method, including but not limited to a fiber
optic, electronic, magnetic, optical, digital or analog method.
   (rr)   TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Any instrument, equipment, machine, or
other device that facilitates telecommunication, including but not limited to a
computer, computer network, computer chip, computer circuit, scanner,
telephone, cellular telephone, pager, personal communications device,
transponder, receiver, radio, modem, or device that enables the use of a modem.
   (ss)   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. The providing, allowing, facilitating, or
generating of any form of telecommunication through the use of a
telecommunications device over a telecommunications system.
   (tt)   THEFT OFFENSE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2911.12, 2911.13,
2911.31, 2911.32, 2913.02, 2913.03, 2913.04, 2913.041, 2913.08, 2913.11,
2913.21, 2913.31, 2913.32, 2913.33, 2913.34, 2913.40, 2913.42, 2913.43,
2913.44, 2913.45, 2913.47, 2913.48, former R.C. § 2913.47 or 2913.48, or R.C. §
2913.51, 2915.05, or 2921.41;
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or of the United States substantially equivalent to any
section listed in division (1) of this definition, or a violation of R.C. §
2913.41, 2913.81 or 2915.06 as it existed prior to July 1, 1996;
      (3)   An offense under an existing or former municipal ordinance or law
of this or any other state or the United States involving robbery, burglary,
breaking and entering, theft, embezzlement, wrongful conversion, forgery,
counterfeiting, deceit, or fraud;
      (4)   A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing any offense under division (1), (2), or (3) of this definition.
   (uu)   UTTER. To issue, publish, transfer, use, put or send into
circulation, deliver, or display.
   (vv)   WRITING. Any computer software, document, letter, memorandum, note,
paper, plate, data, film, or other thing having in or upon it any written,
type-written, or printed matter, and any token, stamp, seal, credit card,
badge, trademark, label, or other symbol of value, right, privilege, license,
or identification.
(ORC 2909.01, 2913.01)
§ 642.02 THEFT.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to deprive the owner of property or services,
shall knowingly obtain or exert control over either the property or services in
any of the following ways:
      (1)   Without the consent of the owner or person authorized to give
consent;
      (2)   Beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of the owner or
person authorized to give consent;
      (3)   By deception;
      (4)   By threat;
      (5)   By intimidation.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of theft. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, a violation of this section is misdemeanor
theft, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the elements set forth in R.C. §
2913.02(B) for felony theft, grand theft, or aggravated theft are met, then a
violation of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
      (2)   In addition to the penalties described in division (b)(1) of this
section, if the offender committed the violation by causing a motor vehicle to
leave the premises of an establishment at which gasoline is offered for retail
sale without the offender making full payment for gasoline that was dispensed
into the fuel tank of the motor vehicle or into another container, the court
may do one of the following:
         A.   Unless division (b)(2)B. of this section applies, suspend for not
more than six months the offenders driver’s license, probationary driver’s
license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, or
nonresident operating privilege;
         B.   If the offender’s driver’s license, probationary driver’s
license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, or
nonresident operating privilege has previously been suspended pursuant to
division (b)(2)A. of this section, or any other substantially equivalent state
or local law, impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s license,
permit, or privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7), provided
that the suspension shall be at least six months;
         C.   The court, in lieu of suspending the offender’s driver’s or
commercial driver’s license, probationary driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, or nonresident operating privilege pursuant to division (b)
(2)A. or (b)(2)B of this section, instead may require the offender to perform
community service for a number of hours determined by the court.
      (3)   In addition to the penalties described in division (b)(1) of this
section, if the offender committed the violation by stealing rented property or
rental services, the court may order that the offender make restitution
pursuant to R.C. § 2929.18 or R.C. § 2929.28. Restitution may include, but is
not limited to, the cost of repairing or replacing the stolen property, or the
cost of repairing the stolen property and any loss of revenue resulting from
deprivation of the property due to theft of rental services that is less than
or equal to the actual value of the property at the time it was rented.
Evidence of intent to commit theft of rented property or rental services shall
be determined pursuant to the provisions of R.C. § 2913.72.
   (c)   The sentencing court that suspends an offender’s license, permit, or
nonresident operating privilege under division (b)(2) of this section may grant
the offender limited driving privileges during the period of the suspension in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 4510.
(R.C. § 2913.02)
Statutory reference:
   Felony theft provisions, see Ohio R.C. 2913.02(B)
§ 642.03 DEGREE OF OFFENSE WHEN CERTAIN PROPERTY INVOLVED.
   Regardless of the value of the property involved, and regardless of whether
the offender previously has been convicted of a theft offense, a violation of
Section 642.02 or Section 642.22 is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
State law if the property involved is any of the following:
   (a)   A credit card;
   (b)   A printed form for a check or other negotiable instrument, that on its
face identifies the drawer or maker for whose use it is designed or identifies
the account on which it is to be drawn, and that has not been executed by the
drawer or maker or on which the amount is blank;
   (c)   A motor vehicle identification license plate as prescribed by R.C. §
4503.22, a temporary motor vehicle license registration as prescribed by R.C. §
4503.182, or any comparable temporary motor vehicle license registration as
prescribed by the applicable law of another state or the United States;
   (d)   A blank form for a certificate of title or a manufacturer’s or
importer’s certificate to a motor vehicle, as prescribed by Ohio R.C. 4505.07;
   (e)   A blank form for any license listed in Ohio R.C. 4507.01.
(R.C. § 2913.71)
§ 642.035 EVIDENCE OF THEFT OF RENTED PROPERTY.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   RENTER. A person who owns rented property or rental services:
      (2)   RENTEE. A person who pays consideration to a renter for the use of
rented property or rental services:
   (b)   Each of the following shall be considered evidence of intent to commit
theft of rented property:
      (1)   At the time of entering into the rental contract, the rentee
presented the renter with identification that was materially false, fictitious,
or not current with respect to name, address, place of employment, or other
relevant information.
      (2)   After receiving a notice demanding the return of the rented
property as provided in division (c) of this section, the rentee neither
returned the rented property nor made arrangements acceptable with the renter
to return the rented property.
   (c)   To establish that a rentee has an intent to commit theft of rented
property or rental services under division (b)(2) above, a renter may issue a
notice to a rentee demanding the return of the rented property. The renter
shall mail the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
rentee at the address the rentee gave when the rental contract was executed, or
to the rentee at the last address the rentee or the rentee’s agent furnished in
writing to the renter.
   (d)   A demand for the return of the rented property is not a prerequisite
for the prosecution of a rentee for theft of rented property or rental
services. The evidence specified in division (b) above does not constitute the
only evidence that may be considered as evidence of intent to commit theft of
rented property or rental services.
(ORC 2913.72)
§ 642.04 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF A VEHICLE; VEHICLE TRESPASS.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly use or operate an aircraft, motor vehicle,
motorcycle, motorboat, or other motor-propelled vehicle without the consent of
the owner or person authorized to give consent.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly use or operate an aircraft, motor vehicle,
motorboat, or other motor- propelled vehicle without the consent of the owner
or person authorized to give consent, and either remove it from this State, or
keep possession of it for more than 48 hours.
   (c)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under this section:
      (1)   At the time of the alleged offense, the actor, though mistaken,
reasonably believed that he or she was authorized to use or operate the
property.
      (2)   At the time of the alleged offense, the actor reasonably believed
that the owner or person empowered to give consent would authorize the actor to
use or operate the property.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unauthorized use of a
vehicle.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (d)(1), a violation
of division (a) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled adult and if the victim
incurs a loss as a result of the violation, a violation of division (a) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate State law.
      (2)   A violation of division (b) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate State law.
(ORC 2913.03)
Statutory reference:
   Theft offense involving motor vehicle, offender to pay towing and storage
fees, see Ohio R.C. 2913.82
§ 642.05 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF PROPERTY.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly use or operate the property of another
without the consent of the owner or person authorized to give consent.
   (b)   No person, in any manner and by any means, including but not limited
to computer hacking, shall knowingly gain access to, attempt to gain access to,
or cause access to be gained to any computer, computer system, computer
network, cable service, cable system, telecommunications device,
telecommunications service, or information service without the consent of, or
beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of, the owner of the
computer, computer system, computer network, cable service, cable system,
telecommunications device, telecommunications service, or information service
or other person authorized to give consent.
   (c)   Except as permitted under R.C. § 5503.101, no person shall knowingly
gain access to, attempt to gain access to, cause access to be granted to, or
disseminate information gained from access to the law enforcement automated
database system created pursuant to R.C. § 5503.10 without the consent of, or
beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of, the chair of the Law
Enforcement Automated Data System Steering Committee.
   (d)   No person shall knowingly gain access to, attempt to gain access to,
cause access to be granted to, or disseminate information gained from access to
the Ohio law enforcement gateway established and operated pursuant to R.C. §
109.57(C)(1) without the consent of, or beyond the scope of the express or
implied consent of, the Superintendent of the Bureau of Criminal Identification
and Investigation.
   (e)   The affirmative defenses contained in Ohio R.C. 2913.03(C) are
affirmative defenses to a charge under this section.
   (f)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of property. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
unauthorized use of property is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (1)   If unauthorized use of property is committed for the purpose of
devising or executing a scheme to defraud or to obtain property or services,
unauthorized use of property is whichever of the following is applicable:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided below, unauthorized use of property
is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         B.   If the value of the property or services or the loss to the
victim is one thousand dollars ($1,000) or more, it is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate State law.
      (2)   If the victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled
adult, unauthorized use of property is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate State law.
   (g)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of computer, cable, or telecommunication property, a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate State law.
   (h)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of the law enforcement automated database system, a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate State law.
   (i)   Whoever violates division (d) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of the Ohio law enforcement gateway, a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
   (j)   As used in this section:
      (1)   CABLE OPERATOR. Any person or group of persons that does either of
the following:
         A.   Provides cable service over a cable system and directly through
one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in that cable system;
         B.   Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any
arrangement, the management and operation of a cable system.
      (2)   CABLE SERVICE. Any of the following:
         A.   The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or
of information that a cable operator makes available to all subscribers
generally;
         B.   Subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the
selection or use of video programming or of information that a cable operator
makes available to all subscribers generally, both as described in division (f)
(2)A. above;
         C.   Any cable television service.
      (3)   CABLE SYSTEM. Any facility, consisting of a set of closed
transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control
equipment that is designed to provide cable service that includes video
programming and that is provided to multiple subscribers within a community.
CABLE SYSTEM does not include any of the following:
         A.   Any facility that serves only to retransmit the television
signals of one or more television broadcast stations;
         B.   Any facility that serves subscribers without using any public
right-of-way;
         C.   Any facility of a common carrier that, under 47 U.S.C. § 522(7)
(c), is excluded from the term CABLE SYSTEM as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(7);
         D.   Any open video system that complies with 47 U.S.C. § 573;
         E.   Any facility of any electric utility used solely for operating
its electric utility system.
(ORC 2913.04)
Statutory reference:
   Telecommunications: fraud and unlawful use of a device, felony offenses, see
Ohio R.C. 2913.05 and 2913.06
§ 642.06 INJURING VINES, BUSHES, TREES OR CROPS.
   (a)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall recklessly cut down,
destroy, girdle, or otherwise injure a vine, bush, shrub, sapling, tree, or
crop standing or growing on the land of another or upon public land.
   (b)   In addition to the penalty provided in division (c) of this section,
whoever violates this section is liable in treble damages for the injury
caused.
(ORC 901.51)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(ORC 901.99(A))
§ 642.07 DESECRATION.
   (a)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall purposely deface, damage,
pollute or otherwise physically mistreat any of the following:
      (1)   Any public monument;
      (2)   Any historical or commemorative marker, or any structure, Indian
mound or earthwork, cemetery, thing or site of great historical or
archeological interest;
      (3)   A place of worship, its furnishings, or religious artifacts or
sacred texts within the place of worship or within the grounds upon which the
place of worship is located;
      (4)   A work of art or museum piece;
      (5)   Any other object of reverence or sacred devotion.
   (b)   As used in this section, CEMETERY means any place of burial and
includes burial sites that contain American Indian burial objects placed with
or containing American Indian human remains.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of desecration. A violation of
division (a)(1), (2), (4) or (5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second
degree. A violation of division (a)(3) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate State law.
(ORC 2927.11)
§ 642.08 ASSAULTING POLICE DOG OR HORSE OR ASSISTANCE DOG.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly cause, or attempt to cause, physical harm to
a police dog or horse in either of the following circumstances:
      (1)   The police dog or horse is assisting a law enforcement officer in
the performance of the officer’s official duties at the time the physical harm
is caused or attempted.
      (2)   The police dog or horse is not assisting a law enforcement officer
in the performance of the officer’s official duties at the time the physical
harm is caused or attempted, but the offender has actual knowledge that the dog
or horse is a police dog or horse.
   (b)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following:
      (1)   Taunt, torment, or strike a police dog or horse;
      (2)   Throw an object or substance at a police dog or horse;
      (3)   Interfere with or obstruct a police dog or horse, or interfere with
or obstruct a law enforcement officer who is being assisted by a police dog or
horse, in a manner that does any of the following:
         A.   Inhibits or restricts the law enforcement officer’s control of
the police dog or horse;
         B.   Deprives the law enforcement officer of control of the police dog
or horse;
         C.   Releases the police dog or horse from its area of control;
         D.   Enters the area of control of the police dog or horse without the
consent of the law enforcement officer, including placing food or any other
object or substance into that area;
         E.   Inhibits or restricts the ability of the police dog or horse to
assist a law enforcement officer;
      (4)   Engage in any conduct that is likely to cause serious physical
injury or death to a police dog or horse;
      (5)   If the person is the owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog, fail to
reasonably restrain the dog from taunting, tormenting, chasing, approaching in
a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, or attempting to bite or
otherwise endanger a police dog or horse that at the time of the conduct, the
police dog or horse is assisting a law enforcement officer in the performance
of the officer's duties or that the person knows is a police dog or horse.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly cause, or attempt to cause, physical harm to
an assistance dog in either of the following circumstances:
      (1)   The dog, at the time the physical harm is caused or attempted, is
assisting or serving a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or a
person with a mobility impairment.
      (2)   The dog, at the time the physical harm is caused or attempted, is
not assisting or serving a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or a
person with a mobility impairment, but the offender has actual knowledge that
the dog is an assistance dog.
   (d)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following:
      (1)   Taunt, torment, or strike an assistance dog;
      (2)   Throw an object or substance at an assistance dog;
      (3)   Interfere with or obstruct an assistance dog, or interfere with or
obstruct a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or a person with a
mobility impairment who is being assisted or served by an assistance dog, in a
manner that does any of the following:
         A.   Inhibits or restricts the assisted or served person’s control of
the dog;
         B.   Deprives the assisted or served person of control of the dog;
         C.   Releases the dog from its area of control;
         D.   Enters the area of control of the dog without the consent of the
assisted or served person, including placing food or any other object or
substance into that area;
         E.   Inhibits or restricts the ability of the dog to assist the
assisted or served person;
      (4)   Engage in any conduct that is likely to cause serious physical
injury or death to an assistance dog;
      (5)   If the person is the owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog, fail to
reasonably restrain the dog from taunting, tormenting, chasing, approaching in
a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, or attempting to bite or
otherwise endanger an assistance dog that at the time of the conduct is
assisting or serving a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or a
person with a mobility impairment or that the person knows is an assistance
dog.
   (e)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
assaulting a police dog or horse. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, assaulting a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of the second
degree. If the violation results in physical harm to the police dog or horse
other than death or serious physical harm, assaulting a police dog or horse is
a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation results in serious physical
harm to the police dog or horse or results in its death, assaulting a police
dog or horse is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate State law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of
harassing a police dog or horse. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
harassing a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
violation results in physical harm to the police dog or horse but does not
result in its death or in serious physical harm to it, harassing a police dog
or horse is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation results in
serous physical harm to the police dog or horse or results in its death,
harassing a police dog or horse is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
State law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of
assaulting an assistance dog. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
assaulting an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
violation results in physical harm to the assistance dog other than death or
serious physical harm, assaulting an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the violation results in serious physical harm to the
assistance dog or results in its death, assaulting an assistance dog is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate State law.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (d) of this section is guilty of
harassing an assistance dog. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
harassing an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
violation results in physical harm to the assistance dog but does not result in
the death or in serious physical harm to it, harassing an assistance dog is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation results in serious physical
harm to the assistance dog or results in its death, harassing an assistance dog
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate State law.
      (5)   In addition to any other sanctions or penalty imposed for the
offense under this section, Ohio R.C. Chapter 2929 or any other provision of
the Ohio Revised Code or this code, whoever violates division (a), (b), (c), or
(d) of this section is responsible for the payment of all of the following:
         A.   Any veterinary bill or bill for medication incurred as a result
of the violation by the police department regarding a violation of division (a)
or (b) of this section or by the person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired
or the person with a mobility impairment assisted or served by the assistance
dog regarding a violation of division (c) or (d) of this section;
         B.   The cost of any damaged equipment that results from the
violation;
         C.   If the violation did not result in the death of the police dog or
horse or the assistance dog that was the subject of the violation and if, as a
result of that dog or horse being the subject of the violation, the dog or
horse needs further training or retraining to be able to continue in the
capacity of a police dog or horse or an assistance dog, the cost of any further
training or retraining of that dog or horse by a law enforcement officer or by
the person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or the person with a
mobility impairment assisted or served by the assistance dog;
         D.   If the violation resulted in the death of the assistance dog that
was the subject of the violation or resulted in serious physical harm to the
police dog or horse or the assistance dog or horse that was the subject of the
violation to the extent that the dog or horse needs to be replaced on either a
temporary or a permanent basis, the cost of replacing that dog or horse and of
any further training of a new police dog or horse or a new assistance dog by a
law enforcement officer or by the person who is blind, deaf, or hearing
impaired or the person with a mobility impairment assisted or served by the
assistance dog, which replacement or training is required because of the death
of or the serious physical harm to the dog or horse that was the subject of the
violation.
   (f)   This section does not apply to a licensed veterinarian whose conduct
is in accordance with Ohio R.C. Chapter 4741.
   (g)   This section only applies to an offender who knows or should know at
the time of the violation that the police dog or horse or assistance dog that
is the subject of a violation under this section is a police dog or horse or
assistance dog.
   (h)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   ASSISTANCE DOG, BLIND and PERSON WITH A MOBILITY IMPAIRMENT. The
same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 955.011.
      (2)   PHYSICAL HARM. Any injury, illness, or other psychological
impairment, regardless of its gravity or duration.
      (3)   POLICE DOG OR HORSE. A dog or horse that has been trained and may
be used to assist law enforcement officers in the performance of their official
duties.
      (4)   SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM. Any of the following:
         A.   Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk of death.
         B.   Any physical harm that causes permanent maiming or that involves
some temporary, substantial maiming.
         C.   Any physical harm that causes acute pain of a duration that
results in substantial suffering.
(R.C. § 2921.321)
§ 642.09 ARSON.
   (a)   No person, by means of fire or explosion, shall knowingly do any of
the following:
      (1)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any
property of another without the other person’s consent;
      (2)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any
property of the offender or another, with purpose to defraud;
      (3)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to the
statehouse or a courthouse, school building, or other building or structure
that is owned or controlled by the state, any political subdivision, or any
department, agency, or instrumentality of the state or a political subdivision,
and that is used for public purposes;
      (4)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm, through the
offer or the acceptance of an agreement for hire or other consideration, to any
property of another without the other person’s consent or to any property of
the offender or another with purpose to defraud;
      (5)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any park,
preserve, wildlands, brush-covered land, cut-over land, forest, timberland,
greenlands, woods, or similar real property that is owned or controlled by
another person, the state, or a political subdivision without the consent of
the other person, the state, or the political subdivision;
      (6)   With purpose to defraud, cause, or create a substantial risk of,
physical harm to any park, preserve, wildlands, brush-covered land, cut-over
land, forest, timberland, greenlands, woods, or similar real property that is
owned or controlled by the offender, another person, the state, or a political
subdivision.
   (b)   No person, by means of fire or explosion, shall knowingly do any of
the following:
      (1)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any
structure of another that is not an occupied structure;
      (2)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm, through the
offer or the acceptance of an agreement for hire or other consideration, to any
structure of another that is not an occupied structure;
      (3)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any
structure that is not an occupied structure and that is in or on any park,
preserve, wildlands, brush-covered land, cut-over land, forest, timberland,
greenlands, woods, or similar real property that is owned or controlled by
another person, the state, or a political subdivision.
   (c)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (b)(1)
or (b)(2) of this section that the defendant acted with the consent of the
other person.
      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (b)(3) of
this section that the defendant acted with the consent of the other person, the
state, or the political subdivision.
   (d)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of arson.
      (2)   A violation of division (a)(1) or (b)(1) of this section is one of
the following:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (d)(2)B. of this
section, a misdemeanor of the first degree;
         B.   If the value of the property or the amount of the physical harm
involved is $1,000 or more, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
      (3)   A violation of division (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4), (a)(5), (a)(6), (b)
(2) or (b)(3) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(R.C. § 2909.03)
Statutory reference:
   Aggravated arson, felony provisions, see R.C. § 2909.02
   Convicted arsonist to make restitution to public agency, see R.C. § 2929.28
§ 642.10 CRIMINAL DAMAGING OR ENDANGERING; VEHICULAR VANDALISM.
   (a)   Criminal damaging or endangering.
      (1)   No person shall cause or create a substantial risk of physical harm
to any property of another without the other person’s consent:
         A.   Knowingly, by any means; or
         B.   Recklessly, by means of fire, explosion, flood, poison gas,
poison, radioactive material, caustic or corrosive material, or other
inherently dangerous agency or substance.
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (a) is guilty of criminal damaging
or endangering, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If violation of this
division (a) creates a risk of physical harm to any person, criminal damaging
or endangering is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the property involved
in a violation of this division (a) is an aircraft, an aircraft engine,
propeller, appliance, spare part, or any other equipment or implement used or
intended to be used in the operation of an aircraft and if the violation
creates a risk of physical harm to any person, criminal damaging or endangering
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate State law. If the property
involved in a violation of this division (a) is an aircraft, an aircraft
engine, propeller, appliance, spare part, or any other equipment or implement
used or intended to be used in the operation of an aircraft and if the
violation creates a substantial risk of physical harm to any person or if the
property involved in a violation of this division (a) is an occupied aircraft,
criminal damaging or endangering is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
State law.
(R.C. § 2909.06)
   (b)   Vehicular vandalism.
      (1)   As used in this division (b):
         A.   ALLEY, STREET, and VEHICLE. The same meanings as in Ohio R.C.
4511.01.
         B.   HIGHWAY. Any highway as defined in Ohio R.C. 4511.01 or any lane,
road, street, alley, bridge, or overpass.
         C.   VESSEL and WATERS IN THIS STATE. The same meanings as in Ohio
R.C. 1546.01.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly, and by any means, drop or throw any
object at, onto, or in the path of any of the following:
         A.   Any vehicle on a highway;
         B.   Any boat or vessel on any of the waters in this State.
      (3)   Whoever violates this division (b) is guilty of vehicular
vandalism. Except as otherwise provided in this division (b)(3), vehicular
vandalism is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation of this
division (b) creates a substantial risk of physical harm to any person or the
violation of this division (b) causes serious physical harm to property,
vehicular vandalism is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate State law.
If the violation of this division (b) causes physical harm to any person or
serious physical harm to any person, vehicular vandalism is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate State law.
(R.C. § 2909.09)
Statutory reference:
   Disrupting public services, felony offense, see R.C. § 2909.04
   Railroad grade crossing device vandalism, see R.C. § 2909.101
   Railroad vandalism, see R.C. § 2909.10
   Vandalism, felony offense, see R.C. § 2909.05
§ 642.11 CRIMINAL MISCHIEF.
   (a)   No person shall:
      (1)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage,
destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper with the either of the following:
         A.   The property of another;
         B.   One’s own residential real property with the purpose to decrease
the value of or enjoyment of the residential real property, if both of the
following apply:
            1.   The residential real property is subject to a mortgage.
            2.   The person has been served with a summons and complaint in a
pending residential mortgage loan foreclosure action relating to that real
property. As used in this division, “pending” includes the time between
judgment entry and confirmation of sale.
      (2)   With purpose to interfere with the use or enjoyment of property of
another, employ a tear gas device, stink bomb, smoke generator, or other device
releasing a substance that is harmful or offensive to persons exposed, or that
tends to cause public alarm;
      (3)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage,
destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper with a bench mark, triangulation
station, boundary marker, or other survey station, monument, or marker;
      (4)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage,
destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper with any safety device, the property of
another, or the property of the offender when required or placed for the safety
of others, so as to destroy or diminish its effectiveness or availability for
its intended purpose;
      (5)   With purpose to interfere with the use or enjoyment of the property
of another, set a fire on the land of another or place personal property that
has been set on fire on the land of another, which fire or personal property is
outside and apart from any building, other structure, or personal property that
is on that land;
      (6)   Without privilege to do so, and with intent to impair the
functioning of any computer, computer system, computer network, computer
software, or computer program, knowingly do any of the following:
         A.   In any manner or by any means, including but not limited to,
computer hacking, alter, damage, destroy, or modify a computer, computer
system, computer network, computer software, or computer program or data
contained in a computer, computer system, computer network, computer software,
or computer program;
         B.   Introduce a computer contaminant into a computer, computer
system, computer network, computer software, or computer program.
      (7)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly destroy or improperly tamper
with a critical infrastructure facility.
   (b)   As used in this section:
      (1)   CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2911.21.
      (2)   IMPROPERLY TAMPER. Means to change the physical location or the
physical condition of the property.
      (3)   SAFETY DEVICE. Means any fire extinguisher, fire hose, or fire axe,
or any fire escape, emergency exit, or emergency escape equipment, or any life
line, life-saving ring, life preserver, or life boat or raft, or any alarm,
light, flare, signal, sign, or notice intended to warn of danger or emergency,
or intended for other safety purposes, or any guard railing or safety
barricade, or any traffic sign or signal, or any railroad grade crossing sign,
signal, or  gate, or any first aid or survival equipment, or any other device,
apparatus, or equipment intended for protecting or preserving the safety of
persons or property.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal mischief,
and shall be punished as provided in division (c)(2), (c)(3), or (c)(4) of this
section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, criminal mischief
committed in violation of division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4), or (a)(5) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the third degree. Except as otherwise provided
in this division, if the violation of division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4),
or (a)(5) of this section creates a risk of physical harm to any person,
criminal mischief committed in violation of division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3),
(a)(4), or (a)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
property involved in the violation of division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4),
or (a)(5) of this section is an aircraft, an aircraft engine, propeller,
appliance, spare part, fuel, lubricant, hydraulic fluid, any other equipment,
implement, or material used or intended to be used in the operation of an
aircraft, or any cargo carried or intended to be carried in an aircraft and if
the violation creates any risk of physical harm to any person, or if the
aircraft in question is an occupied aircraft, criminal mischief committed in
violation of division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4), or (a)(5) of this section
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, criminal mischief
committed in violation of division (a)(6) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the value of the computer, computer system, computer
network, computer software, computer program, or data involved in the violation
of division (a)(6) of this section or the loss to the victim resulting from the
violation is $1,000 or more, or if the computer, computer system, computer
network, computer software, computer program, or data involved in the violation
of division (a)(6) is used or intended to be used in the operation of an
aircraft and the violation creates any risk of physical harm to any person, or
if the aircraft in question is an occupied aircraft, criminal mischief
committed in violation of division (a)(6) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (4)   Criminal mischief committed in violation of division (a)(7) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2909.07)
§ 642.12 CRIMINAL TRESPASS.
   (a)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly enter or remain on the land or premises of another;
      (2)   Knowingly enter or remain on the land or premises of another, the
use of which is lawfully restricted to certain persons, purposes, modes or
hours, when the offender knows the offender is in violation of any such
restriction or is reckless in that regard;
      (3)   Recklessly enter or remain on the land or premises of another, as
to which notice against unauthorized access or presence is given by actual
communication to the offender, or in a manner prescribed by law, or by posting
in a manner reasonably calculated to come to the attention of potential
intruders, or by fencing or other enclosure manifestly designed to restrict
access;
      (4)   Being on the land or premises of another, negligently fail or
refuse to leave upon being notified by signage posted in a conspicuous place or
otherwise being notified to do so by the owner or occupant, or the agent or
servant of either;
      (5)   Knowingly enter or remain on a critical infrastructure facility.
   (b)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that the land or
premises involved was owned, controlled, or in custody of a public agency.
   (c)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that the offender was
authorized to enter or remain on the land or premises involved, when the
authorization was secured by deception.
   (d)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal trespass.
Criminal trespass in violation of division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), or (a)(4) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Criminal trespass in
violation of division (a)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
      (2)   Notwithstanding R.C. § 2929.28, if the person, in committing the
violation of this section, used a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-
purpose vehicle, the court shall impose a fine of two times the usual amount
imposed for the violation.
      (3)   If an offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to two or more violations of this section, R.C. § 2911.21 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, and the offender, in committing each violation,
used a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle, the court, in
addition to or independent of all other penalties imposed for the violation,
may impound the certificate of registration of that snowmobile or off-highway
motorcycle or the certificate of registration and license plate of that all-
purpose vehicle for not less than 60 days. In such a case, R.C. § 4519.47
applies.
   (e)   Notwithstanding any provision of the Ohio Revised Code, if the
offender, in committing the violation of this section, used an all-purpose
vehicle, the Clerk of the Court shall pay the fine imposed pursuant to this
section to the State Recreational Vehicle Fund created by R.C. § 4519.11.
   (f)   As used in divisions (a) through (e) of this section:
      (1)   ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLE, OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLE, and SNOWMOBILE. Have
the same meanings as in R.C. § 4519.01.
      (2)   CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITY. Means:
         A.   One of the following, if completely enclosed by a fence or other
physical barrier that is obviously designed to exclude intruders, or if clearly
marked with signs that are reasonably likely to come to the attention of
potential intruders and that indicate entry is forbidden without site
authorization:
            1.   A petroleum or alumina refinery;
            2.   An electric generating facility, substation, switching
station, electrical control center, or electric transmission and distribution
lines and associated equipment;
            3.   A chemical, polymer, or rubber manufacturing facility;
            4.   A water intake structure, water treatment facility, waste
water facility, drainage facility, water management facility, or any similar
water or sewage treatment system and its water and sewage piping;
            5.   A natural gas company facility or interstate natural gas
pipeline, including a pipeline interconnection, a natural gas compressor
station and associated facilities, city gate or town border station, metering
station, above-ground piping, regulator station, valve site, delivery station,
fabricated assembly, or any other part of a natural gas storage facility
involved in the gathering, storage, transmission, or distribution of gas;
            6.   A telecommunications central switching office or remote
switching facility or an equivalent network facility that serves a similar
purpose;
            7.   Wireline or wireless telecommunications infrastructure,
including telecommunications towers and telephone poles and lines, including
fiber optic lines;
            8.   A port, trucking terminal, or other freight transportation
facility;
            9.   A gas processing plant, including a plant used in the
processing, treatment, or fractionation of natural gas or natural gas liquids;
            10.   A transmission facility used by a federally licensed radio or
television station;
            11.   A steel-making facility that uses an electric arc furnace to
make steel;
            12.   A facility identified and regulated by the United States
Department of Homeland Security's Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards
Program under 6 C.F.R. part 27;
            13.   A dam that is regulated by the state or federal government;
            14.   A crude oil or refined products storage and distribution
facility, including valve sites, pipeline interconnections, pump station,
metering station, below- or above-ground pipeline, or piping and truck loading
or off-loading facility;
            15.   A video service network and broadband infrastructure,
including associated buildings and facilities, video service headends, towers,
utility poles, and utility lines such as fiber optic lines. As used in this
division, “video service network” has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1332.21.
            16.   Any above-ground portion of an oil, gas, hazardous liquid or
chemical pipeline, tank, or other storage facility;
            17.   Any above-ground portion of a well, well pad, or production
operation;
            18.   A laydown area or construction site for pipe and other
equipment intended for use on an interstate or intrastate natural gas or crude
oil pipeline;
            19.   Any mining operation, including any processing equipment,
batching operation, or support facility for that mining operation.
         B.   With respect to a video service network or broadband or wireless
telecommunications infrastructure, the above-ground portion of a facility
installed in a public right-of-way on a utility pole or in a conduit;
         C.   Any railroad property;
         D.   An electronic asset of any of the following:
            1.   An electric light company that is a public utility under R.C.
§ 4905.02;
            2.   An electric cooperative, as defined in R.C. § 4928.01;
            3.   A municipal electric utility, as defined in R.C. § 4928.01;
            4.   A natural gas company that is a public utility under R.C. §
4905.02;
            5.   A telephone company that is a public utility under R.C. §
4905.02;
            6.   A video service provider, including a cable operator, as those
terms are defined in R.C. § 1332.21.
      (3)   ELECTRONIC ASSET. Includes, but is not limited to, the hardware,
software, and data of a programmable electronic device; all communications,
operations, and customer data networks; and the contents of those data
networks.
      (4)   LAND or PREMISES. Includes any land, building, structure, or place
belonging to, controlled by, or in custody of another, and any separate
enclosure or room, or portion thereof.
      (5)   PRODUCTION OPERATION, WELL, and WELL PAD. Have the same meanings as
in R.C. § 1509.01.
(R.C. § 2911.21)
   (g)   Criminal trespass on a place of public amusement.
      (1)   As used in this division (g), “place of public amusement” means a
stadium, theater or other facility, whether licensed or not, at which a live
performance, sporting event or other activity takes place for entertainment of
the public and to which access is made available to the public, regardless of
whether admission is charged.
      (2)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly enter or
remain on any restricted portion of a place of public amusement and, as a
result of that conduct, interrupt or cause the delay of the live performance,
sporting event, or other activity taking place at the place of public amusement
after a printed written notice has been given as provided in division (g)(4)A.
of this section that the general public is restricted from access to that
restricted portion of the place of public amusement. A restricted portion of a
place of public amusement may include but is not limited to a playing field, an
athletic surface or a stage located at the place of public amusement.
      (3)   An owner or lessee of a place of public amusement, an agent of the
owner or lessee, or a performer or participant at a place of public amusement
may use reasonable force to restrain and remove a person from a restricted
portion of the place of public amusement if the person enters or remains on the
restricted portion of the place of public amusement and, as a result of that
conduct, interrupts or causes the delay of the live performance, sporting event
or other activity taking place at the place of public amusement. This division
does not provide immunity from criminal liability for any use of force beyond
reasonable force by an owner or lessee of a place of public amusement, an agent
of either the owner or lessee, or a performer or participant at a place of
public amusement.
      (4)   A.   Notice has been given that the general public is restricted
from access to a portion of a place of public amusement if a printed written
notice of the restricted access has been conspicuously posted or exhibited at
the entrance to that portion of the place of public amusement. If a printed
written notice is posted or exhibited as described in this division regarding a
portion of a place of public amusement, in addition to that posting or
exhibition, notice that the general public is restricted from access to that
portion of the place of public amusement also may be given, but is not required
to be given, by either of the following means:
            1.   By notifying the person personally, either orally or in
writing, that access to that portion of the place of public amusement is
restricted;
            2.   By broadcasting over the public address system of the place of
public amusement an oral warning that access to that portion of the place of
public amusement is restricted.
         B.   If notice that the general public is restricted from access to a
portion of a place of public amusement is provided by the posting or exhibition
of a printed written notice as described in division (g)(4)A. of this section,
the municipality, in a criminal prosecution for a violation of division (g)(2)
of this section, is not required to prove that the defendant received actual
notice that the general public is restricted from access to a portion of a
place of public amusement.
      (5)   A.   Whoever violates division (g)(2) of this section is guilty of
criminal trespass on a place of public amusement, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
         B.   In addition to any jail term, fine or other sentence, penalty or
sanction it imposes upon the offender pursuant to division (g)(5)A. of this
section, a court may require an offender who violates this section to perform
not less than 30 and not more than 120 hours of supervised community service
work.
(R.C. § 2911.23)
§ 642.125 AGGRAVATED TRESPASS.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall enter or remain on the land or premises of
another with purpose to commit on that land or those premises a misdemeanor,
the elements of which involve causing physical harm to another person or
causing another person to believe that the offender will cause physical harm to
that person.
      (2)   No person shall enter or remain on a critical infrastructure
facility with purpose to destroy or tamper with the facility.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of aggravated trespass.
Aggravated trespass in violation of division (a)(1) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. Aggravated trespass in violation of division
(a)(2) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
   (c)   As used in this section, CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITY has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 2911.21.
(R.C. § 2911.211)
§ 642.13 TAMPERING WITH COIN MACHINES.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to commit theft or to defraud, shall knowingly
enter, force an entrance into, tamper with, or insert any part of an instrument
into any coin machine.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of tampering with coin
machines, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of a violation of this section or of any theft offense as
defined in Ohio R.C. 2913.01, tampering with coin machines is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate State law.
(ORC 2911.32)
§ 642.14 PASSING BAD CHECKS.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   CHECK. Includes any form of debit from a demand deposit account,
including but not limited to any of the following:
         A.   A check, bill of exchange, draft, order of withdrawal, or similar
negotiable or non- negotiable instrument;
         B.   An electronic check, electronic transaction, debit card
transaction, check card transaction, substitute check, web check, or any form
of automated clearing house transaction.
      (2)   ISSUE A CHECK. Causing any form of debit from a demand deposit
account.
   (b)   No person, with purpose to defraud, shall issue or transfer or cause
to be issued or transferred a check or other negotiable instrument, knowing
that it will be dishonored or knowing that a person has ordered or will order
stop payment on the check or other negotiable instrument.
   (c)   For purposes of this section, a person who issues or transfers a check
or other negotiable instrument is presumed to know that it will be dishonored
if either of the following occurs:
      (1)   The drawer has no account with the drawee at the time of issue or
the stated date, whichever is later.
      (2)   The check or other negotiable instrument was properly refused
payment for insufficient funds upon presentment within 30 days after issue or
the stated date, whichever is later, and the liability of the drawer, indorser,
or any party who may be liable thereon is not discharged by payment or
satisfaction within ten days after receiving notice of dishonor.
   (d)   In determining the value of the payment for purposes of division (e)
of this section, the court may aggregate all checks and other negotiable
instruments that the offender issued or transferred or caused to be issued or
transferred in violation of division (b) of this section within a period of 180
consecutive days.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of passing bad checks. Except
as otherwise provided in this division, passing bad checks is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the check or checks or other negotiable instrument or
instruments are issued or transferred to a single vendor or single other person
for the payment of $1,000 or more, or if the check or checks or other
negotiable instrument or instruments are issued or transferred to multiple
vendors or persons for the payment of $1,500 or more, passing bad checks is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2913.11)
§ 642.145 FORGING OR SELLING FORGED IDENTIFICATION CARDS.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly do either of the following:
      (1)   Forge an identification card.
      (2)   Sell or otherwise distribute a card that purports to be an
identification card, knowing it was forged.
   (b)   As used in this section, IDENTIFICATION CARD means a card that
includes personal information or characteristics of an individual, a purpose of
which is to establish the identity of the bearer described on the card, whether
the words IDENTITY, IDENTIFICATION, IDENTIFICATION CARD, or other similar words
appear on the card.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of forging
identification cards or selling or distributing forged identification cards.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, forging identification cards or
selling or distributing forged identification cards is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of
division (a) of this section or a substantially equivalent State law or
municipal ordinance, forging identification cards or selling or distributing
forged identification cards is a misdemeanor of the first degree and, in
addition, the court shall impose upon the offender a fine not less than two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
      (2)   If the victim of a violation of this section is an elderly person,
R.C. § 2913.31(C)(2)(b) applies and the offense shall be prosecuted under R.C.
§ 2913.31.
(ORC 2913.31(B), (C)(2))
Statutory reference:
   Forgery, felony provisions, see Ohio R.C. 2913.31(A), (C)(1)
   Forgery of originating address or other routing information in connection
with the transmission of an electronic mail advertisement, felony provisions,
see Ohio R.C. 2307.64
§ 642.146 CRIMINAL SIMULATION.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to defraud, or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Make or alter any object so that it appears to have value because
of antiquity, rarity, curiosity, source, or authorship, which it does not in
fact possess.
      (2)   Practice deception in making, retouching, editing, or reproducing
any photograph, movie film, video tape, phonograph record, or recording tape.
      (3)   Falsely or fraudulently make, simulate, forge, alter, or
counterfeit any wrapper, label, stamp, cork or cap prescribed by the Liquor
Control Commission under Ohio R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303, falsely or
fraudulently cause to be made, simulated, forged, altered, or counterfeited any
wrapper, label, stamp, cork or cap prescribed by the Liquor Control Commission
under Ohio R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303, or use more than once any wrapper,
label, stamp, cork or cap prescribed by the Liquor Control Commission under
Ohio R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303.
      (4)   Offer, or possess with the purpose to offer, any object that the
person knows to have been simulated as provided in divisions (a)(1), (2) or (3)
of this section.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal simulation. Except
as otherwise provided in this division, criminal simulation is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the loss to the victim is one thousand dollars ($1,000) or
more, criminal simulation is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate State
law.
(ORC 2913.32)
§ 642.15 MISUSE OF CREDIT CARDS.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Practice deception for the purpose of procuring the issuance of a
credit card, when a credit card is issued in actual reliance thereon;
      (2)   Knowingly buy or sell a credit card from or to a person other than
the issuer;
      (3)   As an officer, employee, or appointee of a political subdivision or
as a public servant as defined under R.C. § 2921.01, knowingly misuse a credit
card account held by a political subdivision.
   (b)   No person, with purpose to defraud, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Obtain control over a credit card as security for a debt;
      (2)   Obtain property or services by the use of a credit card, in one or
more transactions, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the card
has expired or been revoked, or was obtained, is retained, or is being used in
violation of law;
      (3)   Furnish property or services upon presentation of a credit card,
knowing that the card is being used in violation of law;
      (4)   Represent or cause to be represented to the issuer of a credit card
that property or services have been furnished, knowing that the representation
is false.
   (c)   No person, with purpose to violate this section, shall receive,
possess, control, or dispose of a credit card.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of misuse of credit cards.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (d)(3) of this section, a
violation of division (a), (b)(1), or (c) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division or division (d)(3) of
this section, a violation of division (b)(2), (3), or (4) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the cumulative retail value of the property
and services involved in one or more violations of division (b)(2), (3), or (4)
of this section which violations involve one or more credit card accounts and
occur within a period of 90 consecutive days commencing on the date of the
first violation, is one thousand dollars ($1,000) or more, misuse of credit
cards is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate State law.
      (3)   If the victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled
adult, and if the offense involves a violation of division (b)(1) or (b)(2) of
this section, misuse of credit cards is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate State law.
(R.C. § 2913.21)
§ 642.155 RECORDING CREDIT CARD, TELEPHONE OR SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBERS.
   (a)   No person shall record or cause to be recorded either of the
following:
      (1)   A credit card account number of the other party to a transaction,
when a check, bill of exchange or other draft is presented for payment; or
      (2)   The telephone number or Social Security account number of the other
party to a transaction, when payment is made by credit card charge agreement,
check, bill of exchange or other draft.
   (b)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to a transaction, if all
of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The credit card account number, Social Security account number or
telephone number is recorded for a legitimate business purpose, including
collection purposes.
      (2)   The other party to the transaction consents to the recording of the
credit card account number, Social Security account number or telephone number.
      (3)   The credit card account number, Social Security account number or
telephone number that is recorded during the course of the transaction is not
disclosed to any third party for any purposes other than collection purposes
and is not used to market goods or services unrelated to the goods or services
purchased in the transaction.
   (c)   Nothing in this section prohibits the recording of the number of a
credit card account when given in lieu of a deposit to secure payment in the
event of default, loss, damage or other occurrence, or requires a person to
accept a check presented for payment, if the other party to the transaction
refuses to consent to the recording of the number of the party’s Social
Security account or license to operate a motor vehicle.
(ORC 1349.17)
   (d)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 1349.99)
§ 642.16 MAKING OR USING SLUGS.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Insert or deposit a slug in a coin machine, with purpose to
defraud;
      (2)   Make, possess, or dispose of a slug, with purpose of enabling
another to defraud by inserting or depositing it in a coin machine.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making or using slugs, a
misdemeanor of the second degree.
(ORC 2913.33)
§ 642.17 PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF PURPOSE TO DEFRAUD.
   In a prosecution of a person for a theft offense that alleges that the
person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she was facilitating a
fraud, hired or rented an aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat,
sailboat, camper, trailer, horse, buggy, or other property or equipment, kept
or operated any of the same that has been hired or rented, or engaged
accommodations at a hotel, motel, inn, campground, or other hostelry, it is
prima facie evidence of purpose to defraud if the person did any of the
following:
   (a)   Used deception to induce the rental agency to furnish the person with
the aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat, sailboat, camper, trailer,
horse, buggy, or other property or equipment, or used deception to induce the
hostelry to furnish the person with accommodations;
   (b)   Hired or rented any aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat,
sailboat, camper, trailer, horse, buggy, or other property or equipment, or
engaged accommodations, knowing that he or she is without sufficient means to
pay the hire or rental;
   (c)   Absconded without paying the hire or rental;
   (d)   Knowingly failed to pay the hire or rental as required by the contract
of hire or rental, without reasonable excuse for the failure;
   (e)   Knowingly failed to return hired or rented property as required by the
contract of hire or rental, without reasonable excuse for the failure.
(ORC 2913.41)
§ 642.18 TAMPERING WITH RECORDS.
   (a)   No person, knowing that he or she has no privilege to do so, and with
purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she is facilitating a fraud, shall do
any of the following:
      (1)   Falsify, destroy, remove, conceal, alter, deface, or mutilate any
writing, computer software, data, or record;
      (2)   Utter any writing or record, knowing it to have been tampered with
as provided in division (a)(1) of this section.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of tampering with records.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (b)(3) of this section, if the
offense does not involve data or computer software, tampering with records is
whichever of the following is applicable:
         A.   If division (b)(1)B. of this section does not apply, it is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
         B.   If the writing or record is a will unrevoked at the time of the
offense, it is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate State law.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (b)(3) of this section, if the
offense involves a violation of division (a) of this section involving data or
computer software, tampering with records is whichever of the following is
applicable:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(2)B. of this
section, it is a misdemeanor of the first degree;
         B.   If the value of the data or computer software involved in the
offense or the loss to the victim is $1,000 or more or if the offense is
committed for the purpose of devising or executing a scheme to defraud or to
obtain property or services and the value of the property or services or the
loss to the victim is $7,500 or more, it is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the writing, data, computer software, or record is kept by or
belongs to a local, State, or Federal governmental entity, it is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate State law.
(ORC 2913.42)
§ 642.19 SECURING WRITINGS BY DECEPTION.
   (a)   No person, by deception, shall cause another to execute any writing
that disposes of or encumbers property, or by which a pecuniary obligation is
incurred.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of securing writings by
deception. Except as otherwise provided in this division, securing writings by
deception is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of the property or
the obligation involved is one thousand dollars ($1,000) or more, securing
writings by deception is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate State law.
If the victim of the offense is an elderly person, disabled adult, active duty
service member, or spouse of an active duty service member, securing writings
by deception is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate State law.
(ORC 2913.43)
§ 642.20 PERSONATING AN OFFICER.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she is
facilitating a fraud, or with purpose to induce another to purchase property or
services, shall personate a law enforcement officer, or an inspector,
investigator, or agent of any governmental agency.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of personating an officer, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 2913.44)
§ 642.205 IDENTITY FRAUD. (REPEALED)
   ( Editor's note: Section 642.205 was repealed as part of the 2008 updating
and revision of this Code because a violation of substantially equivalent State
law (Ohio R.C. 2913.49) was made a felony by the Ohio General Assembly.)
§ 642.21 DEFRAUDING CREDITORS.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to defraud one or more of his or her
creditors, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Remove, conceal, destroy, encumber, convey, or otherwise deal with
any of his or her property;
      (2)   Misrepresent or refuse to disclose to a fiduciary appointed to
administer or manage his or her affairs or estate, the existence, amount, or
location of any of his or her property, or any other information regarding the
property which he or she is legally required to furnish to the fiduciary.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of defrauding creditors.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, defrauding creditors is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of the property involved is one
thousand dollars ($1,000) or more, defrauding creditors is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate State law.
(ORC 2913.45)
§ 642.22 RECEIVING STOLEN PROPERTY.
   (a)   No person shall receive, retain, or dispose of property of another
knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the property has been
obtained through commission of a theft offense.
   (b)   It is not a defense to a charge of receiving stolen property in
violation of this section that the property was obtained by means other than
through the commission of a theft offense if the property was explicitly
represented to the accused person as being obtained through the commission of a
theft offense.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of receiving stolen property.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, receiving stolen property is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If any of the following criteria are met, then
a violation of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
State law:
      (1)   The value of the property involved is one thousand dollars ($1,000)
or more;
      (2)   The property involved is any of the property listed in Ohio R.C.
2913.71;
      (3)   The property involved is a firearm or dangerous ordnance, as
defined in Ohio R.C. 2923.11;
      (4)   The property involved is a motor vehicle as defined in Ohio R.C.
4501.01; or
      (5)   The property involved is any dangerous drug, as defined in Ohio
R.C. 4729.01; or
      (6)   The property involved in violation of this section is a special
purchase article as defined in R.C. § 4737.04 or a bulk merchandise container
as defined in R.C. § 4737.012.
(ORC 2913.51)
§ 642.23 PURCHASE FROM MINORS OF SECONDHAND BUILDERS’ AND PLUMBERS’ HARDWARE.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly purchase or otherwise receive any secondhand
grate baskets, locks or other builders’ hardware, electric light fixtures, gas
fixtures, plumbing fixtures, bell fixtures, lead or brass water pipes, water
meters or any part of such articles from any minor.
(Ord. 3200, passed 5-23-1956)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
§ 642.24 BILLPOSTING.
   (a)   No person shall post up or affix, or cause to be posted up or affixed,
in any manner, any bill, placard or notice, either written or printed, upon any
fence, tree-box, wall or upon any part of any building, without the previous
consent of the owner thereof, or upon any part of any building or other
property belonging to the Village.
   (b)   No person shall tack upon or attach to any pole or other structure on
any street, park or public ground of the Village, any handbill, card, circular
or other printed material.
(Ord 2540, passed 9-12-1945)
   (c)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
§ 642.25 THEFT OF C.A.T.V. (REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
   Section 642.25 was repealed as part of the 1985 updating and revision of
these Codified Ordinances because substantially identical State law (Ohio R.C.
4933.42 and 4933.99(A)) was repealed by the Ohio General Assembly by Sub. S.B.
No. 183, effective September 26, 1984. See §§
642.01 and
642.02.
§ 642.26 PROSECUTIONS FOR THEFT OF UTILITIES.
   (a)   In a prosecution for a theft offense, as defined in Ohio R.C. 2913.01,
that involves alleged tampering with a gas, electric, steam or water meter,
conduit or attachment of a utility that has been disconnected by the utility,
proof that a meter, conduit or attachment of a utility has been tampered with
is prima facie evidence that the person who is obligated to pay for the service
rendered through the meter, conduit or attachment, and who is in possession or
control of the meter, conduit or attachment at the time the tampering occurred
has caused the tampering with intent to commit a theft offense.
   (b)   In a prosecution for a theft offense, as defined in Ohio R.C. 2913.01,
that involves the alleged reconnection of a gas, electric, steam or water
meter, conduit or attachment of a utility that has been disconnected by the
utility, proof that a meter, conduit or attachment disconnected by a utility
has been reconnected without the consent of the utility is prima facie evidence
that the person in possession or control of the meter, conduit or attachment at
the time of the reconnection has reconnected the meter, conduit or attachment
with intent to commit a theft offense.
   (c)   As used in this section:
      (1)   UTILITY. Any electric light company, gas company, natural gas
company, pipe-line company, water-works company or heating or cooling company,
as defined in Ohio R.C. 4905.03(C), (D), (E), (F), (G), or (H), its lessees,
trustees or receivers, or any similar utility owned or operated by a political
subdivision.
      (2)   TAMPER. To interfere with, damage or bypass a utility meter,
conduit or attachment with the intent to impede the correct registration of a
meter or the proper functions of a conduit or attachment so as to reduce the
amount of utility service that is registered on the meter.
(ORC 4933.18)
   (d)   Each electric light company, gas company, natural gas company,
pipeline company, waterworks company or heating or cooling company, as defined
by Ohio R.C. 4905.03(C), (D), (E), (F), (G), or (H), or its lessees, trustees
or receivers, and each similar utility owned or operated by a political
subdivision, shall notify its customers, on an annual basis, that tampering
with or bypassing a meter constitutes a theft offense that could result in the
imposition of criminal sanctions.
(ORC 4933.19)
§ 642.27 FOOD STAMPS. (REPEALED) EDITOR’S NOTE:
    Section 642.27 was repealed as part of the 1997 updating and revision of
this Model Ohio Municipal Code because a violation of substantially equivalent
State law (Ohio R.C. 2913.46) was made a felony by the Ohio General Assembly by
Am. Sub. S.B. No. 269, effective June 28, 1996, and July 1, 1996.
§ 642.28 INSURANCE FRAUD.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   DATA. The same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2913.01 and additionally
includes any other representation of information, knowledge, facts,  concepts,
or instructions that are being or have been prepared in a formalized manner.
      (2)   DECEPTIVE. A statement, in whole or in part, would cause another to
be deceived because it contains a misleading representation, withholds
information, prevents the acquisition of information, or by any other conduct,
act, or omission creates, confirms, or perpetuates a false impression,
including, but not limited to, a false impression as to law, value, state of
mind, or other objective or subjective fact.
      (3)   INSURER. Any person that is authorized to engage in the business of
insurance in this State under Ohio R.C. Title 39, the Ohio Fair Plan
Underwriting Association created under Ohio R.C. 3929.43, any health insuring
corporation, and any legal entity that is self-insured and provides benefits to
its employees or members.
      (4)   POLICY. A policy, certificate, contract, or plan that is issued by
an insurer.
      (5)   STATEMENT. Includes but is not limited to any notice, letter, or
memorandum; proof of loss; bill of lading; receipt for payment; invoice,
account, or other financial statement; estimate of property damage; bill for
services; diagnosis or prognosis; prescription; hospital, medical, or dental
chart or other record; x-ray, photograph, videotape, or movie film; test
result; other evidence of loss, injury, or expense; computer-generated
document; and data in any form.
   (b)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Present to, or cause to be presented to, an insurer any written or
oral statement that is part of, or in support of, an application for insurance,
a claim for payment pursuant to a policy, or a claim for any other benefit
pursuant to a policy, knowing that the statement, or any part of the statement,
is false or deceptive;
      (2)   Assist, aid, abet, solicit, procure, or conspire with another to
prepare or make any written or oral statement that is intended to be presented
to an insurer as part of, or in support of, an application for insurance, a
claim for payment pursuant to a policy, or a claim for any other benefit
pursuant to a policy, knowing that the statement, or any part of the statement,
is false or deceptive.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of insurance fraud. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, insurance fraud is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the amount of the claim that is false or deceptive is one
thousand dollars ($1,000) or more, insurance fraud is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate State law.
   (d)   This section shall not be construed to abrogate, waive, or modify Ohio
R.C. 2317.02(A).
(ORC 2913.47)
§ 642.29 DIMINISHING OR INTERFERING WITH FORFEITABLE PROPERTY.
   (a)   No person shall destroy, damage, remove, or transfer property that is
subject to forfeiture or otherwise take any action in regard to property that
is subject to forfeiture with purpose to do any of the following:
      (1)   Prevent or impair the State’s or political subdivision’s lawful
authority to take the property into its custody or control under Ohio R.C.
Chapter 2981 or to continue holding the property under its lawful custody or
control;
      (2)   Impair or defeat the court’s continuing jurisdiction over the
person and property;
      (3)   Devalue property that the person knows, or has reasonable cause to
believe, is subject to forfeiture proceedings under Ohio R.C. Chapter 2981.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interference with or
diminishing forfeitable property. Except as otherwise provided in this division
(b), interference with or diminishing forfeitable property is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the value of the property is one thousand dollars ($1,000)
or more, interference with or diminishing forfeitable property is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate State law.
(ORC 2981.07)
§ 642.30 MISCONDUCT INVOLVING A PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM.
   (a)   As used in this section, PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM means a county
transit system operated in accordance with Ohio R.C. 306.01 to 306.13, a
regional transit authority operated in accordance with Ohio R.C. 306.30 to
306.71, or a regional transit commission operated in accordance with Ohio R.C.
306.80 to 306.90.
   (b)   No person shall evade the payment of the known fares of a public
transportation system.
   (c)   No person shall alter any transfer, pass, ticket or token of a public
transportation system with the purpose of evading the payment of fares or of
defrauding the system.
   (d)   No person shall do any of the following while in any facility or on
any vehicle of a public transportation system:
      (1)   Play sound equipment without the proper use of a private earphone;
      (2)   Smoke, eat or drink in any area where the activity is clearly
marked as being prohibited; or
      (3)   Expectorate upon a person, facility or vehicle.
   (e)   No person shall write, deface, draw or otherwise mark on any facility
or vehicle of a public transportation system.
   (f)   No person shall fail to comply with a lawful order of a public
transportation system police officer, and no person shall resist, obstruct or
abuse a public transportation police officer in the performance of the
officer’s duties.
   (g)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of
misconduct involving a public transportation system.
      (1)   A violation of division (b), (c), or (f) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   A violation of division (d) of this section is a minor misdemeanor
on a first offense. If a person previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of any division of this section or of a Municipal
ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any division of this section, a
violation of division (d) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
      (3)   A violation of division (e) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
   (h)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, 75 percent of each fine
paid to satisfy a sentence imposed for a violation of any of the provisions of
this section shall be deposited into the treasury of the County and 25 percent
shall be deposited with the county transit board, regional transit authority or
regional transit commission that operates the public transportation system
involved in the violation, unless the Board of County Commissioners operates
the public transportation system, in which case 100 percent of each fine shall
be deposited into the treasury of the County.
(ORC 2917.41)
§ 642.31 WORKERS’ COMPENSATION FRAUD.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Receive workers’ compensation benefits to which the person is not
entitled;
      (2)   Make or present or cause to be made or presented a false or
misleading statement with the purpose to secure payment for goods or services
rendered under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4121, 4123, 4127, or 4131 or to secure
workers’ compensation benefits;
      (3)   Alter, falsify, destroy, conceal, or remove any record or document
that is necessary to fully establish the validity of any claim filed with, or
necessary to establish the nature and validity of all goods and services for
which reimbursement or payment was received or is requested from the Bureau of
Workers’ Compensation, or a self-insuring employer under Ohio R.C. Chapter
4121, 4123, 4127, or 4131;
      (4)   Enter into an agreement or conspiracy to defraud the Bureau of
Workers’ Compensation or a self-insuring employer by making or presenting or
causing to be made or presented a false claim for workers’ compensation
benefits;
      (5)   Make or present or cause to be made or presented a false statement
concerning manual codes, classification or employees, payroll, paid
compensation, or number of personnel, when information of that nature is
necessary to determine the actual workers’ compensation premium or assessment
owed to the Bureau by an employer;
      (6)   Alter, forge, or create a workers’ compensation certificate or
falsely show current or correct workers’ compensation coverage;
      (7)   Fail to secure or maintain workers’ compensation coverage as
required by Ohio R.C. Chapter 4123 with the intent to defraud the Bureau of
Workers’ Compensation.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of workers' compensation
fraud. Except as otherwise provided in this division, workers' compensation
fraud is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of premiums and
assessments unpaid pursuant to actions described in divisions (a)(5), (a)(6),
or (a)(7) of this section, or goods, services, property, or money stolen is one
thousand dollars ($1,000) or more, workers' compensation fraud is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate State law.
   (c)   Upon application of the governmental body that conducted the
investigation and prosecution of a violation of this section, the court shall
order the person who is convicted of the violation to pay the governmental body
its costs of investigating and prosecuting the case. These costs are in
addition to any other costs or penalty provided under Federal, State or local
law.
   (d)   The remedies and penalties provided in this section are not exclusive
remedies and penalties and do not preclude the use of any other criminal or
civil remedy or penalty for any act that is in violation of this section.
   (e)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   CLAIM. Any attempt to cause the Bureau of Workers’ Compensation, an
independent third party with whom the administrator or an employer contracts
under Ohio R.C. 4121.44, or a self-insuring employer to make payment or
reimbursement for workers’ compensation benefits.
      (2)   EMPLOYER, EMPLOYEE, and SELF-INSURING EMPLOYER. The same meanings
as in Ohio R.C. 4123.01.
      (3)   EMPLOYMENT. Participating in any trade, occupation, business,
service, or profession for substantial gainful remuneration.
      (4)   FALSE. Wholly or partially untrue or deceptive.
      (5)   GOODS. Includes but is not limited to medical supplies, appliances,
rehabilitative equipment, and any other apparatus or furnishing provided or
used in the care, treatment, or rehabilitation of a claimant for workers’
compensation benefits.
      (6)   RECORDS. Any medical, professional, financial, or business record
relating to the treatment or care of any person, to goods or services provided
to any person, or to rates paid for goods or services provided to any person,
or any record that the administrator of workers’ compensation requires pursuant
to rule.
      (7)   REMUNERATION. Includes but is not limited to wages, commissions,
rebates, and any other reward or consideration.
      (8)   SERVICES. Includes but is not limited to any service provided by
any health care provider to a claimant for workers’ compensation benefits and
any and all services provided by the Bureau as part of workers' compensation
insurance coverage.
      (9)   STATEMENT. Includes but is not limited to any oral, written,
electronic, electronic impulse, or magnetic communication notice, letter,
memorandum, receipt for payment, invoice, account, financial statement, bill
for services; a diagnosis, prognosis, prescription, hospital, medical, or
dental chart or other record; and a computer generated document.
      (10)   WORKERS’ COMPENSATION BENEFITS. Any compensation or benefits
payable under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4121, 4123, 4127, or 4131.
(ORC 2913.48)
§ 642.32 MEDICAID FRAUD.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   PROVIDER. Any person who has signed a provider agreement with the
Department of Medicaid to provide goods or services pursuant to the Medicaid
program or any person who has signed an agreement with a party to such a
provider agreement under which the person agrees to provide goods or services
that are reimbursable under the Medicaid program.
      (2)   PROVIDER AGREEMENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5164.01.
      (3)   RECIPIENT. Any individual who receives goods or services from a
provider under the Medicaid program.
      (4)   RECORDS. Any medical, professional, financial or business records
relating to the treatment or care of any recipient, to goods or services
provided to any recipient, or to rates paid for goods or services provided to
any recipient, and any records that are required by the rules of the Medicaid
Director to be kept for the Medicaid program.
      (5)   STATEMENT OR REPRESENTATION. Any oral, written, electronic,
electronic impulse or magnetic communication that is used to identify an item
of goods or a service for which reimbursement may be made under the Medicaid
program or that states income and expense and is or may be used to determine a
rate of reimbursement under the Medicaid program.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly make or cause to be made a false or
misleading statement or representation for use in obtaining reimbursement from
the Medicaid program.
   (c)   No person, with purpose to commit fraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Contrary to the terms of the person’s provider agreement, charge,
solicit, accept or receive for goods or services that the person provides under
the Medicaid program any property, money or other consideration in addition to
the amount of reimbursement under the Medicaid program and the person’s
provider agreement for the goods or services and any cost-sharing expenses
authorized by R.C. § 5162.20 or rules adopted by the Medicaid Director
regarding the Medicaid program.
      (2)   Solicit, offer or receive any remuneration, other than any cost-
sharing expenses authorized by R.C. § 5162.20 or rules adopted by the Medicaid
Director regarding the Medicaid program, in cash or in kind, including but not
limited to a kickback or rebate, in connection with the furnishing of goods or
services for which whole or partial reimbursement is or may be made under the
Medicaid program.
   (d)   No person, having submitted a claim for or provided goods or services
under the Medicaid program, shall do either of the following for a period of at
least six years after a reimbursement pursuant to that claim, or a
reimbursement for those goods or services, is received under the Medicaid
program:
      (1)   Knowingly alter, falsify, destroy, conceal or remove any records
that are necessary to fully disclose the nature of all goods or services for
which the claim was submitted, or for which reimbursement was received, by the
person; or
      (2)   Knowingly alter, falsify, destroy, conceal or remove any records
that are necessary to disclose fully all income and expenditures upon which
rates of reimbursements were based for the person.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of Medicaid fraud. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, Medicaid fraud is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the value of the property, services or funds obtained in
violation of this section is $1,000 or more, Medicaid fraud is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (f)   Upon application of the governmental agency, office or other entity
that conducted the investigation and prosecution in a case under this section,
the court shall order any person who is convicted of a violation of this
section for receiving any reimbursement for furnishing goods or services under
the Medicaid program to which the person is not entitled to pay to the
applicant its cost of investigating and prosecuting the case. The costs of
investigation and prosecution that a defendant is ordered to pay pursuant to
this division shall be in addition to any other penalties for the receipt of
that reimbursement that are provided in this section, R.C. § 2913.40 or
5164.35, or any other provision of law.
   (g)   The provisions of this section are not intended to be exclusive
remedies and do not preclude the use of any other criminal or civil remedy for
any act that is in violation of this section.
(R.C. § 2913.40)
   (h)   Medicaid eligibility fraud.
      (1)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following in an application
for enrollment in the Medicaid program or in a document that requires a
disclosure of assets for the purpose of determining eligibility for the
Medicaid program:
         A.   Make or cause to be made a false or misleading statement;
         B.   Conceal an interest in property;
         C.   1.   Except as provided in division (h)(1)C.2. of this section,
fail to disclose a transfer of property that occurred during the period
beginning 36 months before submission of the application or document and ending
on the date the application or document was submitted;
            2.   Fail to disclose a transfer of property that occurred during
the period beginning 60 months before submission of the application or document
and ending on the date the application or document was submitted and that was
made to an irrevocable trust a portion of which is not distributable to the
applicant for or recipient of Medicaid or to a revocable trust.
      (2)   A.   Whoever violates this division (h) is guilty of Medicaid
eligibility fraud. Except as otherwise provided in this division, a violation
of this division (h) is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of the
Medicaid services paid as a result of the violation is $1,000 or more, a
violation of this division (h) is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
         B.   In addition to imposing a sentence under division (h)(2)A. of
this section, the court shall order that a person who is guilty of Medicaid
eligibility fraud make restitution in the full amount of any Medicaid services
paid on behalf of an applicant for or recipient of Medicaid for which the
applicant or recipient was not eligible, plus interest at the rate applicable
to judgments on unreimbursed amounts from the date on which the Medicaid
services were paid to the date on which restitution is made.
         C.   The remedies and penalties provided in this division (h) are not
exclusive and do not preclude the use of any other criminal or civil remedy for
any act that is in violation of this division (h).
      (3)   This division (h) does not apply to a person who fully disclosed in
an application for Medicaid or in a document that requires a disclosure of
assets for the purpose of determining eligibility for Medicaid all of the
interests in property of the applicant for or recipient of Medicaid, all
transfers of property by the applicant for or recipient of Medicaid, and the
circumstances of all those transfers.
      (4)   Any amounts of Medicaid services recovered as restitution under
this division (h) and any interest on those amounts shall be credited to the
General Revenue Fund, and any applicable federal share shall be returned to the
appropriate agency or department of the United States.
      (5)   For the purpose of this division (h), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         A.   MEDICAID SERVICES. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5164.01.
         B.   PROPERTY. Any real or personal property or other asset in which a
person has any legal title or interest.
(R.C. § 2913.401)
§ 642.33 MOTION PICTURE PIRACY.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   AUDIOVISUAL RECORDING FUNCTION. The capability of a device to
record or transmit a motion picture or any part of a motion picture by means of
any technology existing on, or developed after, March 9, 2004.
      (2)   FACILITY. A movie theater.
   (b)   No person, without the written consent of the owner or lessee of the
facility and of the licensor of the motion picture, shall knowingly operate an
audiovisual recording function of a device in a facility in which the motion
picture is being shown.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of motion
picture piracy, a misdemeanor of the first degree on the first offense and a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate State law on each subsequent offense.
   (d)   This section does not prohibit or restrict a lawfully authorized
investigative, law enforcement, protective, or intelligence gathering employee
or agent of the government of this State or a political subdivision of this
State, or of the federal government, when acting in an official capacity, from
operating an audiovisual recording function of a device in any facility in
which a motion picture is being shown.
   (e)   Division (b) of this section does not limit or affect the application
of any other prohibition in this code or the Ohio Revised Code. Any act that is
a violation of both division (b) of this section and another provision of this
code or the Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under this section, under the
other provision of this code or the Ohio Revised Code, or under both this
section and the other provision of this code or the Ohio Revised Code.
(ORC 2913.07)
§ 642.34 RAILROAD VANDALISM; CRIMINAL TRESPASS; INTERFERENCE WITH OPERATION OF
TRAIN; GRADE CROSSING DEVICE VANDALISM.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly, and by any means, drop or throw any object
at, onto, or in the path of, any railroad rail, railroad track, locomotive,
engine, railroad car, or other vehicle of a railroad company while such vehicle
is on a railroad track.
   (b)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall climb upon or into any
locomotive, engine, railroad car, or other vehicle of a railroad company when
it is on a railroad track.
   (c)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall disrupt, delay, or
prevent the operation of any train or other vehicle of a railroad company while
such vehicle is on a railroad track.
   (d)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of railroad
vandalism. Whoever violates
division (b) of this section is guilty of criminal trespass on a locomotive,
engine, railroad car, or other railroad vehicle. Whoever violates division (c)
of this section is guilty of interference with the operation of a train. Except
as otherwise provided in this division, railroad vandalism; criminal trespass
on a locomotive, engine, railroad car, or other railroad vehicle; and
interference with the operation of a train each is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the violation of division (a), (b), or (c) of this section causes
serious physical harm to property or creates a substantial risk of physical
harm to any person, causes physical harm to any person, or causes serious
physical harm to any person, the violation is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2909.10)
   (e)   No person shall knowingly deface, damage, obstruct, remove, or
otherwise impair the operation of any railroad grade crossing warning signal or
other protective device, including any gate, bell, light, crossbuck, stop sign,
yield sign, advance warning sign, or advance pavement marking.
   (f)   Whoever violates division (e) of this section is guilty of railroad
grade crossing device vandalism. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
railroad grade crossing device vandalism is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
If the violation of division (e) of this section causes serious physical harm
to property or creates a substantial risk of physical harm to any person,
causes physical harm to any person, or causes serious physical harm to any
person, railroad grade crossing device vandalism is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2909.101)
CHAPTER 648: PEACE DISTURBANCES
648.01   Riot.
648.02   Failure to disperse.
648.03   Justifiable use of force to suppress riot.
648.04   Disorderly conduct.
648.05   Disturbing a lawful meeting.
648.06   Misconduct at an emergency.
648.07   Inducing panic.
648.08   Making false alarms.
648.09   Disturbing the peace. (Repealed)
648.10   Inciting to violence.
648.11   Impeding public passage of an emergency service responder.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar State law
   Power to regulate peace disturbances - see Ohio R.C. 715.49
   Cordoning off riot areas; prohibiting sales of firearms and explosives - see
Ohio R.C. 3761.16
   Suspension of beer and liquor sales during emergency - see Ohio R.C.
4301.251
   Riot and civil disorder assistance by State Highway Patrol - see Ohio R.C.
5503.02
   “Peeling”; cracking exhaust noises - see TRAF.
432.35
   Sirens, whistles and bells on motor vehicles - see TRAF.
438.20
   Noisy mufflers - see TRAF.
438.21
   Definitions generally - see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   “Deadly force” defined - see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   “Force” defined - see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   Resisting arrest - see GEN. OFF.
606.16
   Interfering with civil rights - see GEN. OFF.
606.20
   Detention of shoplifters and those committing motion picture piracy;
protection of institutional property - see GEN. OFF.
606.23
   Liquor sale to intoxicated person - see GEN. OFF.
612.03
   Barking or howling dogs - see GEN. OFF.
618.07
   Assault - see GEN. OFF.
636.02,
636.03
   Menacing - see GEN. OFF.
636.04 et seq.
   Desecration - see GEN. OFF.
642.07
   Arson - see GEN. OFF.
642.09
   Trespass - see GEN. OFF.
642.10,
642.11
   Noise pollution - see GEN. OFF.
660.15
   Pointing and discharging firearms and other weapons - see GEN. OFF.
672.09
   Fireworks - see GEN. OFF.
672.10
§ 648.01 RIOT.
   (a)   No person shall participate with four or more others in a course of
disorderly conduct in violation of Ohio R.C. 2917.11 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance:
      (1)   With purpose to commit or facilitate the commission of a
misdemeanor, other than disorderly conduct;
      (2)   With purpose to intimidate a public official or employee into
taking or refraining from official action, or with purpose to hinder, impede,
or obstruct a function of government;
      (3)   With purpose to hinder, impede, or obstruct the orderly process of
administration or instruction at an educational institution, or to interfere
with or disrupt lawful activities carried on at the institution.
   (b)   No person shall participate with four or more others with purpose to
do an act with unlawful force or violence, even though the act might otherwise
be lawful.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of riot, a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(ORC 2917.03)
   (d)   For the purposes of prosecuting violations of this section, the
prosecution is not required to allege or prove that the offender expressly
agreed with four or more others to commit any act that constitutes a violation
of this section prior to or while committing those acts.
(ORC 2917.031)
Statutory reference:
   Aggravated riot, felony provisions, see Ohio R.C. 2917.02
§ 648.02 FAILURE TO DISPERSE.
   (a)   Where five or more persons are participating in a course of disorderly
conduct in violation of Ohio R.C. 2917.11 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, and there are other persons in the vicinity whose presence
creates the likelihood of physical harm to persons or property or of serious
public inconvenience, annoyance, or alarm, a law enforcement officer or other
public official may order the participants and the other persons to disperse.
No person shall knowingly fail to obey the order.
   (b)   Nothing in this section requires persons to disperse who are peaceably
assembled for a lawful purpose.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to disperse.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(3) of this section,
failure to disperse is a minor misdemeanor.
      (3)   Failure to disperse is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if the
failure to obey the order described in division (a) of this section creates the
likelihood of physical harm to persons or is committed at the scene of a fire,
accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind.
(ORC 2917.04)
§ 648.03 JUSTIFIABLE USE OF FORCE TO SUPPRESS RIOT.
   A law enforcement officer or firefighter engaged in suppressing a riot or in
protecting persons or property during a riot:
   (a)   Is justified in using force, other than deadly force, when and to the
extent he or she has probable cause to believe such force is necessary to
disperse or apprehend rioters;
   (b)   Is justified in using force, including deadly force, when and to the
extent he or she has probable cause to believe such force is necessary to
disperse or apprehend rioters whose conduct is creating a substantial risk of
serious physical harm to persons.
(ORC 2917.05)
§ 648.04 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   (a)   No person shall recklessly cause inconvenience, annoyance, or alarm to
another, by doing any of the following:
      (1)   Engaging in fighting, in threatening harm to persons or property,
or in violent or turbulent behavior;
      (2)   Making unreasonable noise or an offensively coarse utterance,
gesture, or display, or communicating unwarranted and grossly abusive language
to any person;
      (3)   Insulting, taunting, or challenging another, under circumstances in
which that conduct is likely to provoke a violent response;
      (4)   Hindering or preventing the movement of persons on a public street,
road, highway, or right- of-way, or to, from, within, or upon public or private
property, so as to interfere with the rights of others, and by any act that
serves no lawful and reasonable purpose of the offender;
      (5)   Creating a condition that is physically offensive to persons or
that presents a risk of physical harm to persons or property, by any act that
serves no lawful and reasonable purpose of the offender.
   (b)   No person while voluntarily intoxicated shall do either of the
following:
      (1)   In a public place or in the presence of two or more persons, engage
in conduct likely to be offensive or to cause inconvenience, annoyance, or
alarm to persons of ordinary sensibilities, which conduct the offender, if he
or she were not intoxicated, should know is likely to have such effect on
others;
      (2)   Engage in conduct or create a condition that presents a risk of
physical harm to himself, herself or another, or to the property of another.
   (c)   Violation of any statute or ordinance of which an element is operating
a motor vehicle, locomotive, watercraft, aircraft, or other vehicle while under
the influence of alcohol or any drug of abuse is not a violation of division
(b) of this section.
   (d)   If a person appears to an ordinary observer to be intoxicated, it is
probable cause to believe that the person is voluntarily intoxicated for
purposes of division (b) of this section.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disorderly conduct.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (e)(2) and (e)(3) of this
section, disorderly conduct is a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   Disorderly conduct is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if any of
the following applies:
         A.   The offender persists in disorderly conduct after reasonable
warning or request to desist.
         B.   The offense is committed in the vicinity of a school or in a
school safety zone.
         C.   The offense is committed in the presence of any law enforcement
officer, firefighter, rescuer, medical person, emergency medical services
person, or other authorized person who is engaged in the person’s duties at the
scene of a fire, accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind.
         D.   The offense is committed in the presence of any emergency
facility person who is engaged in the person’s duties in an emergency facility.
      (3)   If an offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to three or more violations of division (b) of this section, Ohio R.C. 2917.11
(B), or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a
violation of division (b) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
   (f)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Committed in the vicinity of a school” has the same meaning as in
Ohio R.C. 2925.01.
      (2)   “Emergency facility” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2909.04.
      (3)   “Emergency facility person” is the singular of “emergency facility
personnel” as defined in Ohio R.C. 2909.04.
      (4)   “Emergency medical services person” is the singular of “emergency
medical services personnel” as defined in Ohio R.C. 2133.21.
(ORC 2917.11)
§ 648.05 DISTURBING A LAWFUL MEETING.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to prevent or disrupt a lawful meeting,
procession, or gathering, shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Do any act which obstructs or interferes with the due conduct of
the meeting, procession, or gathering.
      (2)   Make any utterance, gesture, or display which outrages the
sensibilities of the group.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disturbing a lawful
meeting. Except as otherwise provided in this division, disturbing a lawful
meeting is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Disturbing a lawful meeting is a
misdemeanor of the first degree if either of the following applies:
      (1)   The violation is committed with the intent to disturb or disquiet
any assemblage of people met for religious worship at a tax-exempt place of
worship, regardless of whether the conduct is within the place at which the
assemblage is held or is on the property on which that place is located and
disturbs the order and solemnity of the assemblage.
      (2)   The violation is committed with the intent to prevent, disrupt, or
interfere with a virtual meeting or gathering of people for religious worship,
through use of a computer, computer system, telecommunications device, or other
electronic device or system, or in any other manner.
   (c)   As used in this section:
      (1)   COMPUTER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      (2)   COMPUTER SYSTEM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      (3)   TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2913.01.
      (4)   VIRTUAL MEETING OR GATHERING. A meeting or gathering by interactive
video conference or teleconference, or by a combination thereof.
(R.C. § 2917.12)
§ 648.06 MISCONDUCT AT AN EMERGENCY.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Hamper the lawful operations of any law enforcement officer,
firefighter, rescuer, medical person, emergency medical services person, or
other authorized person engaged in the person’s duties at the scene of a fire,
accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind;
      (2)   Hamper the lawful activities of any emergency facility person who
is engaged in the person’s duties in an emergency facility;
      (3)   Fail to obey the lawful order of any law enforcement officer
engaged in the law enforcement officer’s duties at the scene of or in
connection with a fire, accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind.
   (b)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit access or deny
information to any news media representative in the lawful exercise of the news
media representative’s duties.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of misconduct at an emergency.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, misconduct at an emergency is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If violation of this section creates a risk
of physical harm to persons or property, misconduct at an emergency is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (d)   As used in this section:
      (1)   EMERGENCY FACILITY. The same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2909.04.
      (2)   EMERGENCY FACILITY PERSON. The singular of EMERGENCY FACILITY
PERSONNEL, as defined in Ohio R.C. 2909.04.
      (3)   EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSON. The singular of EMERGENCY
MEDICAL SERVICES PERSONNEL, as defined in Ohio R.C. 2133.21.
(ORC 2917.13)
§ 648.07 INDUCING PANIC.
   (a)   No person shall cause the evacuation of any public place, or otherwise
cause serious public inconvenience or alarm, by doing any of the following:
      (1)   Initiating or circulating a report or warning of an alleged or
impending fire, explosion, crime, or other catastrophe, knowing that the report
or warning is false.
      (2)   Threatening to commit any offense of violence.
      (3)   Committing any offense, with reckless disregard of the likelihood
that its commission will cause serious public inconvenience or alarm.
   (b)   Division (a)(1) of this section does not apply to any person
conducting an authorized fire or emergency drill.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of inducing panic.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(3), inducing panic is
a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   If a violation of this section results in physical harm to any
person, inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate State
law. If a violation of this section results in economic harm of one thousand
dollars ($1,000) or more, inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate State law. If the public place involved in a violation of division
(a)(1) is a school or an institution of higher education, inducing panic is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate State law. If a violation of this
section pertains to a purported, threatened or actual use of a weapon of mass
destruction, inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
State law.
   (d)   (1)   It is not a defense to a charge under this section that pertains
to a purported or threatened use of a weapon of mass destruction that the
offender did not possess or have the ability to use a weapon of mass
destruction or that what was represented to be a weapon of mass destruction was
not a weapon of mass destruction.
      (2)   Any act that is a violation of this section and any other section
of the Ohio Revised Code or these Codified Ordinances may be prosecuted under
this section, the other section, or both sections.
   (e)   As used in this section:
      (1)   BIOLOGICAL AGENT. The same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2917.33.
      (2)   ECONOMIC HARM. Any of the following:
         A.   All direct, incidental and consequential pecuniary harm suffered
by a victim as a result of the criminal conduct. ECONOMIC HARM, as described in
this division, includes but is not limited to all of the following:
            1.   All wages, salaries or other compensation lost as a result of
the criminal conduct;
            2.   The cost of all wages, salaries or other compensation paid to
employees for time those employees are prevented from working as a result of
the criminal conduct;
            3.   The overhead costs incurred from the time that a business is
shut down as a result of the criminal conduct;
            4.   The loss of value to tangible or intangible property that was
damaged as a result of the criminal conduct.
         B.   All costs incurred by the State or any political subdivision as a
result of, or in making any response to, the criminal conduct that constituted
the violation of this section or Ohio R.C. 2917.32, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, including but not limited to all costs so
incurred by any law enforcement officers, firefighters, rescue personnel, or
emergency medical services personnel of the State or the political subdivision.
      (3)   EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSONNEL. The same meaning as in Ohio
R.C. 2133.21.
      (4)   INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION. Any of the following:
         A.   A State university or college as defined in Ohio R.C. 3345.12(A)
(1), community college, State community college, university branch, or
technical college;
         B.   A private, nonprofit college, university or other post-secondary
institution located in this state that possesses a certificate of authorization
issued by the Chancellor of Higher Education pursuant to R.C. Chapter 1713;
         C.   A post-secondary institution with a certificate of registration
issued by the State Board of Career Colleges and Schools pursuant to Ohio R.C.
Chapter 3332.
      (5)   SCHOOL. Any school operated by a board of education or any school
for which the Director of Education and Workforce prescribes minimum standards
under R.C. § 3301.07, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular
activities or training provided by the school is being conducted at the time a
violation of this section is committed.
      (6)   WEAPON OF MASS DESTRUCTION. Any of the following:
         A.   Any weapon that is designed or intended to cause death or serious
physical harm through the release, dissemination, or impact of toxic or
poisonous chemicals, or other precursors;
         B.   Any weapon involving a disease organism or biological agent;
         C.   Any weapon that is designed to release radiation or radioactivity
at a level dangerous to human life;
         D.   Any of the following, except to the extent that the item or
device in question is expressly excepted from the definition of DESTRUCTIVE
DEVICE pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 921(a)(4) and regulations issued under that
section:
            1.   Any explosive, incendiary, or poison gas bomb, grenade, rocket
having a propellant charge of more than four ounces, missile having an
explosive or incendiary charge of more than one- quarter ounce, mine, or
similar device;
            2.   Any combination of parts either designed or intended for use
in converting any item or device into any item or device described in division
D.1. of this definition and from which an item or device described in that
division may be readily assembled.
(ORC 2917.31)
§ 648.08 MAKING FALSE ALARMS.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Initiate or circulate a report or warning of an alleged or
impending fire, explosion, crime, or other catastrophe, knowing that the report
or warning is false and likely to cause public inconvenience or alarm.
      (2)   Knowingly cause a false alarm of fire or other emergency to be
transmitted to or within any organization, public or private, for dealing with
emergencies involving a risk of physical harm to persons or property.
      (3)   Report to any law enforcement agency an alleged offense or other
incident within its concern, knowing that the offense did not occur;
      (4)   Initiate or circulate a report or warning of an alleged or
impending fire, explosion, crime, or other catastrophe, knowing that the report
or warning is false and likely to impede the operation of a critical
infrastructure facility.
   (b)   This section does not apply to any person conducting an authorized
fire or emergency drill.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making false alarms. Except
as otherwise provided in this division, making false alarms is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If a violation of this section results in economic harm of
one thousand dollars ($1,000) or more, making false alarms is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate State law. If a violation of this section pertains
to a purported, threatened, or actual use of a weapon of mass destruction,
making false alarms is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate State law.
   (d)   (1)   It is not a defense to a charge under this section that pertains
to a purported or threatened use of a weapon of mass destruction that the
offender did not possess or have the ability to use a weapon of mass
destruction or that what was represented to be a weapon of mass destruction was
not a weapon of mass destruction.
      (2)   Any act that is a violation of this section and any other section
of the Ohio Revised Code or these Codified Ordinances may be prosecuted under
this section, the other section, or both sections.
   (e)   As used in this section:
      (1)   CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2911.21.
      (2)   ECONOMIC HARM and WEAPON OF MASS DESTRUCTION. Have the same meaning
as in R.C. § 2917.31.
(R.C. § 2917.32)
§ 648.09 DISTURBING THE PEACE. (REPEALED).
§ 648.10 INCITING TO VIOLENCE.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly engage in conduct designed to urge or incite
another to commit any offense of violence when either of the following apply:
      (1)   The conduct takes place under circumstances that create a clear and
present danger that any offense of violence will be committed.
      (2)   The conduct proximately results in the commission of any offense of
violence.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of inciting to violence. If
the offense of violence that the other person is being urged or incited to
commit is a misdemeanor, inciting to violence is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the offense of violence that the other person is being urged or
incited to commit is a felony, inciting to violence is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate State law.
(ORC 2917.01)
§ 648.11 IMPEDING PUBLIC PASSAGE OF AN EMERGENCY SERVICE RESPONDER.
   (a)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall recklessly obstruct any
highway, street, sidewalk, or any other public passage in such a manner as to
render the highway, street, sidewalk, or passage impassable without
unreasonable inconvenience or hazard if both of the following apply:
      (1)   The obstruction prevents an emergency vehicle from accessing a
highway or street, prevents an emergency service responder from responding to
an emergency, or prevents an emergency vehicle or an emergency service
responder from having access to an exit from an emergency.
      (2)   Upon receipt of a request or order from an emergency service
responder to remove or cease the obstruction, the person refuses to remove or
cease the obstruction.
   (b)   Division (a) of this section does not limit or affect the application
of R.C. § 2921.31 or any other section of the Ohio Revised Code. Any conduct
that is a violation of division (a) of this section and that also is a
violation of R.C. § 2921.31 or any other section of the Ohio Revised Code may
be prosecuted under this section, the other section of the Ohio Revised Code,
or both sections.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawfully impeding public
passage of an emergency service responder, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (d)   As used in this section, EMERGENCY SERVICE RESPONDER has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 2903.13.
(R.C. § 2917.14)
CHAPTER 654: RAILROADS
654.01   Obstructing streets by railroad companies. (Repealed)
654.02   Climbing upon railroad cars. (Repealed)
654.03   Duties of locomotive engineer. (Repealed)
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar State law
   Lighting railroads - see Ohio R.C. 723.33 et seq.
   Duties of engineers - see Ohio R.C. 4999.04
   Stopping at grade crossings - see TRAF.
432.33 et seq.
   Definitions generally - see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   Organizational criminal liability - see GEN. OFF.
606.08
   Personal accountability for organizational conduct - see GEN. OFF.
606.09
   Livestock in railroad cars or compartments - see GEN. OFF.
618.05
Editor’s note:
   The United States Circuit Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit has held in
a recent case that the Federal Railway Safety Act preempts local ordinances
regarding railroad obstructions and railroad safety. See CSX Transportation,
Inc. v. Village of Plymouth, 86 F.3d 626 (6th Cir. 1996). Therefore, the
provisions in this chapter have been repealed.
   For current enforcement, please consult appropriate State law.
§ 654.01 OBSTRUCTING STREETS BY RAILROAD COMPANIES. (REPEALED)
Statutory reference:
   Obstructing streets by railroad companies, see Ohio R.C. 5589.21
§ 654.02 CLIMBING UPON RAILROAD CARS. (REPEALED)
Statutory reference:
   Climbing upon railroad cars, see Ohio R.C. 4999.02
§ 654.03 DUTIES OF LOCOMOTIVE ENGINEER. (REPEALED)
Statutory reference:
   Duties of locomotive engineer, see Ohio R.C. 4999.04
CHAPTER 660: SAFETY, SANITATION AND HEALTH
660.01   Venting of heaters and burners.
660.02   Spreading contagion.
660.03   Littering and waste disposal.
660.04   Noxious odors; filthy accumulations; polluting and diverting
watercourses.
660.05   Duty to keep sidewalks in repair and clean.
660.06   Abandoned refrigerators and airtight containers.
660.07   Storage of junk vehicles.
660.08   Open burning.
660.09   Barricades and warning lights.
660.10   Sidewalk obstructions; damage or injury.
660.11   Notice to fill lots, remove putrid substances.
660.12   Race tracks and drag strips.
660.13   Political and civic signs.
660.14   Diversion of storm waters into sanitary sewers.
660.15   Air pollution.
660.16   Use of manufactured home as residence.
660.17   Smoking in places of public assembly.
660.18   Use of grills on balconies of multi- family dwellings.
660.19   Tobacco products banned from all Village properties and facilities.
660.20   Community noise.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar State law
   Excavation liability - see Ohio R.C. 723.49 et seq.
   Nuisances - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 3767
   Placing injurious material or obstruction in street - see TRAF.
412.01
   Littering from motor vehicles - see TRAF.
432.40
   Safety and equipment for motor vehicles - see TRAF. Ch. 438 Ch.
438
   Loads dropping or leaking; tracking mud; removal required - see TRAF.
440.06
   Willfully leaving vehicles on private or public property - see TRAF.
452.05
   Rabies quarantine - see GEN. OFF.
618.11
   Animal nuisances - see GEN. OFF.
618.13
   Placing harmful substance or objects in food or confection - see GEN. OFF.
636.16
   Riot - see GEN. OFF.
648.01 et seq.
   Inducing panic - see GEN. OFF.
648.07
   Weapons and explosives - see GEN. OFF. Ch.
672
§ 660.01 VENTING OF HEATERS AND BURNERS.
   (a)   The use of a brazier, salamander, space heater, room heater, furnace,
water heater, or other burner or heater using wood, coal, coke, fuel oil,
kerosene, gasoline, natural gas, liquid petroleum gas or similar fuel, and
tending to give off carbon monoxide or other harmful gases must comply with the
following provisions;
      (1)   When used in living quarters, or in any enclosed building or space
in which persons are usually present, shall be used with a flue or vent so
designed, installed, and maintained as to vent the products of combustion
outdoors; except in storage, factory, or industrial buildings which are
provided with sufficient ventilation to avoid the danger of carbon monoxide
poisoning.
      (2)   When used as a portable or temporary burner or heater at a
construction site, or in a warehouse, shed, or structure in which persons are
temporarily present, shall be vented as provided in division (a)(1) or used
with sufficient ventilation to avoid the danger of carbon monoxide poisoning.
   (b)   This section does not apply to domestic ranges, laundry dryers,
stoves, gas logs installed in a fireplace with an adequate flue, or hot plates,
unless the same are used as space or room heaters.
   (c)   No person shall negligently use, or, being the owner, person in
charge, or occupant of premises, negligently permit the use of a burner or
heater in violation of the standards for venting and ventilation provided in
this section.
   (d)   Division (a) above does not apply to any kerosene-fired space or room
heater that is equipped with an automatic extinguishing tip-over device, or to
any natural gas-fired or liquid petroleum gas-fired space or room heater that
is equipped with an oxygen depletion safety shut-off system, and that has its
fuel piped from a source outside the building in which it is located, that are
approved by an authoritative source recognized by the State Fire Marshal in the
State Fire Code adopted by him or her under Ohio R.C. 3737.82.
   (e)   The State Fire Marshal may make rules to ensure the safe use of
unvented kerosene, natural gas, or liquid petroleum gas heaters exempted from
division (a) above when used in assembly buildings, business buildings, high
hazard buildings, institutional buildings, mercantile buildings, and type R-
1 and R-2 residential buildings, as these groups of buildings are defined in
rules adopted by the Board of Building Standards under Ohio R.C. 3781.10. No
person shall negligently use, or, being the owner, person in charge or occupant
of premises, negligently permit the use of a heater in violation of any rules
adopted under this division.
   (f)   The State Fire Marshal may make rules prescribing standards for
written instructions containing ventilation requirements and warning of any
potential fire hazards that may occur in using a kerosene, natural gas, or
liquid petroleum gas heater. No person shall sell or offer for sale any
kerosene, natural gas, or liquid petroleum gas heater unless the manufacturer
provides with the heater written instructions that comply with any rules
adopted under this division.
   (g)   No product labeled as a fuel additive for kerosene heaters and having
a flash point below 100°F or 37.8°C shall be sold, offered for sale, or used in
any kerosene space heater.
   (h)   No device that prohibits any safety feature on a kerosene, natural
gas, or liquid petroleum gas space heater from operating shall be sold, offered
for sale, or used in connection with any kerosene, natural gas, or liquid
petroleum gas space heater.
   (i)   No person shall sell or offer for sale any kerosene-fired, natural
gas, or liquid petroleum gas- fired heater that is not exempt from division (a)
above, unless it is marked conspicuously by the manufacturer on the container
with the phrase “Not Approved For Home Use.”
   (j)   No person shall use a cabinet-type, liquid petroleum gas-fired heater
having a fuel source within the heater, inside any building, except as
permitted by the State Fire Marshal in the State Fire Code adopted by him or
her under Ohio R.C. 3737.82.
(ORC 3701.82)
   (k)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(ORC 3701.99(B))
§ 660.02 SPREADING CONTAGION.
   (a)   No person, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the
person has a dangerous, contagious disease, shall knowingly fail to take
reasonable measures to prevent exposing self to other persons, except when
seeking medical aid.
   (b)   No person, having charge or care of a person whom the person having
charge or care knows or has reasonable cause to believe has a dangerous,
contagious disease, shall recklessly fail to take reasonable measures to
protect others from exposure to the contagion, and to inform health authorities
of the existence of the contagion.
   (c)   No person, having charge of a public conveyance or place of public
accommodation, amusement, resort, or trade, and knowing or having reasonable
cause to believe that persons using such conveyance or place have been or are
being exposed to a dangerous, contagious disease, shall negligently fail to
take reasonable measures to protect the public from exposure to the contagion,
and to inform health authorities of the existence of the contagion.
(ORC 3701.81)
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second
degree.
(ORC 3701.99(C))
§ 660.03 LITTERING AND WASTE DISPOSAL.
   (a)   As used in this section WASTE means all trash, rubbish, garbage,
wastepaper, nails, pieces of glass, boards, fruit parings, ashes, cans,
bottles, glass, oil, plastics, automobiles without license plates valid in the
State, or anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature and all other
refuse or discarded matter. However, the word does not mean or include
recognized by-products of any business or industry having commercial value and
regularly handled in the ordinary course of business, unless such by-products
are a nuisance or menace to public health.
   (b)   No person shall, without lawful authority, place or dispose of in any
manner, upon any public property or upon the premises of another, any waste.
   (c)   No person shall store, throw or sweep any waste into any street,
avenue, alley, park or public ground, or place any waste on any sidewalk,
street crossing or driveway, or upon the floor, stairway or hallway of any
public building, theater, railroad depot or platform, or along, on or near any
public or private property in the Village.
   (d)   No person operating a motor vehicle shall knowingly or unknowingly
permit any passenger in such motor vehicle to throw any waste into any street,
avenue, alley, park or public ground.
   (e)   All loose wastepaper, rags and other waste material of such kind as to
be subject to be blown about by the wind or otherwise scattered, must be hauled
in such a manner as not to litter the streets. Such materials shall not be
loaded or unloaded along the public streets or sidewalks, except in suitable
containers, cans, boxes, bags or pails.
   (f)   No person shall dump or store any combustible waste on any public or
private property. No person shall dump dirt or other noncombustible material of
any kind on public or private property without proper written authority
therefor from the Village.
   (g)   No person having the care of any premises or property in the Village
shall be permit gas, oil, liquid dye, chemicals, paints, brine or any other
injurious matter to drain or otherwise come in contact with any adjoining
premises.
   (h)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
§ 660.04 NOXIOUS ODORS; FILTHY ACCUMULATIONS; POLLUTING AND DIVERTING
WATERCOURSES.
   (a)   No person shall erect, continue to use, or maintain a building,
structure, or place for the exercise of a trade, employment, or business or for
keeping or feeding an animal which, by occasioning noxious exhalations or
noisome or offensive smells, becomes injurious to the health, comfort, or
property of individuals or of the public.
   (b)   No person shall cause or allow offal, filth, or noisome substances to
be collected or remain in any place to the damage or prejudice of others or of
the public.
   (c)   No person shall unlawfully obstruct or impede the passage of a
navigable river, harbor, or collection of water, or corrupt or render
unwholesome or impure a watercourse, stream of water, or unlawfully divert such
watercourse from its natural course or state to the injury or prejudice of
others.
   (d)   Persons who are engaged in agriculture- related activities, as
“agriculture” is defined in Ohio R.C. 519.01, and who are conducting those
activities outside the Municipality, in accordance with generally accepted
agricultural practices, and in such a manner so as not to have a substantial,
adverse effect on the public health, safety, or welfare, are exempt from
divisions (a) and (b) above and from any ordinances, resolutions, rules, or
other enactments of the Municipality that prohibit excessive noise.
(ORC 3767.13)
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(ORC 3767.99(C))
§ 660.05 DUTY TO KEEP SIDEWALKS IN REPAIR AND CLEAN.
   (a)   No owner or occupant of lots or lands abutting any sidewalk, curb or
gutter shall fail to keep the sidewalks, curbs and gutters in repair and free
from snow, ice or any nuisance, and to remove from such sidewalks, curbs or
gutters all snow and ice accumulated thereon within a reasonable time, which
will ordinarily not exceed 12 hours after any storm during which the snow and
ice has accumulated.
(ORC 723.011)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
§ 660.06 ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS AND AIRTIGHT CONTAINERS.
   (a)   No person shall abandon, discard or knowingly permit to remain on
premises under the person’s control, in a place accessible to children, any
abandoned or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other airtight or semi-airtight
container which has a capacity of 1-1/2 cubic feet or more and an opening of 50
square inches or more and which has a door or lid equipped with a hinge, latch
or other fastening device capable of securing the door or lid, without
rendering the equipment harmless to human life by removing the hinges, latches
or other hardware which may cause a person to be confined therein. This section
shall not apply to an icebox, refrigerator or other airtight or semi-airtight
container located in that part of a building occupied by a dealer, warehouse or
repairer. (ORC 3767.29)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(ORC 3767.99(B))
§ 660.07 STORAGE OF JUNK VEHICLES.
   (a)   (1)   For purposes of this section, JUNK MOTOR VEHICLE means any motor
vehicle which is three years old or older; extensively damaged, such damage
including but not limited to any of the following: missing wheels, tires,
motor, or transmission; apparently inoperable; and having a fair market value
of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) or less, that is left
uncovered in the open on private property for more than 72 hours with the
permission of the person having the right to possession of the property, except
if the person is operating a junk yard or scrap metal processing facility
licensed under the authority of Ohio R.C. 4737.05 through 4737.12, or otherwise
regulated under authority of a political subdivision; or if the property on
which the motor vehicle is left is not subject to licensure or regulation by
any governmental authority, unless the person having the right to the
possession of the property can establish that the motor vehicle is part of a
bona fide commercial operation; or if the motor vehicle is a collector’s
vehicle.
      (2)   The Municipality shall not prevent a person from storing or
keeping, or restrict him or her in the method of storing or keeping, any
collector’s vehicle on private property with the permission of the person
having the right to the possession of the property, except that the
Municipality may require a person having such permission to conceal, by means
of buildings, fences, vegetation, terrain, or other suitable obstruction, any
unlicensed collector’s vehicle stored in the open.
      (3)   The Police Chief, the Legislative Authority, or the zoning
authority may send notice, by certified mail with return receipt requested, to
the person having the right to the possession of the property on which a junk
motor vehicle is left, that within ten days of receipt of the notice, the junk
motor vehicle either shall be covered by being housed in a garage or other
suitable structure, or shall be removed from the property.
      (4)   No person shall willfully leave a junk motor vehicle uncovered in
the open for more than ten days after receipt of a notice as provided in this
section. The fact that a junk motor vehicle is so left is prima facie evidence
of willful failure to comply with the notice, and each subsequent period of 30
days that a junk motor vehicle continues to be so left constitutes a separate
offense.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.65)
§ 660.08 OPEN BURNING.
   (a)   (1)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         A.   AGRICULTURAL WASTE. Any waste material generated by crop,
horticultural, or livestock production practices, and includes such items as
woody debris and plant matter from stream flooding, bags, cartons, structural
materials, and landscape wastes that are generated in agricultural activities,
but does not include land clearing waste; buildings (including dismantled/
fallen barns); garbage; dead animals; animal waste; motor vehicles and parts
thereof; nor economic poisons and containers thereof, unless the manufacturer
has identified open burning as a safe disposal procedure.
         B.   AIR CURTAIN BURNER. An engineered apparatus consisting of a
motorized high- velocity fan and an air distribution system designed to aid in
the efficient combustion of materials placed in a manufactured steel structure
and for which a permit- to-install has been obtained as required in O.A.C.
Chapter 3745-31 and a permit-to-operate has been obtained as required in O.A.C.
Chapter 3745-77.
         C.   AIR CURTAIN DESTRUCTOR. An engineered apparatus consisting of a
motorized high-velocity fan and an air distribution system designed to aid in
the efficient combustion of materials placed in an adjacent pit. An air curtain
burner may be used in place of an air curtain destructor, but an air curtain
destructor may not be used in place of an air curtain burner.
         D.   ECONOMIC POISONS. Include but are not restricted to pesticides
such as insecticides, fungicides, rodenticides, miticides, nematocides and
fumigants; herbicides; seed disinfectants; and defoliants.
         E.   EMERGENCY BURNING. The burning of clean wood waste or deceased
animals caused by a natural disaster or an uncontrolled event such as the
following:
            1.   A tornado.
            2.   High winds.
            3.   An earthquake.
            4.   An explosion.
            5.   A flood.
            6.   A hail storm, a rain storm, or an ice storm.
         F.   GARBAGE. Any waste material resulting from the handling,
processing, preparation, cooking and consumption of food or food products.
         G.   INHABITED BUILDING. Any inhabited private dwelling house and any
public structure which may be used as a place of resort, assembly, education,
entertainment, lodging, trade, manufacture, repair, storage, traffic, or
occupancy by the public. Examples would include, but are not limited to,
highway rest stops, restaurants, motels, hotels and gas stations.
         H.   LAND CLEARING WASTE. Plant waste material which is removed from
land, including plant waste material removed from stream banks during projects
involving more than one property owner, for the purpose of rendering the land
useful for residential, commercial, or industrial development. Land clearing
waste also includes the plant waste material generated during the clearing of
land for new agricultural development.
         I.   LANDSCAPE WASTE. Any plant waste material, except garbage,
including trees, tree trimmings, branches, stumps, brush, weeds, leaves, grass,
shrubbery, yard trimmings, and crop residues.
         J.   OHIO EPA. The Ohio Environmental Protection Agency Director or
agencies delegated authority by the Director of the Ohio Environmental
Protection Agency pursuant to R.C. § 3704.03 or the Chief of any Ohio
Environmental Protection Agency District Office.
         K.   OPEN BURNING. The burning of any materials wherein air
contaminants resulting from combustion are emitted directly into the ambient
air without passing through a stack or chimney. Open burning includes the
burning of any refuse or salvageable material in any device not subject to or
designed specifically to comply with the requirements of O.A.C. 3745-17-09 or
O.A.C. 3745-17-10.
         L.   RESIDENTIAL WASTE. Any waste material, including landscape waste,
generated on the property of a one-, two- or three-family residence as a result
of residential activities, but not including garbage, rubber, grease, asphalt,
liquid petroleum products, or plastics.
         M.   RESTRICTED AREA. The area within the boundary of the
municipality, plus a zone extending 1,000 feet beyond the boundaries of a
municipality having a population of 1,000 to 10,000 persons and a zone
extending one mile beyond any municipality having a population of 10,000
persons or more according to the latest federal census.
         N.   UNRESTRICTED AREA. All areas outside the boundaries of a
restricted area as defined in this section.
      (2)   Referenced materials. This section includes references to certain
matter or materials. The text of the referenced materials is not included in
the legislation contained in this section. Information on the availability of
the referenced materials as well as the date of, and/or the particular edition
or version of the material is included in this legislation. For materials
subject to change, only the specific versions specified in this legislation are
referenced. Material is referenced as it exists on the effective date of this
legislation. Except for subsequent annual publication of existing (unmodified)
Code of Federal Regulation compilations, any amendment or revision to a
referenced document is not applicable unless and until this section has been
amended to specify the new dates.
         A.   Availability. The referenced materials are available as follows:
            1.   Clean Air Act. Information and copies may be obtained by
writing to: Superintendent of Documents, Attn: New Orders, PO Box 371954,
Pittsburgh, PA 15250-7954. The full text of the act as amended in 1990 is also
available in electronic format at www.epa.gov/oar/caa/. A copy of the act is
also available for inspection and use at most public libraries and the State
Library of Ohio.
            2.   Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.). Information and copies
may be obtained by writing to: Superintendent of Documents, Attn: New Orders,
PO Box 371954, Pittsburgh, PA 15250-7954. The full text of the C.F.R. is also
available in electronic format at http://www.ecfr.gov. The C.F.R. compilations
are also available for inspection and use at most public libraries and the
State Library of Ohio.
            3.   National Fire Protection Association. Information on the
National Fire Protection Association codes may be obtained by contacting the
Association at 1 Batterymarch Park, Quincy, Massachusetts 02169-7471, 617-770-
3000. Codes may be ordered at www.nfpa.org/catalog/home/index.asp. Copies of
the code exist or are available at most public libraries and the State Library
of Ohio.
         B.   Referenced materials.
            1.   40 C.F.R. § 60.2974: “Am I required to apply for and obtain a
title V operating permit for my air curtain incinerator that burns only wood
waste, clean lumber, and yard waste?” as published in the July 1, 2012 Code of
Federal Regulations.
            2.   40 C.F.R. § 60.3069: “Am I required to apply for and obtain a
title V operating permit for my air curtain incinerator that burns only wood
waste, clean lumber, and yard waste?” as published in the July 1, 2012 Code of
Federal Regulations.
            3.   NFPA publication 1403: “Standard on Live Fire Training
Evolutions, Chapter 4, Acquired Structures” published April 30, 2007.
            4.   Section 129 of the Clean Air Act, contained in 42 U.S.C. §
7429: “Solid waste combustion” published January 2, 2006 in Supplement V of the
2000 Edition of the United States Code.
(O.A.C. 3745-19-01)
   (b)   Relation to other laws.
      (1)   Notwithstanding any provision in O.A.C. Chapter 3745-19, no open
burning shall be conducted in an area where an air alert, warning or emergency
under O.A.C. Chapter 3745-25 is in effect.
      (2)   No provisions of O.A.C. Chapter 3745-19 permitting open burning,
and no permission to open burn granted by the Ohio EPA, shall exempt any person
from compliance with any section of the Ohio Revised Code, or any regulation of
any state department, or any local ordinance or regulation dealing with open
burning.
(O.A.C. 3745-19-02)
   (c)   Open burning in restricted areas.
      (1)   No person or property owner shall cause or allow open burning in a
restricted area except as provided in divisions (c)(2) to (c)(4) of this
section or in R.C. § 3704.11.
      (2)   Open burning shall be allowed for the following purposes without
notification to or permission from the Ohio EPA:
         A.   Heating tar, welding, acetylene torches, highway safety flares,
heating for warmth of outdoor workers and strikers, smudge pots and similar
occupational needs.
         B.   Bonfires, campfires and outdoor fireplace equipment, whether for
cooking food for human consumption, pleasure, religious, ceremonial, warmth,
recreational or similar purposes, if the following conditions are met:
            1.   They are fueled with clean seasoned firewood, natural gas or
equivalent, or any clean burning fuel with emissions that are equivalent to or
lower than those created from the burning of seasoned firewood;
            2.   They are not used for waste disposal purposes; and
            3.   They shall have a total fuel area of three feet or less in
diameter and two feet or less in height.
         C.   Disposal of hazardous explosive materials, military munitions or
explosive devices that require immediate action to prevent endangerment of
human health, public safety, property or the environment and that are excluded
from the requirement to obtain a hazardous waste permit pursuant to O.A.C.
3745-50-45(D)(1)(d).
         D.   Recognized training in the use of fire extinguishers for
commercial or industrial fire prevention.
         E.   Fires set at the direction of federal, state, and local law
enforcement officials for the purpose of destruction of cannabis sativa
(marijuana) plant vegetation, processed marijuana material and/or other drugs
seized by federal, state, or local law enforcement officials.
         F.   Fires allowed by divisions (c)(2)A., (c)(2)B. and (c)(2)D. of
this section shall not be used for waste disposal purposes and shall be of
minimum size sufficient for their intended purpose; the fuel shall be chosen to
minimize the generation and emission of air contaminants.
      (3)   Open burning shall be allowed for the following purposes with prior
notification to the Ohio EPA in accordance with division (d)(2) of this
section:
         A.   Prevention or control of disease or pests, with written or verbal
verification to the Ohio EPA from the Ohio Department of Health or local health
department, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, cooperative
extension service, Ohio Department of Agriculture or U.S. Department of
Agriculture, that open burning is the only appropriate disposal method.
         B.   Bonfires or campfires used for ceremonial purposes that do not
meet the requirements of division (c)(2)B. of this section, provided the
following conditions are met:
            1.   They have a total fuel area no greater than five feet in
diameter by five feet in height and burn no longer than three hours;
            2.   They are not used for waste disposal purposes; and
            3.   They are fueled with clean seasoned firewood, natural gas or
equivalent, or any clean burning fuel with emissions that are equivalent to or
lower than those created from the burning of seasoned firewood.
         C.   Disposal of agricultural waste generated on the premises if the
following conditions are observed:
            1.   The fire is set only when atmospheric conditions will readily
dissipate contaminants;
            2.   The fire does not create a visibility hazard on the roadways,
railroad tracks or air fields;
            3.   The fire is located at a point on the premises no less than
1,000 feet from any inhabited building not located on the premises;
            4.   The wastes are stacked and dried to provide the best
practicable condition for efficient burning; and
            5.   No materials are burned which contain rubber, grease, asphalt,
liquid petroleum products, plastics or building materials.
      (4)   Open burning shall be allowed for the following purposes upon
receipt of written permission from the Ohio EPA, in accordance with division
(d)(1) of this section, provided that any conditions specified in the
permission are followed:
         A.   Disposal of ignitable or explosive materials where the Ohio EPA
determines that there is no practical alternate method of disposal, excluding
those materials identified in division (c)(2)C. of this section;
         B.   Instruction in methods of fire fighting or for research in the
control of fires as recognized by the State Fire Marshal Division of the Ohio
Department of Commerce and the guidelines set forth in the National Fire
Protection Association’s (NFPA) publication 1403, Standard on Live Fire
Training Evolutions, Chapter 4, Acquired Structures, provided that the
application required in division (d)(1)A. of this section is submitted by the
commercial or public entity responsible for the instruction;
         C.   In emergency or other extraordinary circumstances for any purpose
determined to be necessary by the Director and performed as identified in the
appendix to O.A.C. 3745-19-03. If deemed necessary, the open burning may be
authorized with prior oral approval by the Director followed by the issuance of
a written permission to open burn within seven working days of the oral
approval;
         D.   Recognized horticultural, silvicultural, silvicultural
(forestry), range or wildlife management practices; and
         E.   Fires and/or pyrotechnic effects, for purposes other than waste
disposal, set as part of commercial film-making or video production activities
for motion pictures and television.
(O.A.C. 3745-19-03)
   (d)   Permission to individuals and notification to the Ohio EPA.
      (1)   Permission.
         A.   An application for permission to open burn shall be submitted in
writing to Ohio EPA. The applicant shall allow Ohio EPA at least ten working
days to review the permit. Applicant may proceed with burn upon receipt of
written permission from Ohio EPA. Saturday, Sunday, and legal holidays shall
not be considered working days. The application shall be in such form and
contain such information as required by the Ohio EPA.
         B.   Except as provided in divisions (d)(1)F. and (d)(1)G. of this
section, the applications shall contain, as a minimum, information regarding:
            1.   The purpose of the proposed burning;
            2.   The quantity or acreage and the nature of the materials to be
burned;
            3.   The date or dates when the burning will take place;
            4.   The location of the burning site, including a map showing
distances to residences, populated areas, roadways, air fields and other
pertinent landmarks; and
            5.   The methods or actions which will be taken to reduce the
emissions of air contaminants.
         C.   Permission to open burn shall not be granted unless the applicant
demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Ohio EPA that open burning is necessary
to the public interest; will be conducted in a time, place and manner as to
minimize the emission of air contaminants, when atmospheric conditions are
appropriate; and will have no serious detrimental effect upon adjacent
properties or the occupants thereof. The Ohio EPA may impose such conditions as
may be necessary to accomplish the purpose of O.A.C. Chapter 3745-19.
         D.   Except as provided in division (d)(1)F. of this section,
permission to open burn must be obtained for each specific project. In
emergencies where public health or environmental quality will be seriously
threatened by delay while written permission is sought, the fire may be set
with oral permission of the Ohio EPA.
         E.   Violations of any of the conditions set forth by the Ohio EPA in
granting permission to open burn shall be grounds for revocation of that
permission and refusal to grant future permission, as well as for the
imposition of other sanctions provided by law.
         F.   The Ohio Department of Commerce, Division of State Fire Marshal,
may request permission to open burn on an annual basis for the purpose of
training firefighters on pre-flashover conditions using the Ohio Fire Academy’s
mobile training laboratory at either the academy or at other training sites in
Ohio. The annual application required pursuant to division (d)(1)A. of this
section shall contain information as required in division (d)(1)B. of this
section, except the information required in divisions (d)(1)B.3. and (d)(1)B.4.
of this section need not be provided unless it is available at the time of
submittal of the application. The Academy shall contact the appropriate Ohio
EPA District Office or local air agency at least five working days before each
training session of the date or dates when the training session will take place
and its location. Saturday, Sunday and legal holidays shall not be considered a
working day.
         G.   For open burning defined under division (c)(4)B. of this section
and O.A.C. 3745-19-04(C)(2), permission to open burn shall not be granted
unless the applicant provides proof of written notice of intent to demolish
received by the appropriate Ohio EPA field office in accordance with O.A.C.
3745-20-03.
      (2)   Notification.
         A.   Notification shall be submitted in writing at least ten working
days before the fire is to be set. Saturday, Sunday and legal holidays shall
not be considered a working day. It shall be in such form and contain such
information as shall be required by the Ohio EPA.
         B.   Such notification shall inform the Ohio EPA regarding:
            1.   The purpose of the proposed burning;
            2.   The nature and quantities of materials to be burned;
            3.   The date or dates when the burning will take place; and
            4.   The location of the burning site.
         C.   The Ohio EPA, after receiving notification, may determine that
the open burning is not allowed under O.A.C. Chapter 3745-19 and the Ohio EPA
shall notify the applicant to this effect.
(O.A.C. 3745-19-05)
   (e)   Penalty. Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. In addition, the
offender shall be required to pay the cost of proper disposal of the materials
burned. The cost of proper disposal of the materials burned shall be the amount
it would have cost to dispose of the materials in a manner that is consistent
with the air, water and solid waste laws, ordinances and regulations of the
Municipality and the State.
§ 660.09 BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS.
   (a)   No person shall abandon or knowingly permit to remain on public or
private property, any excavation, well, cesspool or structure which is in the
process of construction, reconstruction, repair or alteration unless the same
is adequately protected by suitable barricades and guarded by warning devices
or lights at night so that the condition will not reasonably prove dangerous to
life or limb.
   (b)   No person shall destroy, remove, damage or extinguish any barricade or
warning light that is placed for the protection of the public so as to prevent
injury to life or limb.
   (c)   Any owner or agent in control of a premises upon which a basement,
cellar, well or cistern has been abandoned due to demolition, failure to build
or any other reason shall cause the same to be filled to the ground surface
with rock, gravel, earth or other suitable material.
   (d)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 660.10 SIDEWALK OBSTRUCTIONS; DAMAGE OR INJURY.
   (a)   No person shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a sidewalk or
playground any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails or other articles which may
damage property of another or injure any person or animal traveling along or
upon such sidewalk or playground.
   (b)   No person shall walk on, or allow any animal upon, or injure or deface
in any way, any soft or newly laid sidewalk pavement.
   (c)   No person shall place, deposit or maintain any merchandise, goods,
material or equipment upon any sidewalk so as to obstruct pedestrian traffic
thereon except for such reasonable time as may be actually necessary for the
delivery or pickup of such articles. In no case shall the obstruction remain on
such sidewalk for more than one hour.
   (d)   No person shall unload upon, or transport any heavy merchandise,
goods, material or equipment over or across any sidewalk or curb without first
placing some sufficient protection over the pavement to protect against damage
or injury.
   (e)   No person shall allow any cellar or trap door, coal chute or elevator
or lift opening in any sidewalk to remain open without providing suitable
safeguards to protect and warn pedestrian traffic of the dangerous conditions.
   (f)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 660.11 NOTICE TO FILL LOTS, REMOVE PUTRID SUBSTANCES.
   (a)   No person shall fail to comply with the following requirements within
the lawful time after service or publication of the notice or resolution is
made as required by law: to fill or drain any lot or land or remove all putrid
substances therefrom, or remove all obstructions from culverts, covered drains
or natural watercourses as provided in Ohio R.C. 715.47.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
§ 660.12 RACE TRACKS AND DRAG STRIPS.
   (a)   No person shall operate or permit the operation of a race track,
speedway, drag strip or testing lane for power-driven vehicles of any kind
within the Village.
(Ord. 14-1967, passed 7-25-1967)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
§ 660.13 POLITICAL AND CIVIC SIGNS.
   (a)   No person shall erect political or civic signs on any public property.
Signs, pennants, banners, flags, streamers or other display devices which call
attention to political or civic events, issues or occurrences may be erected or
installed on private property only with the written consent of the property
owner. All such signs shall be removed within fourteen days next following the
close of the event or project to which they are related.
   (b)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(Ord. 7-1977, passed 4-12-1977)
§ 660.14 DIVERSION OF STORM WATERS INTO SANITARY SEWERS.
   (a)   No person shall divert storm or surface water into any sanitary
sewerage system within the Village.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a
violation or noncompliance occurs or continues.
(Ord. 26-1976, passed 6-22-1976)
§ 660.15 AIR POLLUTION.
   (a)   No person shall cause or allow to be emitted into the open air any
foreign materials such as dust, gases, fumes, mists, vapors, smoke and odors in
quantities and in volume and intensity which, by reason of their objectionable
nature, are considered a nuisance because they:
      (1)   Injure or have a harmful effect upon the health, safety or welfare
of any person or the public;
      (2)   Create disagreeable odors in the atmosphere or annoy the
inhabitants of the Village; or
      (3)   Cause damage to property.
(Ord. 14-1967, passed 7-25-1967)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
§ 660.16 USE OF MANUFACTURED HOME AS RESIDENCE.
   (a)   As used in this section, MANUFACTURED HOME shall have the meaning set
forth in Ohio R.C. 4501.01. MANUFACTURED HOME includes house trailers.
   (b)   No person shall use or permit the use of any manufactured home for
residence purposes in the Village.
   (c)   Division (b) of this section shall not apply to:
      (1)   Manufactured homes serving residence purposes which have been used
and located within the Village for at least 90 days prior to the enactment of
this section (Ordinance 17-1957, passed July 9, 1957), provided that such
manufactured homes remain in their present location; or
      (2)   Manufactured homes used for temporary residence purposes while the
owners or users thereof are in the process of constructing a permanent
residence in compliance with the Building and Housing Code of the Village.
However, anyone inhabiting or using a manufactured home for such temporary
residence purposes shall secure from the Building Commissioner/Inspector a
permit to do so, which permit shall be for a 30-day period only and which
permit shall be renewable not more than three times upon application duly made
to the Commissioner/Inspector.
(Ord. 17-1957, passed 7-9-1957)
   (d)   For each such permit issued and for each such renewal granted, the
Commissioner/Inspector shall collect a fee, payable to the Village, in the
amount of fifty dollars ($50.00).
   (e)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree and shall be fined not
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) or imprisoned not more than 90
days, or both, for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues.
§ 660.17 SMOKING IN PLACES OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY.
   (a)   As used in this section, PLACE OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY means:
      (1)   Enclosed theaters, except the lobby; opera houses; auditoriums;
classrooms; elevators; rooms in which persons are confined as a matter of
health care, including but not limited to a hospital room and a room in a
residential care facility serving as the residence of a person living in such
residential care facility.
      (2)   All buildings and other enclosed structures owned by the state, its
agencies, or political subdivisions, including but not limited to hospitals and
state institutions for persons with mental illnesses and persons with
intellectual disabilities; university and college buildings, except rooms
within those buildings used primarily as the residences of students or other
persons affiliated with the university or college; office buildings; libraries;
museums; and vehicles used in public transportation. That portion of a building
or other enclosed structure that is owned by the state, a state agency or a
political subdivision, and that is used primarily as a food service
establishment, is not a place of public assembly.
      (3)   Each portion of a building or enclosed structure that is not
included in division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section is a place of public
assembly if it has a seating capacity of 50 or more persons and is available to
the public. Restaurants, food service establishments, dining rooms, cafes,
cafeterias, or other rooms used primarily for the service of food, as well as
bowling alleys and places licensed by the Ohio Division of Liquor Control to
sell intoxicating beverages for consumption on the premises, are not places of
public assembly.
   (b)   For the purpose of separating persons who smoke from persons who do
not smoke for the comfort and health of persons not smoking, in every place of
public assembly there shall be an area where smoking is not permitted, which
shall be designated a no smoking area, provided that not more than one-half of
the rooms in any health care facility in which persons are confined as a matter
of health care may be designated as smoking areas in their entirety. The
designation shall be made before the place of public assembly is made available
to the public. In places included in division (a)(1) of this section, the local
fire authority having jurisdiction shall designate the no smoking area. In
places included in division (a)(2) of this section that are owned by the State
or its agencies, the Ohio Director of Administrative Services shall designate
the area, and if the place is owned by a political subdivision, its legislative
authority shall designate an officer who shall designate the area. In places
included in division (a)(3) of this section, the person having control of the
operations of the place of public assembly shall designate the no smoking area.
In places included in division (a)(2) of this section which are also included
in division (a)(1) of this section, the officer who has authority to designate
the area in places in division (a)(2) of this section shall designate the no
smoking area. A no smoking area may include the entire place of public
assembly. Designations shall be made by the placement of signs that are clearly
visible and that state “no smoking.” No person shall remove signs from areas
designated as no smoking areas.
   (c)   This section does not affect or modify the prohibition contained in
Ohio R.C. 3313.751(B).
   (d)   No person shall smoke in any area designated as a no smoking area in
accordance with division (b) of this section.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 3791.031)
§ 660.18 USE OF GRILLS ON BALCONIES OF MULTI-FAMILY DWELLINGS.
   (a)   Definitions. As used in this section:
      (1)   FIRE OR HEAT-PRODUCING GRILL means a charcoal grill, a wood grill
or a gas grill commonly used at home to cook with outdoors.
      (2)   MULTI-FAMILY HOUSING UNIT. A single building that contains two or
more families in separated dwelling therein.
   (b)   Prohibition. No person shall use any fire or heat-producing grill on
the balcony of any multifamily housing unit in the Village.
   (c)   Penalty. Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
(Ord. 11-1992, passed 3-10-1992)
§ 660.19 TOBACCO PRODUCTS BANNED FROM ALL VILLAGE PROPERTIES AND FACILITIES.
   Tobacco products of all kinds shall be banned from all indoor and outdoor
facilities and properties of the Village.
(Ord. 01-2011, passed 1-25-2011)
§ 660.20 COMMUNITY NOISE.
   (a)   Definitions. All definitions/terminology used in this chapter, not
defined below, shall be in conformance with applicable standards of the
American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or its successor body. For the
purpose of this chapter certain words and phrases used herein are defined as
follows:
      (1)   AUDITORY DEVICE means any device that can be used to create a sound
that can be heard.
      (2)   AVERAGE SOUND LEVEL means a sound level typical of the sound levels
observed at a certain place during a given period of time averaged by the
general rule of combination for sound levels, said general rule being set forth
in ANSI specifications for sound level meters. Average sound level is also
called equivalent continuous sound level.
      (3)   DECIBEL means a unit for measuring the intensity of a sound, equal
to 20 times the logarithm to the base ten of the ratio of the pressure of the
sound measured to the reference pressure, which is 20 micropascals. Decibel is
denoted as "dB."
      (4)   DEVICE means any system or machine devised or constructed to
perform one or more tasks.
      (5)   EMERGENCY WORK means any work performed for the purpose of
preventing or alleviating the physical trauma or property damage threatened or
caused by an emergency.
      (6)   LAND USE CATEGORY means those land uses defined and established by
the Zoning Code and all subsequent changes and additions.
      (7)   LOUD OR RAUCOUS NOISE means any noise or sound that emanates in
such manners and/or volume and is of such intensity, character and duration to
be offensive or disturbing to a person of ordinary sensibilities.
      (8)   MACHINE means any system or device together with its power source
and auxiliary equipment used to accomplish a specific objective.
      (9)   MUSICAL INSTRUMENT means any device designed to produce music.
      (10)   PERSON means any public corporation, private corporation,
individual, firm, partnership, association, or other entity.
      (11)   PROPERTY LINE means the line along the ground surface, and its
vertical extension, which separates the real property owned, rented, leased, or
occupied by one or more persons from that owned, rented, leased or occupied by
another person and the imaginary line which represents the legal limits of
property of any person who owns, rents, leases, or otherwise occupies an
apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room, or any other type of occupancy.
      (12)   PROPERTY ZONED RESIDENTIAL means any area zoned or utilized for
residential purposes.
      (13)   SOUND AMPLIFICATION SYSTEM means any device used for the
amplification of the human voice, music, or other sound and includes, but is
not limited to, any radio, tape player, compact disc player or loud speaker.
      (14)   STATIONARY SOUND SOURCE means a machine or device capable of
creating a noise level at the property upon which it is regularly located,
including, but not limited to standing motor vehicles, industrial and
commercial process machinery and equipment, pumps, fans, air-conditioning
apparatus or refrigeration machines.
      (15)   WARNING DEVICE means any device, which signals an unsafe or
potentially dangerous situation.
   (b)   Sound levels for land use districts.
      (1)   The maximum allowable hourly average sound level, emitted from any
stationary sound source, auditory device, or sound amplification system shall
not exceed the limits set forth in Table I for the respective categories of
receiving land use. The actual sound level shall be determined during any
measurement period, which shall not be less than 60 consecutive minutes, and
shall be measured at the property boundary affected by the sound.
Receiving Land Use Category Time 1 hr. Average Sound Level (dBA)
Receiving Land Use Category Time            1 hr. Average Sound Level (dBA)
Institutional               10 p.m. 7 a.m.  60
                            7 a.m.  10 p.m. 65
Residential (all)           10 p.m. 7 a.m.  60
                            7 a.m.  10 p.m. 65
Commercial                  10 p.m. 7 a.m.  70
                            7 a.m.  10 p.m. 75
Industrial                  Anytime         80
 
      (2)   New structures and development. Prior to the approval of a zoning
change, the noise impact of the zoning change may be reviewed by the Zoning
Code Enforcement Officer or his designee, identifying existing and projected
noise sources and their associated sound level. Such review shall include, but
is not limited to, air transportation and land transportation noise sources as
well as stationary noise sources. Adequate control measures may be recommended
to mitigate the impact of those identified noise sources to effect compliance
with this code.
   (d)   Prohibited sounds.
      (1)   No person shall make or allow to be made any unreasonably loud and/
or raucous noise in such a manner or at such a volume as to disturb the quiet,
comfort, or repose of a person of ordinary sensibilities. Strict liability is
intended to be imposed for this section.
      (2)   In addition to the prohibition set out in division (c)(1) of this
section, the following specific acts are declared to be in violation of this
section:
         A.   No person shall operate or permit the operation of any sound
amplification system, auditory device, or stationary sound source from real
property that is zoned residential in a manner as to be heard at a distance of
50 feet beyond the property line of the property from which the sound emanates.
Strict liability is intended to be imposed for this section.
         B.   Where there are two or more residential units contained within
one structure within a property zoned residential, no person shall operate or
permit the operation of any sound amplification system, auditory device, or
stationary sound source in a manner as to be heard within said structure at a
distance of 25 feet beyond the property line of the residential unit from which
the sound emanates. Strict liability is intended to be imposed for this
section.
         C.   Where there are adjoining properties that are zoned residential,
each of which has a residential unit, and where the residential units are
located within 50 feet of one another, no person shall operate or permit the
operation of any sound amplification system, auditory device, or stationary
sound source in a manner as to be heard at a distance of 25 feet onto the
adjoining residential property. Strict liability is intended to be imposed for
this section.
   (d)   Special provisions (exemptions). The provisions of this section shall
not apply to the following:
      (1)   The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the
existence of an emergency, or the emission of sound in the performance of
emergency work.
      (2)   Warning devices necessary for the protection of public safety.
      (3)   Outdoor gatherings, public dances, shows, and sporting and
entertainment events, provided these events are conducted pursuant to a permit
or license issued by the Village.
      (4)   Public works projects as authorized by the State and/or other
political subdivisions.
      (5)   The emission of sound from property zoned residential that is
periodically generated by activities required to maintain the property in
compliance with housing, building, zoning, fire, safety, health or sanitation
codes and which occurs between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
      (6)   The emission of sound from property that is associated with
construction activities for which the Village has issued a building permit, and
which occurs between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
   (e)   Inspection.
      (1)   The appropriate authority may inspect upon consent, at any
reasonable time and in a reasonable manner, any device or mechanism, which
creates any disturbing noise, including but not limited to the premises where
such device or mechanism is used.
      (2)   If entry to the premises is denied or refused, the appropriate
authority shall obtain an inspection warrant from a court of competent
jurisdiction.
   (f)   Variance procedure.
      (1)   Any person who violates any provision of division (b)(1) and (b)(2)
of this section not covered by permit or license, may file an application with
the Board of Zoning Appeals for a variance. The Board of Zoning Appeals may
grant a variance in a specific case and from a specific provision of any
regulation, order or notice subject to appropriate conditions and provided the
Board makes specific findings of fact based on evidence relating to the
following:
         A.   That there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in
carrying out the strict letter of any regulation, order or notice;
         B.   That the effect of the application of the provisions would be
arbitrary in the specific case;
         C.   That an extension would not constitute an appropriate remedy for
these practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships and this arbitrary
effect; and
         D.   That such variance is in harmony with the general purpose and
intent of the Board in securing the public health, safety and general welfare.
   The application shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of one hundred
dollars ($100.00). A separate application shall be filed for each noise source;
however, several mobile sources under common ownership, or several fixed
sources on a single property may be combined into one application.
      (2)   Any person who violates any provision of this section other than
those specified in division (f)(1) of this section which is not covered by
permit or license may file an application with the Municipal Manager for a
variance. The applicant shall set forth all actions taken to comply with said
provision, the reasons why compliance cannot be achieved, the proposed method
for achieving compliance, and the proposed time schedule for its
accomplishment. The application shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of
one hundred dollars ($100.00). A separate application shall be filed for each
noise source; however, several mobile sources under common ownership, or
several fixed sources on a single property may be combined into one
application. Upon receipt of said application and fee, the Municipal Manager
will render a decision within 30 calendar days.
   (g)   Issuance of orders. The Municipal Manager, Code Enforcement Officer,
or their designee may issue orders requiring the abatement of all violations of
this chapter and the correction of any condition, which may result in a
violation of this chapter. Failure to act upon such order within the time limit
set forth therein or within the time extension granted by the Municipal
Manager, Code Enforcement Officer, or their designee, may result in revocation
of any existing permit issued under this chapter.
   (h)   Severability. If any provision of this chapter is held to be
unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction,
the remaining provisions of this chapter shall not be invalidated.
   (i)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates division (c)(1) of this section is guilty of
unreasonably loud and/or raucous noise. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, unreasonably loud and/or raucous noise is a minor misdemeanor. If the
offender persists in making or allowing to be made unreasonably loud and/or
raucous noise after reasonable warning or request to desist within a 12 hour
period, unreasonably loud and/or raucous noise is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (c)(2) of this section is guilty of
prohibited sound. Except as otherwise provided in this division, prohibited
sound is a minor misdemeanor. If the offender persists in operating or
permitting the operation of a sound amplification system, auditory device, or
stationary sound source in violation or the prohibitions contained in division
(c)(2) of this section after reasonable warning or request to desist within a
12 hour period, prohibited sound is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (3)   If the offender has previously been convicted of a violation of
this section, a violation of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(Ord. 09-2016, passed 6-28-2016)
CHAPTER 666: SEX RELATED OFFENSES
666.01   Definitions.
666.02   Unlawful sexual conduct with a minor.
666.03   Sexual imposition.
666.04   Public indecency.
666.05   Voyeurism.
666.06   Polygraph examinations for victims: restrictions on use.
666.07   Procuring; engagement in sexual activity for hire.
666.08   Soliciting.
666.085   Loitering to engage in solicitation.
666.09   Prostitution.
666.10   Rules of evidence.
666.11   Disseminating matter harmful to juveniles.
666.115   Displaying matter harmful to juveniles.
666.12   Pandering obscenity. (Repealed)
666.13   Possession and viewing of obscene material involving a minor.
(Repealed)
666.14   Deception to obtain matter harmful to juveniles.
666.15   Presumptions; notice.
666.16   Declaratory judgment.
666.17   Injunction; abatement of nuisance.
666.18   Unlawful operation of viewing booths depicting sexual conduct.
666.19   Juveniles on the premises of adult entertainment establishments
prohibited.
666.20   Sexually oriented businesses; illegal operation and activity.
666.21   Registered sex offender restrictions on Halloween.
666.22   Unlawful advertising of massage.
666.23   Nonconsensual dissemination of private sexual images.
666.24   Grooming.
666.99   Sentencing for sexually oriented offenses; sexual predators;
registration.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Examination and treatment for venereal disease; HIV tests - see Ohio R.C.
2907.27
   Assistance to victims of sexual assault - see Ohio R.C. 2907.28 - 2907.30
   Child victim, disposition of - see Ohio R.C. 2945.481
   Registration of sex offenders in cities and counties - see Ohio R.C. 2950.01
et seq.
   Definitions generally - see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   Criminal child enticement - see GEN. OFF.
636.08
   Spreading contagion - see GEN. OFF.
660.02
   Sentencing generally - see GEN. OFF. Ch.
698
§ 666.01 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   HARMFUL TO JUVENILES. That quality of any material or performance
describing or representing nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement, or sado-
masochistic abuse in any form to which all of the following apply:
      (1)   The material or performance, when considered as a whole, appeals to
the prurient interest of juveniles in sex.
      (2)   The material or performance is patently offensive to prevailing
standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable
for juveniles.
      (3)   The material or performance, when considered as a whole, lacks
serious literary, artistic, political, and scientific value for juveniles.
   (b)   JUVENILE. Any unmarried person under 18 years of age.
   (c)   LICENSED MEDICAL PROFESSIONAL. Any of the following medical
professionals:
      (1)   A physician assistant licensed under R.C. Chapter 4730;
      (2)   A physician authorized under R.C. Chapter 4731 to practice medicine
and surgery, osteopathic medicine and surgery, or podiatric medicine and
surgery;
      (3)   A massage therapist licensed under R.C. Chapter 4731.
   (d)   MATERIAL. Any book, magazine, newspaper, pamphlet, poster, print,
picture, figure, image, description, motion picture film, video cassette, laser
disc, phonograph record, cassette tape, compact disc, or other tangible thing
capable of arousing interest through sight, sound, or touch and includes an
image or text appearing on a computer monitor, television screen, liquid
crystal display, or similar display device or an image or text recorded on a
computer hard disk, computer floppy disk, compact disk, magnetic tape, or
similar data storage device.
   (e)   MENTAL HEALTH CLIENT OR PATIENT. The same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
2305.51.
   (f)   MENTAL HEALTH PROFESSIONAL. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
2305.115.
   (g)   MINOR. A person under the age of 18.
   (h)   NUDITY. The showing, representation, or depiction of human male or
female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a full, opaque
covering, or of a female breast with less than a full, opaque covering of any
portion thereof below the top of the nipple, or of covered male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state.
   (i)   OBSCENE. When considered as a whole, and judged with reference to
ordinary adults or, if it is designed for sexual deviates or other specially
susceptible group, judged with reference to that group, any material or
performance is OBSCENE if any of the following apply:
      (1)   Its dominant appeal is to prurient interest.
      (2)   Its dominant tendency is to arouse lust by displaying or depicting
sexual activity, masturbation, sexual excitement, or nudity in a way that tends
to represent human beings as mere objects of sexual appetite.
      (3)   Its dominant tendency is to arouse lust by displaying or depicting
bestiality or extreme or bizarre violence, cruelty, or brutality.
      (4)   Its dominant tendency is to appeal to scatological interest by
displaying or depicting human bodily functions of elimination in a way that
inspires disgust or revulsion in persons with ordinary sensibilities, without
serving any genuine scientific, educational, sociological, moral, or artistic
purpose.
      (5)   It contains a series of displays or descriptions of sexual
activity, masturbation, sexual excitement, nudity, bestiality, extreme or
bizarre violence, cruelty, or brutality, or human bodily functions of
elimination, the cumulative effect of which is a dominant tendency to appeal to
prurient or scatological interest, when the appeal to such an interest is
primarily for its own sake or for commercial exploitation, rather than
primarily for a genuine scientific, educational, sociological, moral, or
artistic purpose.
   (j)   PERFORMANCE. Any motion picture, preview, trailer, play, show, skit,
dance, or other exhibition performed before an audience.
   (k)   PLACE WHERE A PERSON HAS A REASONABLE EXPECTATION OF PRIVACY. A place
where a reasonable person would believe that the person could fully disrobe in
private.
   (l)   PRIVATE AREA. The genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or female breast
below the top of the areola, where nude or covered by an undergarment.
   (m)   PROSTITUTE. A male or female who promiscuously engages in sexual
activity for hire, regardless of whether the hire is paid to the prostitute or
to another.
   (n)   SADO-MASOCHISTIC ABUSE. Flagellation or torture by or upon a person or
the condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically restrained.
   (o)   SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Sexual conduct or sexual contact, or both.
   (p)   SEXUAL CONDUCT. Vaginal intercourse between a male and female; anal
intercourse, fellatio, and cunnilingus between persons regardless of sex; and,
without privilege to do so, the insertion, however slight, of any part of the
body or any instrument, apparatus, or other object into the vaginal or anal
opening of another. Penetration, however slight, is sufficient to complete
vaginal or anal intercourse.
   (q)   SEXUAL CONTACT. Any touching of an erogenous zone of another,
including without limitation the thigh, genitals, buttock, pubic region, or, if
the person is a female, a breast, for the purpose of sexually arousing or
gratifying either person.
   (r)   SEXUAL EXCITEMENT. The condition of human male or female genitals when
in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
   (s)   SPOUSE. A person married to an offender at the time of an alleged
offense, except that such person shall not be considered the spouse when any of
the following apply:
      (1)   When the parties have entered into a written separation agreement
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3103.06.
      (2)   When an action is pending between the parties for annulment,
divorce, dissolution of marriage, or legal separation.
      (3)   In the case of an action for legal separation, after the effective
date of the judgment for legal separation.
(ORC 2907.01)
§ 666.02 UNLAWFUL SEXUAL CONDUCT WITH A MINOR.
   (a)   No person who is 18 years of age or older shall engage in sexual
conduct with another when the offender knows the other person is 13 years of
age or older but less than 16 years of age, or the offender is reckless in that
regard.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful sexual conduct
with a minor.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(2), unlawful sexual
conduct with a minor is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate State law.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(3) of this section, if
the offender is less than four years older than the other person, unlawful
sexual conduct with a minor is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a violation of Ohio R.C. 2907.02, 2907.03 or 2907.04, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, or a violation of former Ohio R.C. 2907.12, or
any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, unlawful sexual conduct with
a minor is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate State law.
(ORC 2907.04)
§ 666.03 SEXUAL IMPOSITION.
   (a)   No person shall have sexual contact with another; cause another to
have sexual contact with the offender; or cause two or more other persons to
have sexual contact when the offender knows that the sexual contact is
offensive to the other person, or one of the other persons, or is reckless in
that regard.
   (b)   No person shall be convicted of a violation of this section solely
upon the victim’s testimony unsupported by other evidence.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of sexual imposition, a
misdemeanor of the third degree. If the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this section, R.C. § 2907.02, 2907.03,
2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.06, former R.C. § 2907.12, or a substantially equivalent
state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of this section is a misdemeanor
of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to three or more violations of this section, R.C. § 2907.02,
2907.03, 2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.06, former R.C. § 2907.12, or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or of any combination of those
sections, a violation of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree and,
notwithstanding the range of jail terms prescribed in R.C. § 2929.24, the court
may impose on the offender a definite jail term of not more than one year.
(R.C. § 2907.06)
Statutory reference:
   Gross sexual imposition, felony, see Ohio R.C. 2907.05
   Notice to licensing board or agency upon indictment, conviction or guilty
plea of mental health professional, see Ohio R.C. 2907.17 and 2907.18
§ 666.04 PUBLIC INDECENCY.
   (a)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following, under
circumstances in which the person’s conduct is likely to be viewed by and
affront others who are in the person’s physical proximity and who are not
members of the person’s household:
      (1)   Expose the person’s private parts.
      (2)   Engage in sexual conduct or masturbation.
      (3)   Engage in conduct that to an ordinary observer would appear to be
sexual conduct or masturbation.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following, under circumstances
in which the person’s conduct is likely to be viewed by and affront another
person who is in the person’s physical proximity, who is a minor, and who is
not the spouse of the offender:
      (1)   Engage in masturbation.
      (2)   Engage in sexual conduct.
      (3)   Engage in conduct that to an ordinary observer would appear to be
sexual conduct or masturbation.
      (4)   Expose the person’s private parts with the purpose of personal
sexual arousal or gratification or to lure the minor into sexual activity.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of public indecency and
shall be punished as provided in divisions (c)(2), (c)(3), (c)(4), and (c)(5)
of this section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (c)(2), a violation
of division (a)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
violation of this section or a substantially equivalent State law or municipal
ordinance, a violation of division (a)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the third degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by
the offender’s conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations
of this section or a substantially equivalent State law municipal ordinance, a
violation of division (a)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second
degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by the
offender’s conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more
violations of this section or a substantially equivalent State law or municipal
ordinance, a violation of division (a)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the first degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by
the offender’s conduct was a minor, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
State law.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (c)(3), a violation
of division (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the third
degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
one violation of this section or a substantially equivalent State law or
municipal ordinance, a violation of division (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this section
is a misdemeanor of the second degree or, if any person who was likely to view
and be affronted by the offender’s conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of this section or a substantially equivalent
State law municipal ordinance, a violation of division (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if any person who was likely
to view and be affronted by the offender’s conduct was a minor, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate State law.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (c)(4), a violation
of division (b)(1), (b)(2), or (b)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
second degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one violation of this section or a substantially equivalent State law
or municipal ordinance, a violation of division (b)(1), (b)(2), or (b)(3) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this
section or a substantially equivalent State law municipal ordinance, a
violation of division (b)(1), (b)(2), or (b)(3) of this section is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate State law.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (c)(5), a violation
of division (b)(4) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any violation of
this section or a substantially equivalent State law municipal ordinance, a
violation of division (b)(4) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate State law.
   (d)   (1)   If either of the following applies, the court may determine at
the time of sentencing whether to classify the offender as a tier I sex
offender/child-victim offender for a violation of division (b)(4) of this
section:
         A.   The offender is less than ten years older than the other person.
         B.   The offender is ten or more years older than the other person and
the offender has not previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any
violation of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance.
      (2)   If the offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (b)(4) of this section, is ten or more years older than the other
person, and previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any violation
of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, the court shall issue an order at the time of sentencing that
classifies the offender as a tier I sex offender/child-victim offender subject
to registration under R.C. §§ 2950.04, 2950.041, 2950.05, and 2950.06.
(R.C. § 2907.09)
   (e)   A mother is entitled to breast-feed her baby in any location of a
place of public accommodation, as defined in Ohio R.C. 4112.01, wherein the
mother otherwise is permitted.
(ORC 3781.55)
Statutory reference:
   Bail considerations for persons charged, see Ohio R.C. 2907.41
§ 666.05 VOYEURISM.
   (a)   No person, for the purpose of sexually arousing or gratifying himself
or herself, shall commit trespass or otherwise surreptitiously invade the
privacy of another, to spy or eavesdrop upon another.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly commit trespass or otherwise secretly or
surreptitiously videotape, film, photograph, broadcast, stream, or otherwise
record another person, in a place where a person has a reasonable expectation
of privacy, for the purpose of viewing the private areas of that person.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly commit trespass or otherwise secretly or
surreptitiously videotape, film, photograph, broadcast, stream, or otherwise
record a minor, in a place where a person has a reasonable expectation of
privacy, for the purpose of viewing the private areas of the minor.
   (d)   No person shall secretly or surreptitiously videotape, film,
photograph, or otherwise record another person above, under, or through the
clothing being worn by that other person for the purpose of viewing the body
of, or the undergarments worn by, that other person.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of voyeurism.
      (1)   A violation of division (a) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
      (2)   A violation of division (b) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
second degree.
      (3)   A violation of division (d) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
      (4)   A violation of division (c) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2907.08)
§ 666.06 POLYGRAPH EXAMINATIONS FOR VICTIMS: RESTRICTIONS ON USE.
   (a)   (1)   A peace officer, prosecutor, other public official, defendant,
defendant's attorney, alleged juvenile offender, or alleged juvenile offender's
attorney shall not ask or require a victim of an alleged sex offense to submit
to a polygraph examination as a condition for proceeding with the investigation
or prosecution of the alleged sex offense.
      (2)   The refusal of the victim of an alleged sex offense to submit to a
polygraph examination shall not prevent the investigation of the alleged sex
offense, the filing of criminal charges with respect to the alleged sex
offense, or the prosecution of the alleged perpetrator of the alleged sex
offense.
   (b)   As used in this section:
      (1)   ALLEGED JUVENILE OFFENDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2930.01.
      (2)   PEACE OFFICER has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2921.51.
      (3)   POLYGRAPH EXAMINATION means any mechanical or electrical instrument
or device of any type used or allegedly used to examine, test, or question an
individual for the purpose of determining the individual’s truthfulness.
      (4)   PROSECUTION means the prosecution of criminal charges in a criminal
prosecution or the prosecution of a delinquent child complaint in a delinquency
proceeding.
      (5)   PROSECUTOR has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2935.01.
      (6)   PUBLIC OFFICIAL has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 117.01.
      (7)   SEX OFFENSE means a violation of any provision of Sections 666.02
to 666.05 or Ohio R.C. 2907.02 to 2907.09.
(ORC 2907.10)
§ 666.07 PROCURING; ENGAGEMENT IN SEXUAL ACTIVITY FOR HIRE.
   (a)   Procuring.
      (1)   No person, knowingly and for gain, shall do either of the
following:
         A.   Entice or solicit another to patronize a prostitute or brothel;
         B.   Procure a prostitute for another to patronize, or take or direct
another at the other's request to any place for the purpose of patronizing a
prostitute.
      (2)   No person, having authority or responsibility over the use of
premises, shall knowingly permit the premises to be used for the purpose of
engaging in sexual activity for hire.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (a)(1)A. or (a)(1)B. of this section is
guilty of procuring. Except as otherwise provided in this division, procuring
is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the prostitute who is procured,
patronized, or otherwise involved in a violation of division (a)(1)B. of this
section is under 18 years of age at the time of the violation, regardless of
whether the offender who violates division (a)(1)B. of this section knows the
prostitute's age, or if a prostitute who engages in sexual activity for hire in
premises used in violation of division (a)(2) of this section is under 18 years
of age at the time of the violation, regardless of whether the offender who
violates division (a)(2) of this section knows the prostitute's age, procuring
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.23)
   (b)   Engagement in sexual activity for hire.
      (1)   As used in this division (b):
         A.   PERSON WITH A DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITY. Has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 2905.32.
         B.   SEXUAL ACTIVITY FOR HIRE. An implicit or explicit agreement to
provide sexual activity in exchange for anything of value paid to the person
engaging in such sexual activity, to any person trafficking that person, or to
any person associated with either such person.
      (2)   No person shall recklessly induce, entice, or procure another to
engage in sexual activity for hire in exchange for the person giving anything
of value to the other person.
      (3)   No person shall recklessly induce, entice, or procure another to
engage in sexual activity for hire in exchange for the person giving anything
of value to the other person if the other person is a person with a
developmental disability and the offender knows or has reasonable cause to
believe that the other person is a person with a developmental disability.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (B)(2) of this section is guilty of
engaging in prostitution, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Whoever violates
division (B)(3) of this section is guilty of engaging in prostitution with a
person with a developmental disability, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. In sentencing an offender under this division for a
violation of division (b)(2) of this section, the court shall require the
offender to attend an education or treatment program aimed at preventing
persons from inducing, enticing, or procuring another to engage in sexual
activity for hire in exchange for the person giving anything of value to the
other person. Notwithstanding the fine specified in R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a) for
a misdemeanor of the first degree, in sentencing an offender under this
division for a violation of division (b)(2) of this section, the court may
impose upon the offender a fine of not more than $1,500.
(R.C. § 2907.231)
§ 666.08 SOLICITING.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly solicit another to engage in sexual activity
for hire in exchange for the person receiving anything of value from the other
person.
   (b)   No person, with knowledge that the person has tested positive as a
carrier of a virus that causes acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, shall engage
in conduct in violation of division (a) of this section.
   (c)   As used in division (a) of this section, SEXUAL ACTIVITY FOR HIRE
means an implicit or explicit agreement to provide sexual activity in exchange
for anything of value paid to the person engaging in such sexual activity, to
any person trafficking that person, or to any person associated with either
such person.
   (d)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
soliciting. Soliciting is a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of engaging
in solicitation after a positive HIV test, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.24)
Statutory reference:
   Testing offenders for venereal disease and AIDS, see R.C. § 2907.27
§ 666.085 LOITERING TO ENGAGE IN SOLICITATION.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to solicit another to engage in sexual
activity for hire and while in or near a public place, shall do any of the
following:
      (1)   Beckon to, stop or attempt to stop another;
      (2)   Engage or attempt to engage another in conversation;
      (3)   Stop or attempt to stop the operator of a vehicle or approach a
stationary vehicle;
      (4)   If the offender is the operator of or a passenger in a vehicle,
stop, attempt to stop, beckon to, attempt to beckon to, or entice another to
approach or enter the vehicle of which the offender is the operator or in which
the offender is the passenger;
      (5)   Interfere with the free passage of another.
   (b)   No person, with knowledge that the person has tested positive as a
carrier of a virus that causes acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, shall engage
in conduct in violation of division (a) of this section.
   (c)   As used in division (a) of this section:
      (1)   PUBLIC PLACE. means any of the following:
         A.   A street, road, highway, thoroughfare, bikeway, walkway,
sidewalk, bridge, alley, alleyway, plaza, park, driveway, parking lot or
transportation facility.
         B.   A doorway or entrance way to a building that fronts on a place
described in division (1)A. of this definition.
         C.   A place not described in division (1)A. or (1)B. of this
definition that is open to the public.
      (2)   VEHICLE. has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4501.01.
   (d)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
loitering to engage in solicitation, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of
loitering to engage in solicitation after a positive HIV test, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.241)
Statutory reference:
   Testing offenders for venereal disease and AIDS, see Ohio R.C. 2907.27
§ 666.09 PROSTITUTION.
   (a)   No person shall engage in sexual activity for hire.
   (b)   No person, with knowledge that the person has tested positive as a
carrier of a virus that causes acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, shall engage
in sexual activity for hire.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
prostitution, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of engaging
in prostitution after a positive HIV test, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.25)
Statutory reference:
   Testing offenders for venereal disease and AIDS, see Ohio R.C. 2907.27
§ 666.10 RULES OF EVIDENCE.
   (a)   In any case in which it is necessary to prove that a place is a
brothel, evidence as to the reputation of such place and as to the reputation
of the persons who inhabit or frequent it is admissible on the question of
whether such place is or is not a brothel.
   (b)   In any case in which it is necessary to prove that a person is a
prostitute, evidence as to the reputation of such person is admissible on the
question of whether such person is or is not a prostitute.
   (c)   In any prosecution for a violation of §§
666.07 to 666.09, proof of a prior conviction of the accused of any such
offense or substantially equivalent offense is admissible in support of the
charge.
   (d)   The prohibition contained in Ohio R.C. 2317.02(D) against testimony by
a husband or wife concerning communications between them does not apply, and
the accused’s spouse may testify concerning any such communication in any of
the following cases:
      (1)   When the husband or wife is charged with a violation of Section
666.07 and the spouse testifying was the prostitute involved in the offense or
the person who used the offender’s premises to engage in sexual activity for
hire;
      (2)   When the husband or wife is charged with a violation of Section
666.08 or Section 666.09.
(ORC 2907.26)
§ 666.11 DISSEMINATING MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.
   (a)   No person, with knowledge of its character or content, shall
recklessly do any of following:
      (1)   Directly sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit,
rent, or present to a juvenile any material or performance that is obscene or
harmful to juveniles;
      (2)   Offer or agree to sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide,
exhibit, rent, or present to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law
enforcement officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement
officers posing as juveniles any material or performance that is obscene or
harmful to juveniles;
      (3)   While in the physical proximity of the juvenile or law enforcement
officer posing as a juvenile, allow any juvenile or law enforcement officer
posing as a juvenile to review or peruse any material or view any live
performance that is harmful to juveniles.
   (b)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under this section
that involves material or a performance that is harmful to juveniles but not
obscene:
      (1)   The defendant is the parent, guardian, or spouse of the juvenile
involved.
      (2)   The juvenile involved, at the time of the conduct in question, was
accompanied by his or her parent or guardian who, with knowledge of its
character, consented to the material or performance being furnished or
presented to the juvenile.
      (3)   The juvenile exhibited to the defendant or his or her agent or
employee a draft card, driver’s license, birth record, marriage license, or
other official or apparently official document purporting to show that the
juvenile was 18 years of age or over or married, and the person to whom the
document was exhibited did not otherwise have reasonable cause to believe that
the juvenile was under the age of 18 and unmarried.
   (c)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section,
involving material or a performance that is obscene or harmful to juveniles,
that the material or performance was furnished or presented for a bona fide
medical, scientific, educational, governmental, judicial, or other proper
purpose, by a physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist, teacher,
librarian, clergy, prosecutor, judge, or other proper person.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (b)(3) of this section, mistake of
age is not a defense to a charge under this section.
   (d)   (1)   A person directly sells, delivers, furnishes, disseminates,
provides, exhibits, rents, or presents or directly offers or agrees to sell,
deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent, or present material or a
performance to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement officer
posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as
juveniles in violation of this section by means of an electronic method of
remotely transmitting information if the person knows or has reason to believe
that the person receiving the information is a juvenile or the group of persons
receiving the information are juveniles.
      (2)   A person remotely transmitting information by means of a method of
mass distribution does not directly sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate,
provide, exhibit, rent, or present or directly offer or agree to sell, deliver,
furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent, or present the material or
performance in question to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement
officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as
juveniles in violation of this section if either of the following applies:
         A.   The person has inadequate information to know or have reason to
believe that a particular recipient of the information or offer is a juvenile.
         B.   The method of mass distribution does not provide the person the
ability to prevent a particular recipient from receiving the information.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disseminating matter
harmful to juveniles. If the material or performance involved is harmful to
juveniles except as otherwise provided in this division, a violation of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the material or performance
involved is obscene, violation of this section is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate State law.
(ORC 2907.31)
§ 666.115 DISPLAYING MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.
   (a)   No person who has custody, control, or supervision of a commercial
establishment, with knowledge of the character or content of the material
involved, shall display at the establishment any material that is harmful to
juveniles and that is open to view by juveniles as part of the invited general
public.
   (b)   It is not a violation of division (a) of this section if the material
in question is displayed by placing it behind blinder racks or similar devices
that cover at least the lower two-thirds of the material, if the material in
question is wrapped or placed behind the counter, or if the material in
question otherwise is covered or located so that the portion that is harmful to
juveniles is not open to the view of juveniles.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of displaying matter harmful
to juveniles, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day during which the
offender is in violation of this section constitutes a separate offense.
(ORC 2907.311)
§ 666.12 PANDERING OBSCENITY. (REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
   Section 666.12 was repealed as part of the 1997 updating and revision of
these Codified Ordinances because a violation of substantially equivalent State
law (Ohio R.C. 2907.32) was made a felony by the Ohio General Assembly by Am.
Sub. S.B. No. 2, effective July 1, 1996.
§ 666.13 POSSESSION AND VIEWING OF OBSCENE MATERIAL INVOLVING A MINOR.
(REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
   Section 666.13 was repealed as part of the 1997 updating and revision of
these Codified Ordinances because a violation of substantially equivalent State
law (Ohio R.C. 2907.322 and 2907.323) was made a felony by the Ohio General
Assembly by Am. Sub. S.B. No. 2, effective July 1, 1996.
§ 666.14 DECEPTION TO OBTAIN MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.
   (a)   No person, for the purpose of enabling a juvenile to obtain any
material or gain admission to any performance which is harmful to juveniles,
shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Falsely represent that he or she is the parent, guardian, or spouse
of the juvenile.
      (2)   Furnish the juvenile with any identification or document purporting
to show that the juvenile is 18 years of age or over or married.
   (b)   No juvenile, for the purpose of obtaining any material or gaining
admission to any performance which is harmful to juveniles, shall do either of
the following:
      (1)   Falsely represent that he or she is 18 years of age or over or
married.
      (2)   Exhibit any identification or document purporting to show that he
or she is 18 years of age or over or married.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of deception to obtain matter
harmful to juveniles, a misdemeanor of the second degree. A juvenile who
violates division (b) of this section shall be adjudged an unruly child, with
the disposition of the case as may be appropriate under Ohio R.C. Chapter 2151.
(ORC 2907.33)
§ 666.15 PRESUMPTIONS; NOTICE.
   (a)   An owner or manager, or agent or employee of an owner or manager, of a
bookstore, newsstand, theater, or other commercial establishment engaged in
selling material or exhibiting performances, who, in the course of business
does any of the acts prohibited by §
666.11 is presumed to have knowledge of the character of the material or
performance involved if the owner, manager, or agent or employee of the owner
or manager has actual notice of the nature of such material or performance,
whether or not the owner, manager, or agent or employee of the owner or manager
has precise knowledge of its contents.
   (b)   Without limitation on the manner in which such notice may be given,
actual notice of the character of material or a performance may be given in
writing by the chief legal officer of the Municipality. Such notice, regardless
of the manner in which it is given, shall identify the sender, identify the
material or performance involved, state whether it is obscene or harmful to
juveniles, and bear the date of such notice.
   (c)   Section 666.11 does not apply to a motion picture operator or
projectionist acting within the scope of employment as an employee of the owner
or manager of the theater or other place for the showing of motion pictures to
the general public, and having no managerial responsibility or financial
interest in the operator’s or projectionist’s place of employment, other than
wages.
   (d)   (1)   The provisions of §§
666.11,
666.115 and
666.13(a) do not apply to a person solely because the person provided access or
connection to or from an electronic method of remotely transferring information
not under that person’s control, including having provided capabilities that
are incidental to providing access or connection to or from the electronic
method of remotely transferring the information, and that do not include the
creation of the content of the material that is the subject of the access or
connection.
      (2)   Division (d)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who
conspires with an entity actively involved in the creation or knowing
distribution of material in violation of §§
666.11,
666.115 or
666.13 or who knowingly advertises the availability of material of that nature.
      (3)   Division (d)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who
provides access or connection to an electronic method of remotely transferring
information that is engaged in the violation of Section
666.11,
666.115 or
666.13 and that contain content that person has selected and introduced into
the electronic method of remotely transferring information or content over
which that person exercises editorial control.
   (e)   An employer is not guilty of a violation of §§
666.11,
666.115 or
666.13 based on the actions of an employee or agent of the employer unless the
employee’s or agent’s conduct is within the scope of the employee’s or agent’s
employment or agency, and the employer does either of the following:
      (1)   With knowledge of the employee’s or agent’s conduct, the employer
authorizes or ratifies the conduct.
      (2)   The employer recklessly disregards the employee’s or agent’s
conduct.
   (f)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under §§
666.11 or
666.115 as the section applies to an image transmitted through the internet or
other electronic method of remotely transmitting information that the person
charged with violating the section has taken, in good faith, reasonable,
effective, and appropriate actions under the circumstances to restrict or
prevent access by juveniles to material that is harmful to juveniles, including
any method that is feasible under available technology.
(ORC 2907.35)
§ 666.16 DECLARATORY JUDGMENT.
   (a)   Without limitation on the persons otherwise entitled to bring an
action for a declaratory judgment pursuant to Ohio R.C. Chapter 2721, involving
the same issue, the following persons have standing to bring a declaratory
judgment action to determine whether particular materials or performances are
obscene or harmful to juveniles:
      (1)   The chief legal officer of the Municipality if and when there is
reasonable cause to believe that Ohio R.C. 2907.31 or Ohio R.C. 2907.32, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, is being or is about to be
violated;
      (2)   Any person who, pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2907.35(B) or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, has received notice in writing from the chief
legal officer stating that particular materials or performances are obscene or
harmful to juveniles.
   (b)   Any party to an action for a declaratory judgment pursuant to division
(a) of this section is entitled, upon the party’s request, to trial on the
merits within five days after joinder of the issues, and the court shall render
judgment within five days after trial is concluded.
   (c)   An action for a declaratory judgement pursuant to division (a) of this
section shall not be brought during the pendency of any civil action or
criminal prosecution when the character of the particular materials or
performances involved is at issue in the pending case, and either of the
following applies:
      (1)   Either of the parties to the action for a declaratory judgment is a
party to the pending case;
      (2)   A judgment in the pending case will necessarily constitute res
judicata as to the character of the materials or performances involved.
   (d)   A civil action or criminal prosecution in which the character of
particular materials or performances is at issue, brought during the pendency
of an action for a declaratory judgment involving the same issue, shall be
stayed during the pendency of the action for a declaratory judgment.
   (e)   The fact that a violation of Ohio R.C. 2907.31 or Ohio R.C. 2907.32,
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, occurs prior to a judicial
determination of the character of the material or performance involved in the
violation does not relieve the offender of criminal liability for the
violation, even though prosecution may be stayed pending the judicial
determination.
(ORC 2907.36)
§ 666.17 INJUNCTION; ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.
   (a)   Where it appears that Ohio R.C. 2907.31 or Ohio R.C. 2907.32, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, is being or is about to be
violated, the chief legal officer of the Municipality may bring an action to
enjoin the violation. The defendant, upon his or her request, is entitled to
trial on the merits within five days after the joinder of the issues, and the
court shall render judgment within five days after the trial is concluded.
   (b)   Premises used or occupied for repeated violations of Ohio R.C. 2907.31
or Ohio R.C. 2907.32, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
constitute a nuisance subject to abatement pursuant to Ohio R.C. Chapter 3767.
(ORC 2907.37)
§ 666.18 UNLAWFUL OPERATION OF VIEWING BOOTHS DEPICTING SEXUAL CONDUCT.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT means an entity that is open to the public
and to which either of the following applies:
         A.   It has a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade
of the sale, rental, or viewing of visual materials or performances depicting
sexual conduct.
         B.   It has as a principal business purpose the sale, rental, or
viewing of visual materials or performances depicting sexual conduct.
      (2)   VISUAL MATERIALS OR PERFORMANCES means films, videos, CD-ROM discs,
streaming video, or other motion pictures.
   (b)   No person who has custody, control, or supervision of a commercial
establishment, with knowledge of the character of the visual material or
performance involved, shall knowingly permit the use of, or offer the use of,
viewing booths, stalls, or partitioned portions of a room located in the
commercial establishment for the purpose of viewing visual materials or
performances depicting sexual conduct unless both of the following apply:
      (1)   The inside of each booth, stall, or partitioned room is visible
from, and at least one side of each booth, stall, or partitioned room is open
to, a continuous and contiguous main aisle or hallway that is open to the
public areas of the commercial establishment and is not obscured by any
curtain, door, or other covering or enclosure.
      (2)   No booth, stall, or partitioned room is designed, constructed,
pandered, or allowed to be used for the purpose of encouraging or facilitating
nudity or sexual activity on the part of or between patrons or members of the
public, and no booth, stall, or partitioned room has any aperture, hole, or
opening for the purpose of encouraging or facilitating nudity or sexual
activity.
   (c)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that
either of the following applies to the involved visual materials or
performances:
      (1)   The visual materials or performances depicting sexual conduct are
disseminated or presented for a bona fide medical, scientific, educational,
religious, governmental, judicial, or other proper purpose and by or to a
physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist, teacher, person pursuing bona
fide studies or research, librarian, member of the clergy, prosecutor, judge,
or other person having a proper interest in the visual materials or
performances.
      (2)   The visual materials or performances depicting sexual conduct,
taken as a whole, would be found by a reasonable person to have serious
literary, artistic, political, or scientific value or are presented or
disseminated in good faith for a serious literary, artistic, political, or
scientific purpose and are not pandered for their prurient appeal.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of permitting unlawful
operation of viewing booths depicting sexual conduct, a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(ORC 2907.38)
§ 666.19 JUVENILES ON THE PREMISES OF ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS
PROHIBITED.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Adult arcade” means any place to which the public is permitted or
invited in which coin- operated, slug-operated, or electronically,
electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines,
projectors, or other image-producing devices are regularly maintained to show
images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and in which the
images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon
matter exhibiting or describing specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
      (2)   ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE, or ADULT VIDEO STORE.
         A.   Means a commercial establishment that, for any form of
consideration, has as a significant or substantial portion of its stock-in-
trade in, derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues from,
devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior business or
advertising to, or maintains a substantial section of its sales or display
space for the sale or rental of any of the following:
            1.   Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides, or
other visual representations, that are characterized by their emphasis upon the
exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas;
            2.   Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for
use or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for
sadomasochistic use or abuse of self or others.
         B.   Includes a commercial establishment as defined in Ohio R.C.
2907.38. An establishment may have other principal business purposes that do
not involve the offering for sale, rental, or viewing of materials exhibiting
or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and
still be categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video
store. The existence of other principal business purposes does not exempt an
establishment from being categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty
store, or adult video store so long as one of its principal business purposes
is offering for sale or rental, for some form of consideration, such materials
that exhibit or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
      (3)   ADULT CABARET means a nightclub, bar, juice bar, restaurant, bottle
club, or similar commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages
are served, that regularly features any of the following:
         A.   Persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity;
         B.   Live performances that are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities;
         C.   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other
photographic reproductions that are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis upon the exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
      (4)   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT means the sale, rental, or exhibition, for any
form of consideration, of books, films, video cassettes, magazines,
periodicals, or live performances that are characterized by an emphasis on the
exposure or display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activity.
      (5)   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT means an adult arcade, adult
bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motion
picture theater, adult theater, nude or seminude model studio, or sexual
encounter establishment. An establishment in which a medical practitioner,
psychologist, psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the
state engages in medically approved and recognized therapy, including, but not
limited to, massage therapy, as regulated pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4731.15, is not
an ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT.
      (6)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER means a commercial establishment where
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic
reproductions that are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon
the exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas are regularly shown for any form of consideration.
      (7)   ADULT THEATER means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar
commercial establishment that, for any form of consideration, regularly
features persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity or live
performances that are characterized by their emphasis upon the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.
      (8)   DISTINGUISHED OR CHARACTERIZED BY THEIR EMPHASIS UPON means the
dominant or principal character and theme of the object described by this
phrase. For instance, when the phrase refers to films “that are distinguished
or characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas”, the films so
described are those whose dominant or principal character and theme are the
exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
      (9)   NUDE OR SEMINUDE MODEL STUDIO means any place where a person, who
regularly appears in a state of nudity or seminudity, is provided for money or
any other form of consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted,
sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons. A modeling
class or studio is not a nude or seminude model studio and is not subject to
this chapter if it is operated in any of the following ways:
         A.   By a college or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation;
         B.   By a private college or university that maintains and operates
educational programs, the credits for which are transferable to a college or
university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
         C.   In a structure that has no sign visible from the exterior of the
structure and no other advertising indicating that a person appearing in a
state of nudity or seminudity is available for viewing, if in order to
participate in a class in the structure, a student must enroll at least three
days in advance of the class and if not more than one nude or seminude model is
on the premises at any one time.
      (10)   NUDITY, NUDE, or STATE OF NUDITY means the showing of the human
male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft, or cleavage with
less than a fully opaque covering; or the showing of the female breasts with
less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple.
      (11)   REGULARLY FEATURES or REGULARLY SHOWN means a consistent or
substantial course of conduct, such that the films or performances exhibited
constitute a substantial portion of the films or performances offered as a part
of the ongoing business of the adult entertainment establishment.
      (12)   SEMINUDE or STATE OF SEMINUDITY means a state of dress in which
opaque clothing covers not more than the genitals, pubic region, and nipple of
the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps
or devices.
      (13)   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER ESTABLISHMENT.
         A.   Means a business or commercial establishment that, as one of its
principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration a place where
either of the following occur:
            1.   Two or more persons may congregate, associate, or consort for
the purpose of engaging in specified sexual activities.
            2.   Two or more persons appear nude or seminude for the purpose of
displaying their nude or seminude bodies for their receipt of consideration or
compensation in any type or form.
         B.   An establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist,
psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in
medically approved and recognized therapy, including, but not limited to,
massage therapy, as regulated pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4731.15, is not a  SEXUAL
ENCOUNTER ESTABLISHMENT.
      (14)   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS means the cleft of the buttocks, anus,
male or female genitals, or the female breast.
      (15)   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY means any of the following:
         A.   Sex acts, normal or perverted, or actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation, or sodomy;
         B.   Excretory functions as a part of or in connection with any of the
activities described in division A. of this definition.
   (b)   No person knowingly shall allow an individual, including, but not
limited to, a patron, customer, or employee, who is under 18 years of age on
the premises of an adult entertainment establishment.
   (c)   No individual who is under 18 years of age knowingly shall show or
give false information concerning the individual’s name or age, or other false
identification, for the purpose of gaining entrance to an adult entertainment
establishment.
   (d)   A person shall not be found guilty of a violation of division (b) of
this section if the person raises as an affirmative defense and if the jury or,
in a nonjury trial, the court finds the person has established by a
preponderance of the evidence, all of the following:
      (1)   The individual gaining entrance to the adult entertainment
establishment exhibited to an operator, employee, agent, or independent
contractor of the adult entertainment establishment a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or an identification card issued under Ohio R.C. 4507.50 and
4507.52 showing that the individual was then at least 18 years of age.
      (2)   The operator, employee, agent, or independent contractor made a
bona fide effort to ascertain the true age of the individual gaining entrance
to the adult entertainment establishment by checking the identification
presented, at the time of entrance, to ascertain that the description on the
identification compared with the appearance of the individual and that the
identification had not been altered in any way.
      (3)   The operator, employee, agent, or independent contractor had reason
to believe that the individual gaining entrance to the adult entertainment
establishment was at least 18 years of age.
   (e)   In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense described in
division (d) of this section is raised, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or the
Deputy Registrar who issued a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an
identification card under Ohio R.C. 4507.50 and 4507.52 shall be permitted to
submit certified copies of the records, in the Registrar’s or Deputy
Registrar’s possession, of the issuance of the license or identification card
in question, in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of the Bureau of Motor
Vehicles in the action.
   (f)   (1)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of
permitting a juvenile on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment,
a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day a person violates this division
constitutes a separate offense.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of use by a
juvenile of false information to enter an adult entertainment establishment, a
delinquent act that would be a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if committed by
an adult.
(ORC 2907.39)
§ 666.20 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES; ILLEGAL OPERATION AND ACTIVITY.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE means a commercial
establishment that has as a significant or substantial portion of its stock in
trade or inventory in, derives a significant or substantial portion of its
revenues from, devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior
business or advertising to, or maintains a substantial section of its sales or
display space for the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of books,
magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides, or other visual
representations, that are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition
or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (2)   ADULT CABARET has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2907.39.
      (3)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER  means a commercial establishment
where films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic
reproductions that are characterized by their emphasis upon the display of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas are regularly shown
to more than five individuals for any form of consideration.
      (4)    CHARACTERIZED BY means describing the essential character or
quality of an item.
      (5)   EMPLOYEE means any individual who performs any service on the
premises of a sexually oriented business on a full-time, part-time, or contract
basis, regardless of whether the individual is denominated an employee,
independent contractor, agent, or otherwise, but does not include an individual
exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for
the delivery of goods to the premises.
      (6)   NUDITY, NUDE, or STATE OF NUDITY has the same meaning as in Ohio
R.C. 2907.39.
      (7)   OPERATOR means any individual on the premises of a sexually
oriented business who causes the business to function or who puts or keeps in
operation the business or who is authorized to manage the business or exercise
overall operational control of the business premises.
      (8)   PATRON means any individual on the premises of a sexually oriented
business except for any of the following:
         A.   An operator or an employee of the sexually oriented business;
         B.   An individual who is on the premises exclusively for repair or
maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises;
         C.   A public employee or a volunteer firefighter emergency medical
services worker acting within the scope of the public employee’s or volunteer’s
duties as a public employee or volunteer.
      (9)   PREMISES means the real property on which the sexually oriented
business is located and all appurtenances to the real property, including, but
not limited, to the sexually oriented business, the grounds, private walkways,
and parking lots or parking garages adjacent to the real property under the
ownership, control, or supervision of the owner or operator of the sexually
oriented business.
      (10)   REGULARLY means consistently or repeatedly.
      (11)   SEMINUDE or STATE OF SEMINUDITY has the same meaning as in Ohio
R.C. 2907.39.
      (12)    SEXUAL DEVICE means any three- dimensional object designed and
marketed for stimulation of the male or female human genitals or anus or female
breasts or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of oneself or others, including,
but not limited to, dildos, vibrators, penis pumps, and physical
representations of the human genital organs, but not including devices
primarily intended for protection against sexually transmitted diseases or for
preventing pregnancy.
      (13)   SEXUAL DEVICE SHOP means a commercial establishment that regularly
features sexual devices, but not including any pharmacy, drug store, medical
clinic, or establishment primarily dedicated to providing medical or healthcare
products or services, and not including any commercial establishment that does
not restrict access to its premises by reason of age.
      (14)   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER means a business or commercial enterprise
that, as one of its principal business purposes, purports to offer for any form
of consideration physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between
individuals of the opposite sex when one or more of the individuals is nude or
seminude.
      (15)   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS means an adult bookstore, adult video
store, adult cabaret, adult motion picture theater, sexual device shop, or
sexual encounter center, but does not include a business solely by reason of
its showing, selling, or renting materials that may depict sex.
      (16)   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS includes human genitals, pubic region,
and buttocks and the human female breast below a point immediately above the
top of the areola.
      (17)   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY means sexual intercourse, oral
copulation, masturbation, or sodomy, or excretory functions as a part of or in
connection with any of these activities.
   (b)   No sexually oriented business shall be or remain open for business
between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. on any day, except that a sexually
oriented business that holds a liquor permit pursuant to Ohio R.C. Chapter 4303
may remain open until the hour specified in that permit if it does not conduct,
offer, or allow sexually oriented entertainment activity in which the
performers appear nude.
   (c)   (1)   No patron who is not a member of the employee’s immediate family
shall knowingly touch any employee while that employee is nude or seminude or
touch the clothing of any employee while that employee is nude or seminude.
      (2)   No employee who regularly appears nude or seminude on the premises
of a sexually oriented business, while on the premises of that sexually
oriented business and while nude or seminude, shall knowingly touch a patron
who is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or another employee who
is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or the clothing of a patron
who is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or another employee who
is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or allow a patron who is not
a member of the employee’s immediate family or another employee who is not a
member of the employee’s immediate family to touch the employee or the clothing
of the employee.
   (d)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of illegally
operating a sexually oriented business, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (e)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of illegal
sexually oriented activity in a sexually oriented business. If the offender
touches a specified anatomical area of the patron or employee, or the clothing
covering a specified anatomical area, a violation of division (c) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender does not touch a
specified anatomical area of the patron or employee, or the clothing covering a
specified anatomical area, a violation of division (c) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(ORC 2907.40)
Statutory reference:
   State indemnification for certain municipal liability stemming from local
adult business regulations, see Ohio R.C. 715.55
§ 666.21 REGISTERED SEX OFFENDER RESTRICTIONS ON HALLOWEEN.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect children from the
dangers posed by registered sex offenders. The following regulations impose
reasonable time, place, and manner regulations and are rationally related to
advance the Village's interest in protecting children and the general public.
   (b)   As used in this section:
      (1)   CHILD or CHILDREN means any person(s) under the age of 18.
      (2)   REGISTERED SEX OFFENDER means any person for whom registration is
required pursuant to Ohio R.C. Chapter 2950.
   (c)   Restrictions on conduct. Any sex offender, as defined herein, shall be
required, between 12:00 a.m. and 11:59 p.m. of October 31 of each year, or
between 12:00 a.m. and 11:59 p.m. on a day officially designated for trick-or-
treat if that day is a day other than October 31, to do the following:
      (1)   Leave all exterior residential, decorative, and ornamental lighting
off;
      (2)   Refrain from decorating his or her front yard and exterior of the
residence with Halloween decorations; and
      (3)   Refrain from answering the door or otherwise distributing candy or
treats to children who are trick-or-treating.
   (d)   Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(Ord. 19-2014, passed 3-25-2014)
§ 666.22 UNLAWFUL ADVERTISING OF MASSAGE.
   (a)   No person, by means of a statement, solicitation, or offer in a print
or electronic publication, sign, placard, storefront display, or other medium,
shall advertise massage, relaxation massage, any other massage technique or
method, or any related service, with the suggestion or promise of sexual
activity.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful advertising of
massage, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (c)   Nothing in this section prevents the municipality from enacting any
regulation of the advertising of massage further than and in addition to the
provisions of divisions (a) and (b) of this section.
   (d)   As used in this section, SEXUAL ACTIVITY has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2907.01.
(R.C. § 2927.17)
§ 666.23 NONCONSENSUAL DISSEMINATION OF PRIVATE SEXUAL IMAGES.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   CABLE SERVICE PROVIDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1332.01.
      (2)   DIRECT-TO-HOME SATELLITE SERVICE. Has the meaning defined in 47
U.S.C. § 303, as amended.
      (3)   DISSEMINATE. Means to post, distribute, or publish on a computer
device, computer network, web site, or other electronic device or medium of
communication.
      (4)   IMAGE. Means a photograph, film, videotape, digital recording, or
other depiction or portrayal of a person.
      (5)   INTERACTIVE COMPUTER SERVICE. Has the meaning defined in the
“Telecommunications Act of 1996”, 47 U.S.C. § 230, as amended.
      (6)   INTERNET PROVIDER. Means a provider of internet service, including
all of the following:
         A.   Broadband service, however defined or classified by the Federal
Communications Commission;
         B.   Information service or telecommunications service, both as
defined in the “Telecommunications Act of 1996”, 47 U.S.C. § 153, as amended;
         C.   Internet protocol- enabled services, as defined in R.C. §
4927.01.
      (7)   MOBILE SERVICE. Has the meaning defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153, as
amended.
      (8)   SEXUAL ACT. Means any of the following:
         A.   Sexual activity;
         B.   Masturbation;
         C.   An act involving a bodily substance that is performed for the
purpose of sexual arousal or gratification;
         D.   Sado-masochistic abuse.
      (9)    TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIER. Has the meaning defined in 47 U.S.C. §
153, as amended.
      (10)   VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1332.21.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly disseminate an image of another person if
all of the following apply:
      (1)   The person in the image is 18 years of age or older.
      (2)   The person in the image can be identified from the image itself or
from information displayed in connection with the image and the offender
supplied the identifying information.
      (3)   The person in the image is in a state of nudity or is engaged in a
sexual act.
      (4)   The image is disseminated without consent from the person in the
image.
      (5)   The image is disseminated with intent to harm the person in the
image.
   (c)   This section does not prohibit the dissemination of an image if any of
the following apply:
      (1)   The image is disseminated for the purpose of a criminal
investigation that is otherwise lawful.
      (2)   The image is disseminated for the purpose of, or in connection
with, the reporting of unlawful conduct.
      (3)   The image is part of a news report or commentary or an artistic or
expressive work, such as a performance, work of art, literary work, theatrical
work, musical work, motion picture, film, or audiovisual work.
      (4)   The image is disseminated by a law enforcement officer, or a
corrections officer or guard in a detention facility, acting within the scope
of the person’s official duties.
      (5)   The image is disseminated for another lawful public purpose.
      (6)   The person in the image is knowingly and willingly in a state of
nudity or engaged in a sexual act and is knowingly and willingly in a location
in which the person does not have a reasonable expectation of privacy.
      (7)   The image is disseminated for the purpose of medical treatment or
examination.
   (d)   The following entities are not liable for a violation of this section
solely as a result of an image or other information provided by another person:
      (1)   A provider of interactive computer service;
      (2)   A mobile service;
      (3)   A telecommunications carrier;
      (4)   An internet provider;
      (5)   A cable service provider;
      (6)   A direct-to-home satellite service;
      (7)   A video service provider.
   (e)   Any conduct that is a violation of this section and any other section
of this Code or the Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under this section, the
other section, or both sections.
   (f)   (1)   A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (f)(1)B., (f)
(1)C., or (f)(1)D. of this section, whoever violates this section is guilty of
nonconsensual dissemination of private sexual images, a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
         B.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of this section or any substantially equivalent state or
local law, nonconsensual dissemination of private sexual images is a
misdemeanor of the second degree.
         C.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more
violations of this section or any substantially equivalent state or local law,
nonconsensual dissemination of private sexual images is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
         D.   If the offender is under 18 years of age and the person in the
image is not more than five years older than the offender, the offender shall
not be prosecuted under this section.
      (2)   In addition to any other penalty or disposition authorized or
required by law, the court may order any person who is convicted of a violation
of this section or who is adjudicated delinquent by reason of a violation of
this section to criminally forfeit all of the following property to the state
under R.C. Chapter 2981:
         A.   Any profits or proceeds and any property the person has acquired
or maintained in violation of this section that the sentencing court determines
to have been acquired or maintained as a result of the violation;
         B.   Any interest in, securities of, claim against, or property or
contractual right of any kind affording a source of influence over any
enterprise that the person has established, operated, controlled, or conducted
in violation of this section that the sentencing court determines to have been
acquired or maintained as a result of the violation.
   (g)   A victim of a violation of this section may commence a civil cause of
action against the offender, as described in R.C. § 2307.66.
(R.C. § 2917.211)
§ 666.24 GROOMING.
   (a)   As used in this section, PATTERN OF CONDUCT has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2903.211.
   (b)   No person who is 18 years of age or older shall engage in a pattern of
conduct with a minor who is less than 16 years of age and who is four or more
years younger than the person, when the pattern of conduct would cause a
reasonable adult person to believe that the person is communicating with the
minor with purpose to do either of the following:
      (1)   Entice, coerce, or solicit the minor to engage in sexual activity,
and when the person’s purpose in engaging in the pattern of conduct is to
entice, coerce, or solicit the minor to engage in sexual activity with the
person or a third person;
      (2)   Prepare the minor to engage in sexual activity, and when the
person’s purpose in engaging in the pattern of conduct is to prepare the minor
to engage in sexual activity with the person or a third person that would be a
violation of R.C. § 2907.02, 2907.03, 2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.06, or 2907.07.
   (c)   No person who is 18 years of age or older shall engage in a pattern of
conduct with a minor if the person and the minor are in any of the
relationships described in R.C. § 2907.03(A)(5) to (A)(13), when the pattern of
conduct would cause a reasonable adult person to believe that the person is
communicating with the minor with purpose to do either of the following:
      (1)   Entice, coerce, or solicit the minor to engage in sexual activity,
and when the person’s purpose in engaging in the pattern of conduct is to
entice, coerce, or solicit the minor to engage in sexual activity with the
person or a third person;
      (2)   Prepare the minor to engage in sexual activity, and when the
person’s purpose in engaging in the pattern of conduct is to prepare the minor
to engage in sexual activity with the person or a third person that would be a
violation of R.C. § 2907.02, 2907.03, 2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.06, or 2907.07.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of grooming.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, a violation of
division (b) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
victim of the offense is less than 13 years of age or if the offender supplied
alcohol or a drug of abuse to the victim of the offense, a violation of
division (b) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law. If the victim of the offense is less than 13 years of age and if the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of
this section or a sexually oriented offense or a child-victim oriented offense
or the offender supplied alcohol or a drug of abuse to the victim of the
offense, a violation of division (b) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this section or a sexually
oriented offense or a child-victim oriented offense and the offender supplied
alcohol or a drug of abuse to the victim of the offense, a violation of
division (b) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, a violation of
division (c) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender supplied alcohol or a drug of abuse to the victim of the offense, a
violation of division (c) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. If the victim of the offense is less than 13 years of
age or if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a
violation of this section or a sexually oriented offense or a child-victim
oriented offense, a violation of division (c) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. If the victim of the offense is less
than 13 years of age and if the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to a violation of this section or a sexually oriented offense or
a child-victim oriented offense or the offender supplied alcohol or a drug of
abuse to the victim of the offense, a violation of division (c) of this section
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (e)   A prosecution for a violation of this section does not preclude a
prosecution of a violation of any other section of the this code or the Ohio
Revised Code. One or more acts, a series of acts, or a course of behavior that
can be prosecuted under this section or any other section of this code or the
Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under this section, the other section of
this code or the Revised Code, or both sections.
(R.C. § 2907.071)
§ 666.99 SENTENCING FOR SEXUALLY ORIENTED OFFENSES; SEXUAL PREDATORS;
REGISTRATION.
   (a)   If an offender is being sentenced for a sexually oriented offense or
child-victim oriented offense that is a misdemeanor committed on or after
January 1, 1997, and the offender is a tier III sex offender/child-victim
offender relative to the offense or the offense is any offense listed in Ohio
R.C. 2901.07(D)(1) to (D)(3), the judge shall include in the offender’s
sentence a statement that the offender is a tier III sex offender/child-victim
offender, shall comply with the requirements of Ohio R.C. 2950.03, and shall
require the offender to submit to a DNA specimen collection procedure pursuant
to Ohio R.C. 2901.07.
   (b)   If an offender is being sentenced for a sexually oriented offense or a
child-victim oriented offense that is a misdemeanor committed on or after
January 1, 1997, the judge shall include in the sentence a summary of the
offender’s duties imposed under Ohio R.C. 2950.04, 2950.041, 2950.05, and
2950.06, and the duration of the duties. The judge shall inform the offender,
at the time of sentencing, of those duties and of their duration. If required
under Ohio R.C. 2950.03(A)(2), the judge shall perform the duties specified in
that section or, if required under Ohio R.C. 2950.03(A)(6), the judge shall
perform the duties specified in that division.
(ORC 2929.23)
CHAPTER 668: TREES, WEEDS AND GRASS
Editor’s note:
   This chapter regulates trees on private property. For regulations pertaining
to trees in public rights-of-way, see
Chapter 1026 of the Streets, Utilities and Public Services Code.
668.01   Keeping down weeds; cutting trees.
668.02   Notice to cut weeds, destroy trees; service.
668.03   Fees for service and return.
668.04   Noncompliance; remedy of Village.
668.05   Charges a lien; collection.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   State law provisions - see Ohio R.C. 731.51 et seq.
   Injuring vines, bushes, trees or crops - see GEN. OFF.
642.06
   Trees - see S.U. & P.S.
Ch. 1026
   Destruction or removal of vegetation in parks - see S.U. & P.S.
1062.04
   Vegetation in subdivisions - see P. & Z.
1250.04
   Trees in public rights-of-way - see P. & Z. Pt. 12,
Title 4, Appx. F
§ 668.01 KEEPING DOWN WEEDS; CUTTING TREES.
   (a)   No person owning or having charge of land within the Village shall
fail to keep such property free and clear from all noxious weeds, rank
vegetation and dead and/or dangerous trees, or fail to cut all such weeds and
vegetation on the lots owned or controlled by him or her when such noxious
weeds and rank vegetation exceed 12 inches in height.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(Ord. 31-1978, passed 11-14-1978)
§ 668.02 NOTICE TO CUT WEEDS, DESTROY TREES; SERVICE.
   Upon information that dead and/or dangerous trees exist on lands in the
Village, or that noxious weeds are growing on lands in the Village and are
about to spread or mature seeds, Council shall cause written notice to be
served on the owner or person in charge of such land that such trees or weeds
must be cut and destroyed within five days after service of such notice. If
such owner or person in charge of such land is a nonresident whose address is
known, such notice shall be sent to his or her address by registered mail; if
unknown, it shall be sufficient to publish such notice once in a newspaper of
general circulation in the County.
(Ord. 17-1968, passed 12-10-1968)
§ 668.03 FEES FOR SERVICE AND RETURN.
   The Chief of Police, any police officer or the Clerk of Council may make
service and return of the notice provided for in Section 668.02 and shall be
allowed the same fee as that provided for service and return of a summons in a
civil case before a magistrate.
(Ord. 17-1968, passed 12-10-1968)
§ 668.04 NONCOMPLIANCE; REMEDY OF VILLAGE.
   If the owner or person in charge of land fails to comply with the notice,
Council shall cause the trees or noxious weeds to be cut and destroyed. All
expenses and labor costs incurred shall, when approved by Council, be paid out
of Village funds not otherwise appropriated.
(Ord. 17-1968, passed 12-10-1968)
§ 668.05 CHARGES A LIEN; COLLECTION.
   Council shall make a written return to the County Auditor of its action
under Sections 668.02, 668.03 and 668.04 with a statement of the charges for
its services, the amount paid for labor, the fees of the officers serving such
notices and a proper description of the premises. Such amounts, when allowed,
shall be entered upon the tax duplicate and be a lien upon the lands from and
after the date of the entry and be collected as other taxes and returned to the
Village with the General Fund. Such remedy shall be in addition to the penalty
provided in Section 668.01(b).
(Ord. 17-1968, passed 12-10-1968)
CHAPTER 672: WEAPONS AND EXPLOSIVES
672.01   Definitions.
672.02   Carrying concealed weapons.
672.025   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention.
672.03   Using weapons while intoxicated.
672.04   Improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle.
672.05   License or permit to possess dangerous ordnance.
672.06   Failure to secure dangerous ordnance.
672.07   Unlawful transactions in weapons.
672.08   Improperly furnishing firearms to a minor. (Repealed)
672.085   Underage purchase of a firearm or handgun.
672.09   Pointing and discharging firearms and other weapons.
672.095   Discharge of a firearm on or near prohibited premises.
672.10   Fireworks.
672.11   Endangering aircraft and airport operations.
672.12   Possessing criminal tools.
672.13   Possession of an object indistinguishable from a firearm in a school
safety zone.
672.14   Concealed handgun licenses: possession of a revoked or suspended
license; additional restrictions; posting of signs prohibiting possession.
672.15   Defaced firearms.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar State law
   Prohibiting sales of firearms and explosives in riot areas - see Ohio R.C.
3761.16
   Vehicles transporting explosives - see TRAF.
440.04
   Definitions generally - see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   Reporting gunshot wounds - see GEN. OFF.
606.12
   Posting firearm warning signs - see GEN. OFF.
612.06
   Hunting prohibited - see GEN. OFF.
618.12
   Arson - see GEN. OFF.
642.09
§ 672.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   ACTIVE DUTY. Has the same meaning as defined in 10 U.C.C. § 101.
   (b)   ALIEN REGISTRATION NUMBER. The number issued by the United States
Citizenship and  Immigration Services Agency that is located on the alien’s
permanent resident card and may also be commonly referred to as the “USCIS
number” or the “alien number”.
   (c)   AUTOMATIC FIREARM. Any firearm designed or specially adapted to fire a
succession of cartridges with a single function of the trigger.
   (d)   BALLISTIC KNIFE. A knife with a detachable blade that is propelled by
a spring-operated mechanism.
   (e)   CONCEALED HANDGUN LICENSE or LICENSE TO CARRY A CONCEALED HANDGUN.
      (1)   Means, subject to division (2) of this definition, a license or
temporary emergency license to carry a concealed handgun issued under R.C. §
2923.125 or R.C. § 2923.1213 or a license to carry a concealed handgun issued
by another state with which the Attorney General has entered into a reciprocity
agreement under R.C. § 109.69.
      (2)   A reference in any provision of this Code to a concealed handgun
license issued under R.C. § 2923.125 or a license to carry a concealed handgun
issued under R.C. § 2923.125 means only a license of the type that is specified
in that section. A reference in any provision of this Code to a concealed
handgun license issued under R.C. § 2923.1213, a license to carry a concealed
handgun issued under R.C. § 2923.1213, or a license to carry a concealed
handgun on a temporary emergency basis means only a license of the type that is
specified in R.C. § 2923.1213. A reference in any provision of this Code to a
concealed handgun license issued by another state or a license to carry a
concealed handgun issued by another state means only a license issued by
another state with which the Attorney General has entered into a reciprocity
agreement under R.C. § 109.69.
   (f)   DANGEROUS ORDNANCE.
      (1)   Any of the following, except as provided in division (2) of this
definition:
         A.   Any automatic or sawed-off firearm, zip-gun, or ballistic knife.
         B.   Any explosive device or incendiary device.
         C.   Nitroglycerin, nitrocellulose, nitrostarch, PETN, cyclonite, TNT,
picric acid, and other high explosives; amatol, tritonal, tetrytol, pentolite,
pecretol, cyclotol, and other high explosive compositions; plastic explosives;
dynamite, blasting gelatin, gelatin dynamite, sensitized ammonium nitrate,
liquid-oxygen blasting explosives, blasting powder, and other blasting agents;
and any other explosive substance having sufficient brisance or power to be
particularly suitable for use as a military explosive, or for use in mining,
quarrying, excavating, or demolitions.
         D.   Any firearm, rocket launcher, mortar, artillery piece, grenade,
mine, bomb, torpedo, or similar weapon, designed and manufactured for military
purposes, and the ammunition for that weapon.
         E.   Any firearm muffler or suppressor.
         F.   Any combination of parts that is intended by the owner for use in
converting any firearm or other device into a dangerous ordnance.
      (2)   The term does not include any of the following:
         A.   Any firearm, including a military weapon and the ammunition for
that weapon, and regardless of its actual age, that employs a percussion cap or
other obsolete ignition system, or that is designed and safe for use only with
black powder.
         B.   Any pistol, rifle, or shotgun, designed or suitable for sporting
purposes, including a military weapon as issued or as modified, and the
ammunition for that weapon, unless the firearm is an automatic or sawed-off
firearm.
         C.   Any cannon or other artillery piece that, regardless of its
actual age, is of a type in accepted use prior to 1887, has no mechanical,
hydraulic, pneumatic, or other system for absorbing recoil and returning the
tube into battery without displacing the carriage, and is designed and safe for
use only with black powder.
         D.   Black powder, priming quills, and percussion caps possessed and
lawfully used to fire a cannon of a type defined in division (2)C. of this
definition during displays, celebrations, organized matches or shoots, and
target practice, and smokeless and black powder, primers, and percussion caps
possessed and lawfully used as a propellant or ignition device in small-arms or
small-arms ammunition.
         E.   Dangerous ordnance that is inoperable or inert and cannot readily
be rendered operable or activated, and that is kept as a trophy, souvenir,
curio, or museum piece.
         F.   Any device that is expressly excepted from the definition of a
destructive device pursuant to the Gun Control Act of 1968, 18 U.S.C. § 921(a)
(4), as amended, and regulations issued under that act.
         G.   Any firearm with an overall length of at least 26 inches that is
approved for sale by the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and
Explosives under the “Gun Control Act of 1968”, 82 Stat. 1213, 18 U.S.C. § 921
(a)(3), but that is found by the Bureau not to be regulated under the “National
Firearms Act”, 68A Stat. 725 (1934), 26 U.S.C. § 5845(a).
   (g)   DEADLY WEAPON. Any instrument, device, or thing capable of inflicting
death, and designed or specially adapted for use as a weapon, or possessed,
carried, or used as a weapon.
   (h)   EXPLOSIVE. Any chemical compound, mixture, or device, the primary or
common purpose of which is to function by explosion. The term includes all
materials that have been classified as division 1.1, division 1.2, division
1.3, or division 1.4 explosives by the United States Department of
Transportation in its regulations and includes but is not limited to dynamite,
black powder, pellet powders, initiating explosives, blasting caps, electric
blasting caps, safety fuses, fuse igniters, squibs, cordeau detonant fuses,
instantaneous fuses, and igniter cords and igniters. The term does not include
“fireworks,” as defined in R.C. § 3743.01, or any substance or material
otherwise meeting the definition of explosive set forth in this section that is
manufactured, sold, possessed, transported, stored, or used in any activity
described in R.C. § 3743.80, provided the activity is conducted in accordance
with all applicable laws, rules, and regulations, including but not limited to
the provisions of R.C. § 3743.80 and the rules of the Fire Marshal adopted
pursuant to R.C. § 3737.82.
   (i)   EXPLOSIVE DEVICE. Any device designed or specially adapted to cause
physical harm to persons or property by means of an explosion, and consisting
of an explosive substance or agency and a means to detonate it. The term
includes without limitation any bomb, any explosive demolition device, any
blasting cap or detonator containing an explosive charge, and any pressure
vessel that has been knowingly tampered with or arranged so as to explode.
   (j)   FIREARM.
      (1)   Any deadly weapon capable of expelling or propelling one or more
projectiles by the action of an explosive or combustible propellant. The term
includes an unloaded firearm, and any firearm that is inoperable but that can
readily be rendered operable.
      (2)   When determining whether a firearm is capable of expelling or
propelling one or more projectiles by the action of an explosive or combustible
propellant, the trier of fact may rely upon circumstantial evidence, including
but not limited to the representations and actions of the individual exercising
control over the firearm.
   (k)   HANDGUN. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any firearm that has a short stock and is designed to be held and
fired by the use of a single hand;
      (2)   Any combination of parts from which a firearm of a type described
in division (1) of this definition can be assembled.
   (l)   INCENDIARY DEVICE. Any firebomb, and any device designed or specially
adapted to cause physical harm to persons or property by means of fire, and
consisting of an incendiary substance or agent and a means to ignite it.
   (m)   MISDEMEANOR PUNISHABLE BY IMPRISONMENT FOR A TERM EXCEEDING ONE YEAR.
The phrase does not include any of the following:
      (1)   Any federal or state offense pertaining to antitrust violations,
unfair trade practices, restraints of trade, or other similar offenses relating
to the regulation of business practices;
      (2)   Any misdemeanor offense punishable by a term of imprisonment of two
years or less.
   (n)   SAWED-OFF FIREARM. A shotgun with a barrel less than 18 inches long,
or a rifle with a barrel less than 16 inches long, or a shotgun or rifle less
than 26 inches long overall. “Sawed-off firearm” does not include any firearm
with an overall length of at least 26 inches that is approved for sale by the
Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives under the “Gun
Control Act of 1968”, 82 Stat. 1213, 18 U.S.C. § 921(a)(3), but that is found
by the Bureau not to be regulated under the “National Firearms Act”, 68A Stat.
725 (1934), 26 U.S.C. § 5845(a).
   (o)   SEMI-AUTOMATIC FIREARM. Any firearm designed or specially adapted to
fire a single cartridge and automatically chamber a succeeding cartridge ready
to fire, with a single function of the trigger.
   (p)   VALID CONCEALED HANDGUN LICENSE or VALID LICENSE TO CARRY A CONCEALED
HANDGUN. A concealed handgun license that is currently valid, that is not under
a suspension under R.C. § 2923.128(A)(1), under R.C. § 2923.1213, or under a
suspension provision of the state other than this state in which the license
was issued, and that has not been revoked under R.C. § 2923.128(B)(1), under
R.C. § 2923.1213, or under a revocation provision of the state other than this
state in which the license was issued.
   (q)   ZIP-GUN. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any firearm of crude and extemporized manufacture.
      (2)   Any device, including without limitation a starter’s pistol, not
designed as a firearm, but that is specially adapted for use as a firearm.
      (3)   Any industrial tool, signaling device, or safety device, not
designed as a firearm, but that as designed is capable of use as such, when
possessed, carried, or used as a firearm.
(R.C. § 2923.11)
§ 672.02 CARRYING CONCEALED WEAPONS.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly carry or have, concealed on the person’s
person or concealed ready at hand, any of the following:
      (1)   A deadly weapon other than a handgun;
      (2)   A handgun other than a dangerous ordnance;
      (3)   A dangerous ordnance.
   (b)   No person who has been issued a concealed handgun license shall do any
of the following:
      (1)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and is
carrying a concealed handgun, before or at the time a law enforcement officer
asks if the person is carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly fail to disclose
that the person then is carrying a concealed handgun, provided that it is not a
violation of this division if the person fails to disclose that fact to an
officer during the stop and the person already has notified another officer of
that fact during the same stop;
      (2)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and is
carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly fail to keep the person’s hands in
plain sight at any time after any law enforcement officer begins approaching
the person while stopped and before the law enforcement officer leaves, unless
the failure is pursuant to and in accordance with directions given by a law
enforcement officer;
      (3)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose, if the
person is carrying a concealed handgun, and if the person is approached by any
law enforcement officer while stopped, knowingly remove or attempt to remove
the loaded handgun from the holster, pocket or other place in which the person
is carrying it, knowingly grasp or hold the loaded handgun, or knowingly have
contact with the loaded handgun by touching it with the person’s hands or
fingers at any time after the law enforcement officer begins approaching and
before the law enforcement officer leaves, unless the person removes, attempts
to remove, grasps, holds or has contact with the loaded handgun pursuant to and
in accordance with directions given by the law enforcement officer;
      (4)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and is
carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly disregard or fail to comply with any
lawful order of any law enforcement officer given while the person is stopped,
including but not limited to a specific order to the person to keep the
person’s hands in plain sight.
   (c)   (1)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
         A.   An officer, agent or employee of this or any other state or the
United States, or to a law enforcement officer, who is authorized to carry
concealed weapons or dangerous ordnance or is authorized to carry handguns and
is acting within the scope of the officer’s, agent’s or employee’s duties;
         B.   Any person who is employed in this state, who is authorized to
carry concealed weapons or dangerous ordnance or is authorized to carry
handguns, and who is subject to and in compliance with the requirements of R.C.
§ 109.801, unless the appointing authority of the person has expressly
specified that the exemption provided in this division (c)(1)B. does not apply
to the person.;
         C.   A person’s transportation or storage of a firearm, other than a
firearm described in R.C. § 2923.11(G) to (M), in a motor vehicle for any
lawful purpose if the firearm is not on the actor’s person;
         D.   A person’s storage or possession of a firearm, other than a
firearm described in R.C. § 2923.11(G) to (M), in the actor’s own home for any
lawful purpose.
      (2)   Division (a)(2) of this section does not apply to any person who
has been issued a concealed handgun license that is valid at the time of the
alleged carrying or possession of a handgun or who, at the time of the alleged
carrying or possession of a handgun, is an active duty member of the armed
forces of the United States and is carrying a valid military identification
card and documentation of successful completion of firearms training that meets
or exceeds the training requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), unless
the person knowingly is in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
   (d)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (a)(1) of this
section of carrying or having control of a weapon other than a handgun and
other than a dangerous ordnance, that the actor was not otherwise prohibited by
law from having the weapon, and that any of the following applies:
      (1)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for
defensive purposes, while the actor was engaged in or was going to or from the
actor’s lawful business or occupation, which business or occupation was of a
character or was necessarily carried on in a manner or at a time or place as to
render the actor particularly susceptible to criminal attack, such as would
justify a prudent person in going armed.
      (2)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for
defensive purposes, while the actor was engaged in a lawful activity and had
reasonable cause to fear a criminal attack upon the actor, a member of the
actor’s family, or the actor’s home, such as would justify a prudent person in
going armed.
      (3)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for any
lawful purpose and while in the actor’s own home.
   (e)   (1)   No person who is charged with a violation of this section shall
be required to obtain a concealed handgun license as a condition for the
dismissal of the charge.
      (2)   If a person is convicted of, was convicted of, pleads guilty to, or
has pleaded guilty to a violation of division (b)(1) of this section as it
existed prior to June 13, 2022, the person may file an application under R.C. §
2953.35 requesting the expungement of the record of conviction.
   (f)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of carrying concealed
weapons. Except as otherwise provided in this division or divisions (f)(2), (f)
(6), and (f)(7) of this section, carrying concealed weapons in violation of
division (a) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Except as
otherwise provided in this division or divisions (f)(2), (f)(6), and (f)(7) of
this section, if the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of
this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance
or of any offense of violence, if the weapon involved is a firearm that is
either loaded or for which the offender has ammunition ready at hand, or if the
weapon involved is dangerous ordnance, carrying concealed weapons in violation
of division (a) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law. Except as otherwise provided in divisions (f)(2), (f)(6), and (f)(7)
of this section, if the offense is committed aboard an aircraft, or with
purpose to carry a concealed weapon aboard an aircraft, regardless of the
weapon involved, carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (a) of
this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   A person shall not be arrested for a violation of division (a)(2)
of this section solely because the person does not promptly produce a valid
concealed handgun license. If a person is arrested for a violation of division
(a)(2) of this section and is convicted of or pleads guilty to the violation,
the offender shall be punished as follows:
         A.   The offender shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor if both of
the following apply:
            1.   Within ten days after the arrest, the offender presents a
concealed handgun license, which license was valid at the time of the arrest to
the law enforcement agency that employs the arresting officer.
            2.   At the time of the arrest, the offender was not knowingly in a
place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
         B.   The offender shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined
$500 if all of the following apply:
            1.   The offender previously had been issued a concealed handgun
license, and that license expired within the two years immediately preceding
the arrest.
            2.   Within 45 days after the arrest, the offender presents a
concealed handgun license to the law enforcement agency that employed the
arresting officer, and the offender waives in writing the offender’s right to a
speedy trial on the charge of the violation that is provided in R.C. § 2945.71.
            3.   At the time of the commission of the offense, the offender was
not knowingly in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
         C.   If divisions (f)(2)A. and (f)(2)B. and (f)(6) of this section do
not apply, the offender shall be punished under division (f)(1) or (f)(7) of
this section.
      (3)   Carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (b)(1) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
      (4)   Carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (b)(2) or (b)
(4) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division
(b)(2) or (b)(4) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. In
addition to any other penalty or sanction imposed for a misdemeanor violation
of division (b)(2) or (b)(4) of this section, the offender’s concealed handgun
license shall be suspended pursuant to R.C. § 2923.128(A)(2).
      (5)   Carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (b)(3) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (6)   If a person being arrested for a violation of division (a)(2) of
this section is an active duty m ember of the armed forces of the United States
and is carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of
successful completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training
requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), and if at the time of the
violation the person was not knowingly in a place described in R.C. 2923.126
(B), the officer shall not arrest the person for a violation of that division.
If the person is not able to promptly produce a valid military identification
card and documentation of successful completion of firearms training that meets
or exceeds the training requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1) and if
the person is not in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B), the officer shall
issue a citation and the offender shall be assessed a civil penalty of not more
than $500. The citation shall be automatically dismissed and the civil penalty
shall not be assessed if both of the following apply:
         A.   Within ten days after the issuance of the citation, the offender
presents a valid military identification card and documentation of successful
completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements
described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), which were both valid at the time of the
issuance of the citation to the law enforcement agency that employs the citing
officer.
         B.   At the time of the citation, the offender was not knowingly in a
place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
      (7)   If a person being arrested for a violation of division (a)(2) of
this section is knowingly in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B)(5) and is
not authorized to carry a handgun or have a handgun concealed on the person’s
person or concealed ready at hand under that division, the penalty shall be as
follows:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the person
produces a valid concealed handgun license within ten days after the arrest and
has not previously been convicted or pleaded guilty to a violation of division
(a)(2) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, the person is guilty of a minor misdemeanor;
         B.   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the person has
previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (a)
(2) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree;
         C.   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the person has
previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of division
(a)(2) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree;
         D.   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the person has
previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of
division (a)(2) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, or convicted of or pleaded guilty to any offense of
violence, if the weapon involved is a firearm that is either loaded or for
which the offender has ammunition ready at hand, or if the weapon involved is a
dangerous ordnance, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (g)   If a law enforcement officer stops a person to question the person
regarding a possible violation of this section, for a traffic stop, or for any
other law enforcement purpose, if the person surrenders a firearm to the
officer, either voluntarily or pursuant to a request or demand of the officer,
and if the officer does not charge the person with a violation of this section
or arrest the person for any offense, the person is not otherwise prohibited by
law from possessing the firearm, and the firearm is not contraband, the officer
shall return the firearm to the person at the termination of the stop. If a
court orders a law enforcement officer to return a firearm to a person pursuant
to the requirement set forth in this division, R.C. § 2923.163(B) applies.
   (h)   For purposes of this section, DEADLY WEAPON or WEAPON does not include
any knife, razor, or cutting instrument if the instrument was not used as a
weapon.
(R.C. § 2923.12)
Statutory reference:
   Carrying concealed handguns, licensing through county sheriff, see R.C. §
2923.124 et seq.
   Conveyance or possession of deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance on school
premises, felony offense, see R.C. § 2923.122
   Conveyance, possession, or control of deadly weapon or dangerous ordinance
in a courthouse, felony offense, see R.C. § 2923.123
   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention, felony offense, see see
R.C. § 2923.131
   Possession of firearm in liquor permit premises, felony offense, see see
R.C. § 2923.121
§ 672.025 POSSESSION OF DEADLY WEAPON WHILE UNDER DETENTION.
   (a)   DETENTION and DETENTION FACILITY have the same meanings as in Ohio
R.C. 2921.01.
   (b)   No person under detention at a detention facility shall possess a
deadly weapon.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possession of a deadly
weapon while under detention.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(2) of this section,
possession of a deadly weapon while under detention is a felony to be
prosecuted under State law.
      (2)   If the offender, at the time of the commission of the offense, was
under detention as an alleged or adjudicated delinquent child or unruly child
and if at the time the offender commits the act for which the offender was
under detention it would not be a felony if committed by an adult, possession
of a deadly weapon while under detention is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 2923.131)
Statutory reference:
   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention, felony offenses, see Ohio
R.C. 2923.131
§ 672.03 USING WEAPONS WHILE INTOXICATED.
   (a)   No person, while under the influence of alcohol or any drug of abuse,
shall carry or use any firearm or dangerous ordnance.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of using weapons while
intoxicated, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 2923.15)
§ 672.04 IMPROPERLY HANDLING FIREARMS IN A MOTOR VEHICLE.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly discharge a firearm while in or on a motor
vehicle.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a loaded firearm in a
motor vehicle in such a manner that the firearm is accessible to the operator
or any passenger without leaving the vehicle.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a firearm in a motor
vehicle, unless the person may lawfully possess that firearm under applicable
law of this state or the United States, the firearm is unloaded, and the
firearm is carried in one of the following ways:
      (1)   In a closed package, box or case.
      (2)   In a compartment that can be reached only by leaving the vehicle.
      (3)   In plain sight and secured in a rack or holder made for the
purpose.
      (4)   If the firearm is at least 24 inches in overall length as measured
from the muzzle to the part of the stock furthest from the muzzle and if the
barrel is at least 18 inches in length, either in plain sight with the action
open or the weapon stripped, or, if the firearm is of a type on which the
action will not stay open or which cannot easily be stripped, in plain sight.
   (d)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a loaded handgun in a
motor vehicle if, at the time of that transportation or possession, any of the
following applies:
      (1)   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a
combination of them.
      (2)   The person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine
contains a concentration of alcohol, a listed controlled substance, or a listed
metabolite of a controlled substance prohibited for persons operating a
vehicle, as specified in R.C. § 4511.19(A), regardless of whether the person at
the time of the transportation or possession as described in this division is
the operator of or a passenger in the motor vehicle.
   (e)   No person who has been issued a concealed handgun license or who is an
active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is carrying a
valid military identification card and documentation of successful completion
of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements described
in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), who is the driver or an occupant of a motor vehicle
that is stopped as a result of a traffic stop or a stop for another law
enforcement purpose or is the driver or an occupant of a commercial motor
vehicle that is stopped by an employee of the motor carrier enforcement unit
for the purposes defined in R.C. § 5503.34, and who is transporting or has a
loaded handgun in the motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle in any manner,
shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Before or at the time a law enforcement officer asks if the person
is carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly fail to disclose that the person
then possesses or has a loaded handgun in the motor vehicle, provided that it
is not a violation of this division if the person fails to disclose that fact
to an officer during the stop and the person already has notified another
officer of that fact during the same stop;
      (2)   Before or at the time an employee of the motor carrier enforcement
unit asks if the person is carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly fail to
disclose that the person then possesses or has a loaded handgun in the
commercial motor vehicle, provided that it is not a violation of this division
if the person fails to disclose that fact to an employee of the unit during the
stop and the person already has notified another employee of the unit of that
fact during the same stop;
      (3)   Knowingly fail to remain in the motor vehicle while stopped, or
knowingly fail to keep the person’s hands in plain sight at any time after any
law enforcement officer begins approaching the person while stopped and before
the law enforcement officer leaves, unless the failure is pursuant to and in
accordance with directions given by a law enforcement officer;
      (4)   Knowingly have contact with the loaded handgun by touching it with
the person’s hands or fingers in the motor vehicle at any time after the law
enforcement officer begins approaching and before the law enforcement officer
leaves, unless the person has contact with the loaded handgun pursuant to and
in accordance with directions given by the law enforcement officer.
      (5)   Knowingly disregard or fail to comply with any lawful order of any
law enforcement officer given while the motor vehicle is stopped, including but
not limited to a specific order to the person to keep the person’s hands in
plain sight.
   (f)   (1)   Divisions (a), (b), (c) and (e) of this section do not apply to
any of the following:
         A.   An officer, agent or employee of this or any other state or the
United States, or a law enforcement officer, when authorized to carry or have
loaded or accessible firearms in motor vehicles and acting within the scope of
the officer’s, agent’s or employee’s duties;
         B.   Any person who is employed in this state, who is authorized to
carry or have loaded or accessible firearms in motor vehicles, and who is
subject to and in compliance with the requirements of R.C. § 109.801, unless
the appointing authority of the person has expressly specified that the
exemption provided in this division (f)(1)B. does not apply to the person.
      (2)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to a person if all of
the following circumstances apply:
         A.   The person discharges a firearm from a motor vehicle at a coyote
or groundhog, the discharge is not during the deer gun hunting season as set by
the Chief of the Division of Wildlife of the Department of Natural Resources,
and the discharge at the coyote or groundhog, but for the operation of this
section, is lawful.
         B.   The motor vehicle from which the person discharges the firearm is
on real property that is located in an unincorporated area of a township and
that is either zoned for agriculture or is used for agriculture.
         C.   The person owns the real property described in division (f)(2)B.
of this section, is the spouse or a child of another person who owns that real
property, is a tenant of another person who owns that real property, or is the
spouse or a child of a tenant of another person who owns that real property.
         D.   The person does not discharge the firearm in any of the following
manners:
            1.   While under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or
alcohol and a drug of abuse;
            2.   In the direction of a street, highway or other public or
private property used by the public for vehicular traffic or parking;
            3.   At or into an occupied structure that is a permanent or
temporary habitation;
            4.   In the commission of any violation of law, including but not
limited to a felony that includes, as an essential element, purposely or
knowingly causing or attempting to cause the death of or physical harm to
another and that was committed by discharging a firearm from a motor vehicle.
      (3)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to a person if all of
the following apply:
         A.   The person possesses a valid all-purpose vehicle permit issued
under R.C. § 1533.103 by the Chief of the Division of Wildlife.
         B.   The person discharges a firearm at a wild quadruped or game bird
as defined in R.C. § 1531.01 during the open hunting season for the applicable
wild quadruped or game bird.
         C.   The person discharges a firearm from a stationary all-purpose
vehicle as defined in R.C. § 1531.01 from private or publicly owned lands or
from a motor vehicle that is parked on a road that is owned or administered by
the Division of Wildlife.
         D.   The person does not discharge the firearm in any of the following
manners:
            1.   While under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or
alcohol and a drug of abuse;
            2.   In the direction of a street, a highway or other public or
private property that is used by the public for vehicular traffic or parking;
            3.   At or into an occupied structure that is a permanent or
temporary habitation;
            4.   In the commission of any violation of law, including but not
limited to a felony that includes, as an essential element, purposely or
knowingly causing or attempting to cause the death of or physical harm to
another and that was committed by discharging a firearm from a motor vehicle.
      (4)   Divisions (b) and (c) of this section do not apply to a person if
all of the following circumstances apply:
         A.   At the time of the alleged violation of either of those
divisions, the person is the operator of or a passenger in a motor vehicle.
         B.   The motor vehicle is on real property that is located in an
unincorporated area of a township and that is either zoned for agriculture or
is used for agriculture.
         C.   The person owns the real property described in division (f)(4)B.
of this section, is the spouse or a child of another person who owns that real
property, is a tenant of another person who owns that real property, or is the
spouse or a child of a tenant of another person who owns that real property.
         D.   The person, prior to arriving at the real property described in
division (f)(4)B. of this section, did not transport or possess a firearm in
the motor vehicle in a manner prohibited by division (b) or (c) of this section
while the motor vehicle was being operated on a street, highway or other public
or private property used by the public for vehicular traffic or parking.
      (5)   Divisions (b) and (c) of this section do not apply to a person who
transports or possesses a handgun in a motor vehicle if, at the time of that
transportation or possession, both of the following apply:
         A.   The person transporting or possessing the handgun has been issued
a concealed handgun license that is valid at the time in question or the person
is an active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is
carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of successful
completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements
described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1).
         B.   The person transporting or possessing the handgun is not
knowingly in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
      (6)   Divisions (b) and (c) of this section do not apply to a person if
all of the following apply:
         A.   The person possesses a valid all-purpose vehicle permit issued
under R.C. § 1533.103 by the Chief of the Division of Wildlife.
         B.   The person is on or in an all-purpose vehicle as defined in R.C.
§ 1531.01 or a motor vehicle during the open hunting season for a wild
quadruped or game bird.
         C.   The person is on or in an all-purpose vehicle as defined in R.C.
§ 1531.01 on private or publicly owned lands or on or in a motor vehicle that
is parked on a road that is owned or administered by the Division of Wildlife.
   (g)   (1)   The affirmative defenses authorized in R.C. § 2923.12(D)(1) and
(D)(2) are affirmative defenses to a charge under division (b) or (c) of this
section that involves a firearm other than a handgun.
      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (b) or (c)
of this section of improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle that the
actor transported or had the firearm in the motor vehicle for any lawful
purpose and while the motor vehicle was on the actor’s own property, provided
that this affirmative defense is not available unless the person, immediately
prior to arriving at the actor’s own property, did not transport or possess the
firearm in a motor vehicle in a manner prohibited by division (b) or (c) of
this section while the motor vehicle was being operated on a street, highway or
other public or private property used by the public for vehicular traffic.
   (h)   (1)   No person who is charged with a violation of division (b), (c)
or (d) of this section shall be required to obtain a concealed handgun license
as a condition for the dismissal of the charge.
      (2)   A.   If a person is convicted of, was convicted of, pleads guilty
to, or has pleaded guilty to a violation of division (e) of this section as it
existed prior to September 30, 2011, and the conduct that was the basis of the
violation no longer would be a violation of division (e) of this section on or
after September 30, 2011, or if a person is convicted of, was convicted of,
pleads guilty to, or has pleaded guilty to a violation of division (e)(1) or
(e)(2) of this section as it existed prior to June 13, 2022, the person may
file an application under R.C. § 2953.35 requesting the expungement of the
record of conviction.
         B.   If a person is convicted of, was convicted of, pleads guilty to,
or has pleaded guilty to a violation of division (b) or (c) of this section as
the division existed prior to September 30, 2011 and if the conduct that was
the basis of the violation no longer would be a violation of division (b) or
(c) of this section on or after September 30, 2011 due to the application of
division (f)(5) of this section as it exists on and after September 30, 2011,
the person may file an application under R.C. § 2953.35 requesting the
expungement of the record of conviction.
   (i)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of improperly handling
firearms in a motor vehicle. A violation of division (a) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation of division
(c) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. A violation of
division (d) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law and, if the loaded handgun is concealed on the person's person, it is
also a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation of
division (e)(1) or (e)(2) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second
degree. A violation of division (e)(4) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation of division (e)(3) or (e)
(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division
(e)(3) or (e)(5) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. In
addition to any other penalty or sanction imposed for a misdemeanor violation
of division (e)(3) or (e)(5) of this section, the offender's concealed handgun
license shall be suspended pursuant to R.C. § 2923.128(A)(2). A violation of
division (b) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (j)   If a law enforcement officer stops a motor vehicle for a traffic stop
or any other purpose, if any person in the motor vehicle surrenders a firearm
to the officer, either voluntarily or pursuant to a request or demand of the
officer, and if the officer does not charge the person with a violation of this
section or arrest the person for any offense, the person is not otherwise
prohibited by law from possessing the firearm, and the firearm is not
contraband, the officer shall return the firearm to the person at the
termination of the stop. If a court orders a law enforcement officer to return
a firearm to a person pursuant to the requirement set forth in this division,
R.C. § 2923.163(B) applies.
   (k)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   AGRICULTURE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 519.01.
      (2)   COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4506.25
(A).
      (3)   MOTOR CARRIER ENFORCEMENT UNIT. The Motor Carrier Enforcement Unit
in the Department of Public Safety, Division of State Highway Patrol, that is
created by R.C. § 5503.34.
      (4)   MOTOR VEHICLE, STREET and HIGHWAY. Have the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 4511.01.
      (5)   OCCUPIED STRUCTURE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.01.
      (6)   TENANT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1531.01.
      (7)   UNLOADED.
         A.   With respect to a firearm other than a firearm described in
division D. of this definition, means that no ammunition is in the firearm in
question, no magazine or speed loader containing ammunition is inserted into
the firearm, and one of the following applies:
            1.   There is no ammunition in a magazine or speed loader that is
in the vehicle in question and that may be used with the firearm in question.
            2.   Any magazine or speed loader that contains ammunition and that
may be used with the firearm in question is stored in a compartment within the
vehicle in question that cannot be accessed without leaving the vehicle or is
stored in a container that provides complete and separate enclosure.
         B.   For the purposes of division A.2. of this definition, a CONTAINER
THAT PROVIDES COMPLETE AND SEPARATE ENCLOSURE includes, but is not limited to,
any of the following:
            1.   A package, box, or case with multiple compartments, as long as
the loaded magazine or speed loader and the firearm in question either are in
separate compartments within the package, box, or case, or, if they are in the
same compartment, the magazine or speed loader is contained within a separate
enclosure in that compartment that does not contain the firearm and that closes
using a snap, button, buckle, zipper, hook and loop closing mechanism, or other
fastener that must be opened to access the contents or the firearm is contained
within a separate enclosure of that nature in that compartment that does not
contain the magazine or speed loader;
            2.   A pocket or other enclosure on the person of the person in
question that closes using a snap, button, buckle, zipper, hook and loop
closing mechanism, or other fastener that must be opened to access the
contents.
         C.   For the purposes of divisions A. and B. of this definition,
ammunition held in stripper- clips or in en-bloc clips is not considered
ammunition that is loaded into a magazine or speed loader.
         D.   UNLOADED means, with respect to a firearm employing a percussion
cap, flintlock, or other obsolete ignition system, when the weapon is uncapped
or when the priming charge is removed from the pan.
   (l)   Divisions A. and B. of the definition of "unloaded" in division (k) of
this section do not affect the authority of a person who has been issued a
concealed handgun license that is valid at the time in question to have one or
more magazines or speed loaders containing ammunition anywhere in a vehicle,
without being transported as described in those divisions, as long as no
ammunition is in a firearm, other than a handgun, in the vehicle other than as
permitted under any other provision of this chapter. A person who has been
issued a concealed handgun license that is valid at the time in question may
have one or more magazines or speed loaders containing ammunition anywhere in a
vehicle without further restriction, as long as no ammunition is in a firearm,
other than a handgun, in the vehicle other than as permitted under any
provision of this chapter.
(ORC 2923.16)
§ 672.05 LICENSE OR PERMIT TO POSSESS DANGEROUS ORDNANCE.
   (a)   Upon application to the Sheriff of the County or Safety Director or
Police Chief of the Municipality where the applicant resides or has the
applicant’s principal place of business, and upon payment of the fee specified
in division (b) of this section, a license or temporary permit shall be issued
to qualified applicants to acquire, possess, carry or use a dangerous ordnance
for the following purposes:
      (1)   Contractors, wreckers, quarriers, mine operators and other persons
regularly employing explosives in the course of a legitimate business, with
respect to explosives and explosive devices acquired, possessed, carried or
used in the course of such business.
      (2)   Farmers, with respect to explosives and explosive devices acquired,
possessed, carried or used for agricultural purposes on lands farmed by them.
      (3)   Scientists, engineers, and instructors, with respect to a dangerous
ordnance acquired, possessed, carried or used in the course of bona fide
research or instruction.
      (4)   Financial institutions and armored car company guards, with respect
to automatic firearms lawfully acquired, possessed, carried or used by any such
person while acting within the scope of the person’s duties.
      (5)   In the discretion of the issuing authority, any responsible person,
with respect to a dangerous ordnance lawfully acquired, possessed, carried or
used for a legitimate research, scientific, educational, industrial or other
proper purpose.
   (b)   Application for a license or temporary permit under this section shall
be in writing under oath to the Sheriff of the County or Safety Director or
Police Chief of the Municipality where the applicant resides or has the
applicant’s principal place of business. The application shall be accompanied
by an application fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) when the application is for a
license, and an application fee of five dollars ($5.00) when the application is
for a temporary permit. The fees shall be paid into the general revenue fund of
the County or Municipality. The application shall contain the following
information:
      (1)   The name, age, address, occupation and business address of the
applicant, if the applicant is a natural person, or the name, address, and
principal place of business of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation.
      (2)   A description of the dangerous ordnance for which a permit is
requested.
      (3)   A description of the places where and the manner in which the
dangerous ordnance is to be kept, carried, and used.
      (4)   A statement of the purposes for which the dangerous ordnance is to
be acquired, possessed, carried or used.
      (5)   Such other information as the issuing authority may require in
giving effect to this section.
   (c)   Upon investigation, the issuing authority shall issue a license or
temporary permit only if all of the following apply:
      (1)   The applicant is not otherwise prohibited by law from acquiring,
having, carrying or using a dangerous ordnance.
      (2)   The applicant is 21 years of age or over, if the applicant is a
natural person.
      (3)   It appears that the applicant has sufficient competence to safely
acquire, possess, carry or use the dangerous ordnance, and that proper
precautions will be taken to protect the security of the dangerous ordnance and
ensure the safety of persons and property.
      (4)   It appears that the dangerous ordnance will be lawfully acquired,
possessed, carried and used by the applicant for a legitimate purpose.
   (d)   The license or temporary permit shall identify the person to whom it
is issued, identify the dangerous ordnance involved and state the purposes for
which the license or temporary permit is issued, state the expiration date, if
any, and list such restrictions on the acquisition, possession, carriage, or
use of the dangerous ordnance as the issuing authority considers advisable to
protect the security of the dangerous ordnance and ensure the safety of persons
and property.
   (e)   A temporary permit shall be issued for the casual use of explosives
and explosive devices, and other consumable dangerous ordnance, and shall
expire within 30 days of its issuance. A license shall be issued for the
regular use of consumable dangerous ordnance, or for any non-consumable
dangerous ordnance, which license need not specify an expiration date, but the
issuing authority may specify such expiration date, not earlier than one year
from the date of issuance, as it considers advisable in view of the nature of
the dangerous ordnance and the purposes for which the license is issued.
   (f)   The dangerous ordnance specified in a license or temporary permit may
be obtained by the holder anywhere in the State. Pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2923.18
(F), the holder of a license may use such dangerous ordnance anywhere in the
State. The holder of a temporary permit may use such dangerous ordnance only
within the territorial jurisdiction of the issuing authority.
   (g)   The issuing authority shall forward to the State Fire Marshal a copy
of each license or temporary permit issued pursuant to this section, and a copy
of each record of a transaction in a dangerous ordnance and of each report of a
lost or stolen dangerous ordnance, given to the local law enforcement authority
as required by R.C. § 2923.20(A)(6) and (A)(7) or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance. The State Fire Marshal will keep a permanent file of all
licenses and temporary permits issued pursuant to this section, and of all
records of transactions in, and losses or thefts of a dangerous ordnance
forwarded by local law enforcement authorities pursuant to this section.
(R.C. § 2923.18)
§ 672.06 FAILURE TO SECURE DANGEROUS ORDNANCE.
   (a)   No person, in acquiring, possessing, carrying, or using any dangerous
ordnance, shall negligently fail to take proper precautions:
      (1)   To secure the dangerous ordnance against theft, or against its
acquisition or use by any unauthorized or incompetent person.
      (2)   To insure the safety of persons and property.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to a secure
dangerous ordnance, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(ORC 2923.19)
§ 672.07 UNLAWFUL TRANSACTIONS IN WEAPONS.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Recklessly sell, lend, give or furnish any firearm to any person
prohibited by R.C. § 2923.13 or 2923.15, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, from acquiring or using any firearm, or recklessly sell,
lend, give or furnish any dangerous ordnance to any person prohibited by R.C. §
2923.13, 2923.15 or 2923.17, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
from acquiring or using any dangerous ordnance;
      (2)   Possess any firearm or dangerous ordnance with purpose to dispose
of it in violation of division (a)(1) of this section;
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b) of this section,
knowingly solicit, persuade, encourage, or entice a federally licensed firearms
dealer or private seller to transfer a firearm or ammunition to any person in a
manner prohibited by state or federal law;
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b) of this section, with
an intent to deceive, knowingly provide materially false information to a
federally licensed firearms dealer or private seller;
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b) of this section,
knowingly procure, solicit, persuade, encourage, or entice a person to act in
violation of division (a)(3) or (a)(4) of this section;
      (6)   When transferring any dangerous ordnance to another, negligently
fail to require the transferee to exhibit the identification, license or permit
showing the transferee to be authorized to acquire dangerous ordnance pursuant
to R.C. § 2923.17, or negligently fail to take a complete record of the
transaction and forthwith forward a copy of the record to the Sheriff of the
county or Safety Director or Police Chief of the municipality where the
transaction takes place;
      (7)   Knowingly fail to report to law enforcement authorities forthwith
the loss or theft of any firearm or dangerous ordnance in the person’s
possession and under his or her control.
   (b)   Divisions (a)(3), (a)(4), and (a)(5) of this section do not apply to
any of the following:
      (1)   A law enforcement officer who is acting within the scope of the
officer’s duties;
      (2)   A person who is acting in accordance with directions given by a law
enforcement officer described in division (b)(1) of this section.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful transactions in
weapons. A violation of division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4), or (a)(5) of
this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. A
violation of division (a)(6) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second
degree. A violation of division (a)(7) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
   (d)   As used in this section:
      (1)   AMMUNITION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2305.401.
      (2)   FEDERALLY LICENSED FIREARMS DEALER. Has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 5502.63.
      (3)   MATERIALLY FALSE INFORMATION. Means information regarding the
transfer of a firearm or ammunition that portrays an illegal transaction as
legal or a legal transaction as illegal.
      (4)   PRIVATE SELLER. Means a person who sells, offers for sale, or
transfers a firearm or ammunition and who is not a federally licensed firearms
dealer.
(R.C. § 2923.20)
§ 672.08 IMPROPERLY FURNISHING FIREARMS TO A MINOR. (REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
   Section 672.08 was repealed as part of the 2005 revision of these Codified
Ordinances because a violation of substantially equivalent State law (Ohio R.C.
2923.21) was made a felony by the Ohio General Assembly.
§ 672.085 UNDERAGE PURCHASE OF A FIREARM OR HANDGUN.
   (a)   No person under 18 years of age shall purchase or attempt to purchase
a firearm.
   (b)   No person under 21 years of age shall purchase or attempt to purchase
a handgun; provided, that this division does not apply to the purchase or
attempted purchase of a handgun by a person 18 years of age or older and under
21 years of age, if either of the following applies:
      (1)   The person is a law enforcement officer and has received firearms
training approved by the Ohio Peace Officer Training Council or equivalent
firearms training.
      (2)   The person is an active or reserve member of the armed services of
the United States or the Ohio National Guard, or was honorably discharged from
military service in the active or reserve armed services of the United States
or the Ohio National Guard, and the person has received firearms training from
the armed services or the national guard or equivalent firearms training.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of underage
purchase of a firearm, a delinquent act that would be a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate State law if it could be committed by an adult. Whoever
violates division (b) of this section is guilty of underage purchase of a
handgun, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(ORC 2923.211)
§ 672.09 POINTING AND DISCHARGING FIREARMS AND OTHER WEAPONS.
   (a)   Except as provided in divisions (c) and (d) of this section, no person
shall discharge any air gun, rifle, shotgun, revolver, pistol or other firearm,
or make use of any sling or arrow, within the corporate limits of the
Municipality.
   (b)   No person shall point or aim a firearm at or toward another or
discharge a firearm so pointed or aimed.
   (c)   This section does not extend to cases in which firearms, slings or
arrows are used in the lawful defense of any person or property of any person,
in the discharge of official duty or when otherwise lawfully authorized.
   (d)   This section does not extend to cases in which BB guns and other air
guns, or slings or arrows, are used in the confines of dwellings, provided such
use is under adult supervision and is approved by the Chief of Police.
   (e)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(Ord. 12-2019, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 672.095 DISCHARGE OF A FIREARM ON OR NEAR PROHIBITED PREMISES.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Without permission from the proper officials and subject to
division (b)(1) of this section, discharge a firearm upon or over a cemetery or
within 100 yards of a cemetery;
      (2)   Subject to division (b)(2) of this section, discharge of a firearm
on a lawn, park, pleasure ground, orchard, or other ground appurtenant to a
schoolhouse, church, or inhabited dwelling, the property of another, or a
charitable institution;
      (3)   Discharge a firearm upon or over a public road or highway.
   (b)   (1)   Division (a)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who
while on the person’s own land, discharges a firearm.
      (2)   Division (a)(2) of this section does not apply to a person who owns
any type of property described in that division and who, while on the person’s
own enclosure, discharges a firearm.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of discharge
of a firearm on or near prohibited premises. A violation of division (a)(1) or
(a)(2) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. A violation of
division (a)(3) of this section shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(2) of this section, a
violation of division (a)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
      (2)   If the violation created a substantial risk of physical harm to any
person, caused serious physical harm to property, caused physical harm to any
person, or caused serious physical harm to any person, a violation of division
(a)(3) is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2923.162)
§ 672.10 FIREWORKS.
   (a)   Definitions. As used in this section, unless otherwise provided:
      (1)   1.3G FIREWORKS. Display fireworks consistent with regulations of
the United States Department of Transportation as expressed using the
designation “Division 1.3" in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
      (2)   1.4G FIREWORKS. Consumer fireworks consistent with regulations of
the United States Department of Transportation as expressed using the
designation “Division 1.4" in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
      (3)   BEER and INTOXICATING LIQUOR. Have the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
4301.01.
      (4)   BOOBY TRAP. A small tube that has a string protruding from both
ends that has a friction- sensitive composition and that is ignited by pulling
the ends of the string.
      (5)   CIGARETTE LOAD. A small wooden peg that is coated with a small
quantity of explosive composition and that is ignited in a cigarette.
      (6)   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 3719.01.
      (7)   DISCHARGE SITE. An area immediately surrounding the mortars used to
fire aerial shells.
      (8)   FIREWORKS. Any composition or device prepared for the purpose of
producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or
detonation, except ordinary matches and except as provided in Ohio R.C.
3743.80.
      (9)   FIREWORKS INCIDENT. Any action or omission that occurs at a
fireworks exhibition that results in injury or death, or a substantial risk of
injury or death, to any person, and that involves either of the following:
         A.   The handling or other use, or the results of the handling or
other use, of fireworks or associated equipment or other materials;
         B.   The failure of any person to comply with any applicable
requirement imposed by this section or Ohio R.C. Chapter 3743, or any
applicable rule adopted under this section or Ohio R.C. Chapter 3743.
      (10)   FIREWORKS INCIDENT SITE. A discharge site or other location at a
fireworks exhibition where a fireworks incident occurs, a location where an
injury or death associated with a fireworks incident occurs, or a location
where evidence of a fireworks incident or an injury or death associated with a
fireworks incident is found.
      (11)   FIREWORKS PLANT. All buildings and other structures in which the
manufacturing of fireworks, or the storage or sale of manufactured fireworks by
a manufacturer, takes place.
      (12)   FOUNTAIN DEVICE. Means a specific type of 1.4G firework that meets
all of the following criteria:
         A.   It is nonaerial and nonreport producing.
         B.   It is recognized and manufactured in accordance with sections
3.1.1 and 3.5 of APA standard 87-1 (2001 edition).
         C.   It is a ground-based or hand-held sparkler with one or more tubes
containing a nonexplosive pyrotechnic mixture that produces a shower of sparks
upon ignition, with or without additional effects that may include a colored
flame, audible crackling effect, audible whistle effect, or smoke.
         D.   It contains not more than 75 grams of the nonexplosive
pyrotechnic mixture in any individual tube and not more than 500 grams or less
for multiple tubes.
      (13)   HIGHWAY. Any public street, road, alley, way, lane or other public
thoroughfare.
      (14)   INTOXICATING LIQUOR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4301.01.
      (15)   LICENSED BUILDING. A building on the licensed premises of a
licensed manufacturer or wholesaler of fireworks that is approved for occupancy
by the building official having jurisdiction.
      (16)   LICENSED EXHIBITOR OF FIREWORKS or LICENSED EXHIBITOR. A person
licensed pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.50 through 3743.55.
      (17)   LICENSED FOUNTAIN DEVICE RETAILER or LICENSED RETAILER. Means a
person licensed pursuant to R.C. § 3743.26.
      (18)   LICENSED MANUFACTURER OF FIREWORKS or LICENSED MANUFACTURER. A
person licensed pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.02 through 3743.08.
      (19)   LICENSED PREMISES. The real estate upon which a licensed
manufacturer or wholesaler of fireworks conducts business.
      (20)   LICENSED WHOLESALER OF FIREWORKS or LICENSED WHOLESALER. A person
licensed pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.15 through 3743.21.
      (21)   LIST OF LICENSED EXHIBITORS. The list required by R.C. § 3743.51
(C).
      (22)   LIST OF LICENSED MANUFACTURERS. The list required by R.C. §
3743.03(C).
      (23)   LIST OF LICENSED WHOLESALERS. The list required by R.C. § 3743.16
(C).
      (24)   MANUFACTURING OF FIREWORKS. The making of fireworks from raw
materials, none of which in and of themselves constitute fireworks, or the
processing of fireworks.
      (25)   NAVIGABLE WATERS. Any body of water susceptible of being used in
its ordinary condition as a highway of commerce over which trade and travel is
or may be conducted in the customary modes, but does not include a body of
water that is not capable of navigation by barges, tugboats, and other large
vessels.
      (26)   NOVELTIES and TRICK NOISEMAKERS.
         A.   Devices that produce a small report intended to surprise the
user, including but not limited to booby traps, cigarette loads, party poppers,
and snappers;
         B.   Snakes or glow worms;
         C.   Smoke devices;
         D.   Trick matches.
      (27)   PARTY POPPER. A small plastic or paper item that contains not more
than 16 milligrams of friction-sensitive explosive composition that is ignited
by pulling a string protruding from the item, and from which paper streamers
are expelled when the item is ignited.
      (28)   PROCESSING OF FIREWORKS. The making of fireworks from materials
all or part of which in and of themselves constitute fireworks, but does not
include the mere packaging or repackaging of fireworks.
      (29)   RAILROAD. Any railway or railroad that carries freight or
passengers for hire, but does not include auxiliary tracks, spurs, and sidings
installed and primarily used in serving a mine, quarry or plant.
      (30)   RETAIL SALE or SELL AT RETAIL. A sale of fireworks to a purchaser
who intends to use the fireworks and not to resell them.
      (31)   SMOKE DEVICE. A tube or sphere that contains pyrotechnic
composition that, upon ignition, produces white or colored smoke as the primary
effect.
      (32)   SNAKE or GLOW WORM. A device that consists of a pressed pellet of
pyrotechnic composition that produces a large snake-like ash upon burning,
which ash expands in length as the pellet burns.
      (33)   SNAPPER. A small paper- wrapped item that contains a minute
quantity of explosive composition coated on small bits of sand and that, when
dropped, implodes.
      (34)   STORAGE LOCATION. A single parcel or contiguous parcels of real
estate approved by the Ohio Fire Marshal pursuant to R.C. § 3743.04(I) or
3743.17(F) that are separate from a licensed premises containing a retail
showroom, and which parcel or parcels a licensed manufacturer or wholesaler of
fireworks may use only for the distribution, possession and storage of
fireworks in accordance with this chapter.
      (35)   TRICK MATCH. A kitchen or book match that is coated with a small
quantity of explosive composition and that, upon ignition, produces a small
report or a shower of sparks.
      (36)   WHOLESALE SALE or SELL AT WHOLESALE. A sale of fireworks to a
purchaser who intends to resell the fireworks so purchased.
      (37)   WIRE SPARKLER. A sparkler consisting of a wire or stick coated
with a nonexplosive pyrotechnic mixture that produces a shower of sparks upon
ignition and that contains no more than 100 grams of this mixture.
   (b)   Manufacturing.
      (1)   No licensed manufacturer of fireworks shall knowingly fail to
comply with the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant to Ohio R.C.
3743.05 or the requirements of Ohio R.C. 3743.06.
      (2)   No licensed manufacturer of fireworks shall fail to maintain
complete inventory, wholesale sale and retail records as required by Ohio R.C.
3743.07, or to permit an inspection of these records or the premises of a
fireworks plant or the wholesaler pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.08.
      (3)   No licensed manufacturer of fireworks shall fail to comply with an
order of the State Fire Marshal issued pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.08(B)(1)
within the specified period of time.
      (4)   No licensed manufacturer of fireworks shall fail to comply with an
order of the State Fire Marshal issued pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.08(B)(2)
until the nonconformities are eliminated, corrected or otherwise remedied or
the 72 hour period specified in those divisions has expired, whichever occurs
first.
      (5)   No person shall smoke or shall carry a pipe, cigarette, or cigar,
or a match, lighter, other flame-producing item, or open flame on, or shall
carry a concealed source of ignition into, the premises of a fireworks plant,
except as smoking is authorized in specified lunchrooms or restrooms by a
manufacturer pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.06(C).
      (6)   No person shall have possession or control of, or be under the
influence of, any intoxicating liquor, beer, or controlled substance while on
the premises of a fireworks plant.
   (c)   Wholesaling.
      (1)   No licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall knowingly fail to comply
with the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.18
or the requirements of Ohio R.C. 3743.19.
      (2)   No licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall fail to maintain complete
inventory, wholesale sale and retail records as required by Ohio R.C. 3743.20,
or to permit an inspection of these records or the premises of a fireworks
plant or the wholesaler pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.21.
      (3)   No licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall fail to comply with an
order of the State Fire Marshal issued pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.21(B)(1)
within the specified period of time.
      (4)   No licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall fail to comply with an
order of the State Fire Marshal issued pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.21(B)(2)
until the nonconformities are eliminated, corrected or otherwise remedied or
the 72 hour period specified in those divisions has expired, whichever occurs
first.
      (5)   No person shall smoke or shall carry a pipe, cigarette, or cigar,
or a match, lighter, other flame-producing item, or open flame on, or shall
carry a concealed source of ignition into, the premises of a wholesaler of
fireworks, except as smoking is authorized in specified lunchrooms or restrooms
by a wholesaler pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.19(D).
      (6)   No person shall have possession or control of, or be under the
influence of, any intoxicating liquor, beer, or controlled substance while on
the premises of a wholesaler of fireworks.
   (d)   Purchasing and transporting.
      (1)   No person who resides in another State and purchases fireworks in
this State shall obtain possession of the fireworks in this State unless the
person complies with Ohio R.C. 3743.44.
      (2)   No person who resides in another State and who purchases fireworks
in this State shall obtain possession of fireworks in this State other than
from a licensed manufacturer or wholesaler, or fail, when transporting 1.3G
fireworks, to transport them directly out of this State within 72 hours after
the time of their purchase. No such person shall give or sell to any other
person in this State fireworks that the person has acquired in this State.
      (3)   No person who resides in this State and purchases fireworks in this
State shall obtain possession of the fireworks in this State unless the person
complies with Ohio R.C. 3743.45.
      (4)   No person who resides in this State and who purchases fireworks in
this State under Ohio R.C. 3743.45 shall obtain possession of the fireworks in
this State other than from a licensed manufacturer or licensed wholesaler, or
fail, when transporting the fireworks, to transport them directly out of this
State within 48 hours after the time of their purchase. No such person shall
give or sell to any other person in this State fireworks that the person has
acquired in this State.
   (e)   Prohibited activities by exhibitors.
      (1)   An exhibitor of fireworks licensed under Ohio R.C. 3743.50 through
3743.55 who wishes to conduct a public fireworks exhibition shall apply for
approval to conduct the exhibition to the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer
and to the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the
designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer,
having jurisdiction over the premises.
      (2)   The approval required by division (e)(1) of this section shall be
evidenced by the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and by the Police Chief
or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police
Chief or similar chief law enforcement officer, signing a permit for the
exhibition. Any exhibitor of fireworks who wishes to conduct a public fireworks
exhibition may obtain a copy of the form from the State Fire Marshal or, if
available, from the Fire Chief, a fire prevention officer, the Police Chief or
other similar chief law enforcement officer, or a designee of the Police Chief
or other similar chief law enforcement officer.
      (3)   Before a permit is signed and issued to a licensed exhibitor of
fireworks, the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer, in consultation with the
Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the designee of
the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, shall inspect
the premises on which the exhibition will take place and shall determine that,
in fact, the applicant for the permit is a licensed exhibitor of fireworks.
Each applicant shall show his or her license as an exhibitor of fireworks to
the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer.
      (4)   The Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and the Police Chief or
other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police
Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, shall give approval to
conduct a public fireworks exhibition only if satisfied, based on the
inspection, that the premises on which the exhibition will be conducted allow
the exhibitor to comply with the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.53(B) and (E) and that the applicant is, in fact, a
licensed exhibitor of fireworks. The Fire Chief or fire prevention officer, in
consultation with the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement
officer or with the designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief law
enforcement officer, may inspect the premises immediately prior to the
exhibition to determine if the exhibitor has complied with the rules, and may
revoke a permit for noncompliance with the rules.
      (5)   If the Council has prescribed a fee for the issuance of a permit
for a public fireworks exhibition, the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer
and Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or their
designee, shall not issue a permit until the exhibitor pays the requisite fee.
      (6)   Each exhibitor shall provide an indemnity bond in the amount of at
least one million dollars with surety satisfactory to the Fire Chief or fire
prevention officer and to the Police Chief or other similar chief law
enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief
law enforcement officer, conditioned for the payment of all final judgments
that may be rendered against the exhibitor on account of injury, death, or loss
to person or property emanating from the fireworks exhibitor, or proof of
insurance coverage of at least one million dollars for liability arising from
injury, death, or loss of persons or property emanating from the fireworks
exhibition. The Council may require the exhibitor to provide an indemnity bond
or proof of insurance coverage in amounts greater than those required by this
division. The Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, or their designee, shall not issue a
permit until the exhibitor provides the bond or proof of the insurance coverage
required by this division or by the Council.
      (7)   Each permit for a fireworks exhibition issued by the Fire Chief or
fire prevention officer and by the Police Chief or other similar chief law
enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief
law enforcement officer, shall contain a distinct number, designate the
municipality, and identify the certified fire safety inspector, Fire Chief, or
fire prevention officer who will be present before, during and after the
exhibition, where appropriate. A copy of each permit issued shall be forwarded
by the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and by the Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, or designee of the Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, issuing it to the State Fire Marshal. A
permit is not transferable or assignable.
      (8)   The Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, or designee of the Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, shall keep a record of issued permits
for fireworks exhibitions. In this list, the Fire Chief, fire prevention
officer, Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or
designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer,
shall list the name of the exhibitor, his or her license number, the premises
on which the exhibition will be conducted, the date and time of the exhibition,
and the number and political subdivision designation of the permit issued to
the exhibitor for the exhibition.
      (9)   The Council shall require that a certified fire safety inspector,
Fire Chief or fire prevention officer be present before, during and after the
exhibition, and shall require the certified fire safety inspector, Fire Chief
or fire prevention officer to inspect the premises where the exhibition is to
take place and determine whether the exhibition is in compliance with this
section and Ohio R.C. Chapter 3743.
      (10)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall fail to comply with the
applicable requirements of the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant
to Ohio R.C. 3743.53(B) and (E) or to comply with Ohio R.C. 3743.53(C) and (D).
      (11)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall conduct a fireworks
exhibition unless a permit has been secured for the exhibition pursuant to Ohio
R.C. 3743.54 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or if a permit
so secured is revoked by a Fire Chief or fire prevention officer, in
consultation with a Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement
officer, or with a designee of a Police Chief or other similar chief law
enforcement officer, pursuant to those sections.
      (12)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall acquire fireworks for use
at a fireworks exhibition other than in accordance with Ohio R.C. 3743.54 and
3743.55, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (13)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks or other person associated with
the conduct of a fireworks exhibition shall have possession or control of, or
be under the influence of, any intoxicating liquor, beer, or controlled
substance while on the premises on which the exhibition is being conducted.
      (14)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall permit an employee to
assist the licensed exhibitor in conducting fireworks exhibitions unless the
employee is registered with the State Fire Marshal under Ohio R.C. 3743.56.
   (f)   Possession, sale, discharge and advertising; falsification.
      (1)   No person shall possess fireworks in this Municipality or shall
possess for sale or sell fireworks in this Municipality, except a licensed
manufacturer of fireworks as authorized by Ohio R.C. 3743.02 through 3743.08, a
licensed wholesaler of fireworks as authorized by Ohio R.C. 3743.15 through
3743.21, a shipping permit holder as authorized by Ohio R.C. 3743.40, an out-
of-State resident as authorized by Ohio R.C. 3743.44, a resident of this State
as authorized by Ohio R.C. 3743.45, or a licensed exhibitor of fireworks as
authorized by Ohio R.C. 3743.50 through 3743.55, or as authorized by any
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of these statutes,
and except as provided in Ohio R.C. 3743.80 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
      (2)   Except as provided in Ohio R.C. 3743.80 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, and except for licensed exhibitors of fireworks
authorized to conduct a fireworks exhibition pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.50
through 3743.55 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, no person
shall discharge, ignite, or explode any fireworks in this Municipality.
      (3)   No person shall use in a theater or public hall what is technically
known as fireworks showers, or a mixture containing potassium chlorate and
sulphur.
      (4)   No person shall sell fireworks of any kind to a person under 18
years of age. No person under 18 years of age shall enter a fireworks sales
showroom unless that person is accompanied by a parent, legal guardian, or
other responsible adult. No person under 18 years of age shall touch or possess
fireworks on a licensed premises without the consent of the licensee. A
licensee may eject any person from a licensed premises that is in any way
disruptive to the safe operation of the premises.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 3743.44, no person, other
than a licensed manufacturer, licensed wholesaler, licensed exhibitor, or
shipping permit holder shall possess 1.3G fireworks in this Municipality.
   (g)   Transporting and shipping.
      (1)   No person shall transport fireworks in this Municipality except in
accordance with the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant to Ohio
R.C. 3743.58.
      (2)   As used in this division, FIREWORKS includes only 1.3G and 1.4G
fireworks. No person shall ship fireworks into this Municipality by mail,
parcel post, or common carrier unless the person possesses a valid shipping
permit issued under Ohio R.C. 3743.40, and the fireworks are shipped directly
to the holder of a license issued under Ohio R.C. 3743.03, 3743.16 or 3743.51.
      (3)   No person shall ship fireworks within this Municipality by mail,
parcel post, or common carrier unless the fireworks are shipped directly to the
holder of a license issued under Ohio R.C. 3743.01, 3743.16 or 3743.51.
   (h)   Exceptions. This section does not prohibit or apply to the following:
      (1)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage, or use
in emergency situations of pyrotechnic signaling devices and distress signals
for marine, aviation, or highway use;
      (2)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use
of fusees, torpedoes, or other signals necessary for the safe operation of
railroads;
      (3)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use
of blank cartridges in connection with theaters or shows, or in connection with
athletics as signals for ceremonial purposes;
      (4)   The manufacture for, the transportation, storage, possession or use
by, or the sale to the armed forces of the United States and the militia of
this state, as recognized by the Adjutant General of Ohio, of pyrotechnic
devices;
      (5)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use
of toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices in which paper or plastic
caps containing 0.25 grains or less of explosive material are used, provided
that they are constructed so that a hand cannot come into contact with a cap
when it is in place for explosion, or apply to the manufacture, sale,
possession, transportation, storage or use of those caps;
      (6)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use
of novelties and trick noisemakers, auto burglar alarms, or model rockets and
model rocket motors designed, sold, and used for the purpose of propelling
recoverable aero models;
      (7)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use
of wire sparklers.
      (8)   The conduct of radio-controlled special effect exhibitions that use
an explosive black powder charge of not more than one-quarter pound per charge,
and that are not connected in any manner to propellant charges; provided, that
the exhibition complies with all of the following:
         A.   No explosive aerial display is conducted in the exhibition;
         B.   The exhibition is separated from spectators by not less than 200
feet;
         C.   The person conducting the exhibition complies with regulations of
the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms of the United States Department of
the Treasury and the United States Department of Transportation with respect to
the storage and transport of the explosive black powder used in the exhibition.
   (i)   Forfeiture and disposal. Fireworks manufactured, sold, possessed,
transported, or used in violation of this section shall be forfeited by the
offender. The Fire Marshal’s office or certified fire safety inspector’s office
shall dispose of seized fireworks pursuant to the procedures specified in Ohio
R.C. 2981.11 to 2981.13 for the disposal of forfeited property by law
enforcement agencies, and the Fire Marshal or that office is not liable for
claims for the loss of or damages to the seized fireworks.
   (j)   Penalty.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (j)(2) or (j)(3) of this
section, whoever violates any provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a violation of Ohio R.C. 3743.60(I) or Ohio R.C. 3743.61(I), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, a violation of division (b)(5) of
this section or division (c)(5) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate State law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (e)(10) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition to any other penalties that may be
imposed on a licensed exhibitor of fireworks under this division and unless the
third sentence of this division applies, the person's license as an exhibitor
of fireworks or as an assistant exhibitor of fireworks shall be suspended. If
the violation of division (e)(10) of this section results in serious physical
harm to persons or serious physical harm to property, the person's license as
an exhibitor of fireworks or as an assistant exhibitor of fireworks shall be
revoked.
(Ord. 14-2022, passed 6-28-2022)
§ 672.11 ENDANGERING AIRCRAFT AND AIRPORT OPERATIONS.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   AIR GUN. A hand pistol or rifle that propels its projectile by
means of releasing compressed air, carbon dioxide, or other gas.
      (2)   AIRPORT OPERATIONAL SURFACE. Any surface of land or water that is
developed, posted, or marked so as to give an observer reasonable notice that
the surface is designed and developed for the purpose of storing, parking,
taxiing, or operating aircraft, or any surface of land or water that is
actually being used for any of those purposes.
      (3)   FIREARM. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2923.11.
      (4)   SPRING-OPERATED GUN. A hand pistol or rifle that propels a
projectile not less than four or more than five millimeters in diameter by
means of a spring.
   (b)   No person shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly throw an object at, or drop an object upon, any moving
aircraft.
      (2)   Knowingly shoot with a bow and arrow, or knowingly discharge a
firearm, air gun, or spring- operated gun, at or toward any aircraft.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly or recklessly shoot with a bow and arrow, or
shall knowingly or recklessly discharge a firearm, air gun, or spring- operated
gun, upon or over any airport operational surface. This division does not apply
to the following:
      (1)   An officer, agent, or employee of this or any other State or of the
United States, or a law enforcement officer, authorized to discharge firearms
and acting within the scope of his or her duties.
      (2)   A person who, with the consent of the owner or operator of the
airport operational surface or the authorized agent of either, is lawfully
engaged in any hunting or sporting activity or is otherwise lawfully
discharging a firearm.
   (d)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of endangering
aircraft, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation creates any risk
of physical harm to any person, or if the aircraft that is the subject of the
violation is occupied, endangering aircraft is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate State law.
   (e)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of endangering
airport operations, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the violation
creates a risk of physical harm to any person or substantial risk of serious
harm to any person, endangering airport operations is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate State law. In addition to any other penalty or sanction
imposed for the violation, the hunting license or permit of a person who
violates division (c) of this section while hunting shall be suspended or
revoked pursuant to Ohio R.C. 1533.68.
(ORC 2909.08(A) - (E))
§ 672.12 POSSESSING CRIMINAL TOOLS.
   (a)   No person shall possess or have under his or her control any
substance, device, instrument, or article, with purpose to use it criminally.
   (b)   Each of the following constitutes prima facie evidence of criminal
purpose:
      (1)   Possession or control of any dangerous ordnance, or the materials
or parts for making a dangerous ordnance, in the absence of circumstances
indicating the dangerous ordnance, materials or parts are intended for a
legitimate use.
      (2)   Possession or control of any substance, device, instrument, or
article designed or specially adapted for criminal use.
      (3)   Possession or control of any substance, device, instrument, or
article commonly used for criminal purposes, under circumstances indicating the
item is intended for criminal use.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing criminal tools.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, possessing criminal tools is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the circumstances indicate that the
substance, device, instrument, or article involved in the offense was intended
for use in the commission of a felony, possessing criminal tools is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate State law.
(ORC 2923.24)
§ 672.13 POSSESSION OF AN OBJECT INDISTINGUISHABLE FROM A FIREARM IN A SCHOOL
SAFETY ZONE.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly possess an object in a school safety zone if
both of the following apply:
      (1)   The object is indistinguishable from a firearm, whether or not the
object is capable of being fired.
      (2)   The person indicates that the person possesses the object and that
it is a firearm, or the person knowingly displays or brandishes the object and
indicates that it is a firearm.
   (b)   (1)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
         A.   An officer, agent, or employee of this or any other state or the
United States who is authorized to carry deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance
and is acting within the scope of the officer's, agent's, or employee's duties;
         B.   A law enforcement officer who is authorized to carry deadly
weapons or dangerous ordnance;
         C.   A security officer employed by a board of education or governing
body of a school during the time that the security officer is on duty pursuant
to that contract of employment;
         D.   1.   Any person not described in divisions (b)(1)A. to (b)(1)C.
of this section who has written authorization from the board of education or
governing body of a school to convey deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance into
a school safety zone or to possess a deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance in a
school safety zone and who conveys or possesses the deadly weapon or dangerous
ordnance in accordance with that authorization, provided both of the following
apply:
               a.   Either the person has successfully completed the
curriculum, instruction, and training established under R.C. § 5502.703, or the
person has received a certificate of having satisfactorily completed an
approved basic peace officer training program or is a law enforcement officer;
               b.   The board or governing body has notified the public, by
whatever means the affected school regularly communicates with the public, that
the board or governing body has authorized one or more persons to go armed
within a school operated by the board or governing authority.
            2.   A district board or school governing body that authorizes a
person under division (b)(1)D. of this section shall require that person to
submit to an annual criminal records check conducted in the same manner as R.C.
§ 3319.39 or R.C. § 3319.391.
         E.   Any person who is employed in this state, who is authorized to
carry deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance, and who is subject to and in
compliance with the requirements of R.C. § 109.801, unless the appointing
authority of the person has expressly specified that the exemption provided in
division (b)(1)E. of this section does not apply to the person.
      (2)   This section does not apply to premises upon which home schooling
is conducted. This section also does not apply to a school administrator,
teacher or employee who possesses an object that is indistinguishable from a
firearm for legitimate school purposes during the course of employment, a
student who uses an object that is indistinguishable from a firearm under the
direction of a school administrator, teacher or employee, or any other person
who, with the express prior approval of a school administrator, possesses an
object that is indistinguishable from a firearm for a legitimate purpose,
including the use of the object in a ceremonial activity, a play, re-enactment
or other dramatic presentation, school safety training, or a ROTC activity or
another similar use of the object.
      (3)   This section does not apply to a person who conveys or attempts to
convey a handgun into, or possesses a handgun in, a school safety zone if, at
the time of that conveyance, attempted conveyance, or possession of the
handgun, all of the following apply:
         A.   The person does not enter into a school building or onto school
premises and is not at a school activity.
         B.   The person has been issued a concealed handgun license that is
valid at the time of the conveyance, attempted conveyance, or possession or the
person is an active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is
carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of successful
completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements
described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1).
         C.   The person is in the school safety zone in accordance with 18
U.S.C. 922(q)(2)(B).
         D.   The person is not knowingly in a place described in R.C. §
2923.126(B)(1) or (B)(3) to (B)(8).
      (4)   This section does not apply to a person who conveys or attempts to
convey a handgun into, or possesses a handgun in, a school safety zone if at
the time of that conveyance, attempted conveyance, or possession of the handgun
all of the following apply:
         A.   The person has been issued a concealed handgun license that is
valid at the time of the conveyance, attempted conveyance, or possession or the
person is an active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is
carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of successful
completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements
described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1).
         B.   The person leaves the handgun in a motor vehicle.
         C.   The handgun does not leave the motor vehicle.
         D.   If the person exits the motor vehicle, the person locks the motor
vehicle.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal possession of an
object indistinguishable from a firearm in a school safety zone. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, illegal possession of an object
indistinguishable from a firearm in a school safety zone is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation
of this section, illegal possession of an object indistinguishable from a
firearm in a school safety zone is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (d)   (1)   In addition to any other penalty imposed upon a person who is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of this section, and subject to
division (d)(2) of this section, if the offender has not attained 19 years of
age, regardless of whether the offender is attending or is enrolled in a school
operated by a board of education or for which the Director of Education and
Workforce prescribes minimum standards under R.C. § 3301.07, the court shall
impose upon the offender a class four suspension of the offender’s probationary
driver’s license, restricted license, driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit or probationary commercial driver’s
license that then is in effect from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4)
and shall deny the offender the issuance of any permit or license of that type
during the period of the suspension. If the offender is not a resident of this
state, the court shall impose a class four suspension of the nonresident
operating privilege of the offender from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02
(A)(4).
      (2)   If the offender shows good cause why the court should not suspend
one of the types of licenses, permits or privileges specified in division (d)
(1) of this section or deny the issuance of one of the temporary instruction
permits specified in division (d)(1) of this section, the court in its
discretion may choose not to impose the suspension, revocation or denial
required in division (d)(1) of this section, but the court, in its discretion,
instead may require the offender to perform community service for a number of
hours determined by the court.
   (e)   As used in this section, OBJECT THAT IS INDISTINGUISHABLE FROM A
FIREARM means an object made, constructed or altered so that, to a reasonable
person without specialized training in firearms, the object appears to be a
firearm.
(R.C. § 2923.122(C) - (G))
Statutory reference:
   Conveyance or possession of deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance in a school
safety zone, felony offense, see Ohio R.C. 2923.122(A), (B)
§ 672.14 CONCEALED HANDGUN LICENSES: POSSESSION OF A REVOKED OR SUSPENDED
LICENSE; ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS; POSTING OF SIGNS PROHIBITING POSSESSION.
   (a)   Possession of a revoked or suspended concealed handgun license.
      (1)   No person, except in the performance of official duties, shall
possess a concealed handgun license that was issued and that has been revoked
or suspended.
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (a) is guilty of possessing a
revoked or suspended concealed handgun license, a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(R.C. § 2923.1211(B), (C))
   (b)   Additional restrictions. Pursuant to R.C. § 2923.126:
      (1)   A concealed handgun license that is issued under R.C. § 2923.125
shall expire five years after the date of issuance. A licensee who has been
issued a license under that section shall be granted a grace period of 30 days
after the licensee's license expires during which the licensee's license
remains valid. Except as provided in divisions (b)(2) and (b)(3) of this
section, a licensee who has been issued a concealed handgun license under R.C.
§ 2923.125 or 2923.1213 may carry a concealed handgun anywhere in this state if
the license is valid when the licensee is in actual possession of a concealed
handgun. The licensee shall give notice of any change in the licensee's
residence address to the sheriff who issued the license within 45 days after
that change.
      (2)   A valid concealed handgun license does not authorize the licensee
to carry a concealed handgun in any manner prohibited under R.C. § 2923.12(B)
or in any manner prohibited under R.C. § 2923.16. A valid license does not
authorize the licensee to carry a concealed handgun into any of the following
places:
         A.   A police station, sheriff’s office, or state highway patrol
station, premises controlled by the bureau of criminal identification and
investigation; a state correctional institution, jail, workhouse, or other
detention facility; any area of an airport passenger terminal that is beyond a
passenger or property screening checkpoint or to which access is restricted
through security measures by the airport authority or a public agency; or an
institution that is maintained, operated, managed, and governed pursuant to
R.C. § 5119.14(A) or R.C. § 5123.03(A)(1);
         B.   A school safety zone if the licensee’s carrying the concealed
handgun is in violation of R.C. § 2923.122;
         C.   A courthouse or another building or structure in which a
courtroom is located if the licensee’s carrying the concealed handgun is in
violation of R.C. § 2923.123;
         D.   Any premises or open air arena for which a D permit has been
issued under R.C. Chapter 4303, if the licensee’s carrying the concealed
handgun is in violation of R.C. § 2923.121;
         E.   Any premises owned or leased by any public or private college,
university or other institution of higher education, unless the handgun is in a
locked motor vehicle or the licensee is in the immediate process of placing the
handgun in a locked motor vehicle or unless the licensee is carrying the
concealed handgun pursuant to a written policy, rule, or other authorization
that is adopted by the institution’s board of trustees or other governing body
and that authorizes specific individuals or classes of individuals to carry a
concealed handgun on the premises;
         F.   Any church, synagogue, mosque or other place of worship, unless
the church, synagogue, mosque or other place of worship posts or permits
otherwise;
         G.   Any building that is a government facility of this state or a
political subdivision of this state and that is not a building that is used
primarily as a shelter, restroom, parking facility for motor vehicles, or rest
facility and is not a courthouse or other building or structure in which a
courtroom is located that is subject to division (b)(2)C. of this section;
         H.   A place in which federal law prohibits the carrying of handguns.
      (3)   A.   Nothing in this division (b) shall negate or restrict a rule,
policy or practice of a private employer that is not a private college,
university, or other institution of higher education concerning or prohibiting
the presence of firearms on the private employer’s premises or property,
including motor vehicles owned by the private employer. Nothing in this
division (b) shall require a private employer of that nature to adopt a rule,
policy or practice concerning or prohibiting the presence of firearms on the
private employer’s premises or property, including motor vehicles owned by the
private employer.
         B.   1.   A private employer shall be immune from liability in a civil
action for any injury, death or loss to person or property that allegedly was
caused by or related to a licensee bringing a handgun onto the premises or
property of the private employer, including motor vehicles owned by the private
employer, unless the private employer acted with malicious purpose. A private
employer is immune from liability in a civil action for any injury, death or
loss to person or property that allegedly was caused by or related to the
private employer’s decision to permit a licensee to bring, or prohibit a
licensee from bringing, a handgun onto the premises or property of the private
employer.
            2.   A political subdivision shall be immune from liability in a
civil action, to the extent and in the manner provided in R.C. Chapter 2744,
for any injury, death or loss to person or property that allegedly was caused
by or related to a licensee bringing a handgun onto any premises or property
owned, leased or otherwise under the control of the political subdivision. As
used in this division, POLITICAL SUBDIVISION has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2744.01.
            3.   An institution of higher education shall be immune from
liability in a civil action for any injury, death, or loss to person or
property that allegedly was caused by or related to a licensee bringing a
handgun onto the premises of the institution, including motor vehicles owned by
the institution, unless the institution acted with malicious purpose. An
institution of higher education is immune from liability in a civil action for
any injury, death, or loss to person or property that allegedly was caused by
or related to the institution’s decision to permit a licensee or class of
licensees to bring a handgun onto the premises of the institution.
            4.   A nonprofit corporation shall be immune from liability in a
civil action for any injury, death, or loss to person or property that
allegedly was caused by or related to a licensee bringing a handgun onto the
premises of the nonprofit corporation, including any motor vehicle owned by the
nonprofit corporation, or to any event organized by the nonprofit corporation,
unless the nonprofit corporation acted with malicious purpose. A nonprofit
corporation is immune from liability in a civil action for any injury, death,
or loss to person or property that allegedly was caused by or related to the
nonprofit corporation’s decision to permit a licensee to bring a handgun onto
the premises of the nonprofit corporation or to any event organized by the
nonprofit corporation. The immunities described in this division apply to an
entity that leases its property to the nonprofit corporation or permits its
property to be used by the nonprofit corporation for any purpose.
         C.   1.   a.    Except as provided in division (b)(3)C.2. of this
section and R.C. § 2923.1214, the owner or person in control of private land or
premises, and a private person or entity leasing land or premises owned by the
state, the United States, or a political subdivision of the state or the United
States, may post a sign in a conspicuous location on that land or on those
premises prohibiting persons from carrying firearms or concealed firearms on or
onto that land or those premises. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, a person who knowingly violates a posted prohibition of that nature
is guilty of criminal trespass in violation of R.C. § 2911.21(A)(4) and is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If a person knowingly violates a
posted prohibition of that nature and the posted land or premises primarily was
a parking lot or other parking facility, the person is not guilty of criminal
trespass under R.C. § 2911.21 or under any other criminal law of this state or
criminal law, ordinance, or resolution of a political subdivision of this
state, and instead is subject only to a civil cause of action for trespass
based on the violation.
               b.   If a person knowingly violates a posted prohibition of the
nature described in this division and the posted land or premises is a child
care center, type A family child care home, or type B family child care home,
unless the person is a licensee who resides in a type A family child care home
or type B family child care home, the person is guilty of aggravated trespass
in violation of R.C. § 2911.211. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the person
previously has been convicted of a violation of this division or any
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or of any offense of
violence, if the weapon involved is a firearm that is either loaded or for
which the offender has ammunition ready at hand, or if the weapon involved is
dangerous ordnance, the offender is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
            2.   A landlord may not prohibit or restrict a tenant who is a
licensee and who on or after September 9, 2008 enters into a rental agreement
with the landlord for the use of residential premises, and the tenant’s guest
while the tenant is present, from lawfully carrying or possessing a handgun on
those residential premises.
            3.   As used in division (b)(3)C. of this section:
               a.   RESIDENTIAL PREMISES. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5321.01, except “residential premises” does not include a dwelling unit that is
owned or operated by a college or university.
               b.   LANDLORD, TENANT, and RENTAL AGREEMENT. Have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 5321.01.
      (4)   A person who holds a valid concealed handgun license issued by
another state that is recognized by the Attorney General pursuant to a
reciprocity agreement entered into pursuant to R.C. § 109.69 or a person who
holds a valid concealed handgun license under the circumstances described in
R.C. § 109.69(B) has the same right to carry a concealed handgun in this state
as a person who was issued a concealed handgun license under R.C. § 2923.125
and is subject to the same restrictions that apply to a person who has been
issued a license under that section that is valid at the time in question.
      (5)   A.   A peace officer has the same right to carry a concealed
handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun license
under R.C. § 2923.125, provided that the officer when carrying a concealed
handgun under authority of this division is carrying validating identification.
For purposes of reciprocity with other states, a peace officer shall be
considered to be a licensee in this state.
         B.   An active duty member of the armed forces of the United States
who is carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of
successful completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training
requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1) has the same right to carry a
concealed handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun
license under R.C. § 2923.125 and is subject to the same restrictions as
specified in this division (b).
         C.   A tactical medical professional who is qualified to carry
firearms while on duty under R.C. § 109.771 has the same right to carry a
concealed handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun
license under R.C. § 2923.125.
         D.   A fire investigator who is qualified to carry firearms while on
duty under R.C. § 109.774 has the same right to carry a concealed handgun in
this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun license under R.C. §
2923.125.
      (6)   A.   A qualified retired peace officer who possesses a retired
peace officer identification card issued pursuant to division (b)(6)B. of this
section and a valid firearms requalification certification issued pursuant to
division (b)(6)C. of this section has the same right to carry a concealed
handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun license
under R.C. § 2923.125 and is subject to the same restrictions that apply to a
person who has been issued a license issued under that section that is valid at
the time in question. For purposes of reciprocity with other states, a
qualified retired peace officer who possesses a retired peace officer
identification card issued pursuant to division (b)(6)B. of this section and a
valid firearms requalification certification issued pursuant to division (b)
(6)C. of this section shall be considered to be a licensee in this state.
         B.   1.   Each public agency of this state or of a political
subdivision of this state that is served by one or more peace officers shall
issue a retired peace officer identification card to any person who retired
from service as a peace officer with that agency, if the issuance is in
accordance with the agency’s policies and procedures and if the person, with
respect to the person’s service with that agency, satisfies all of the
following:
               a.   The person retired in good standing from service as a peace
officer with the public agency, and the retirement was not for reasons of
mental instability.
               b.   Before retiring from service as a peace officer with that
agency, the person was authorized to engage in or supervise the prevention,
detection, investigation or prosecution of, or the incarceration of any person
for, any violation of law and the person had statutory powers of arrest.
               c.   At the time of the person’s retirement as a peace officer
with that agency, the person was trained and qualified to carry firearms in the
performance of the peace officer’s duties.
               d.   Before retiring from service as a peace officer with that
agency, the person was regularly employed as a peace officer for an aggregate
of 15 years or more, or, in the alternative, the person retired from service as
a peace officer with that agency, after completing any applicable probationary
period of that service, due to a service- connected disability, as determined
by the agency.
            2.   A retired peace officer identification card issued to a person
under division (b)(6)B.1. of this section shall identify the person by name,
contain a photograph of the person, identify the public agency of this state or
of the political subdivision of this state from which the person retired as a
peace officer and that is issuing the identification card, and specify that the
person retired in good standing from service as a peace officer with the
issuing public agency and satisfies the criteria set forth in divisions (b)
(6)B.1.a. to (b)(6)B.1.d. of this section. In addition to the required content
specified in this division, a retired peace officer identification card issued
to a person under division (b)(6)B.1. of this section may include the firearms
requalification certification described in division (b)(6)C. of this section,
and if the identification card includes that certification, the identification
card shall serve as the firearms requalification certification for the retired
peace officer. If the issuing public agency issues credentials to active law
enforcement officers who serve the agency, the agency may comply with division
(b)(6)B.1. of this section by issuing the same credentials to persons who
retired from service as a peace officer with the agency and who satisfy the
criteria set forth in divisions (b)(6)B.1.a. to (b)(6)B.1.d. of this section,
provided that the credentials so issued to retired peace officers are stamped
with the word “RETIRED”.
            3.   A public agency of this state or of a political subdivision of
this state may charge persons who retired from service as a peace officer with
the agency a reasonable fee for issuing to the person a retired peace officer
identification card pursuant to division (b)(6)B.1. of this section.
         C.   1.   If a person retired from service as a peace officer with a
public agency of this state or of a political subdivision of this state and the
person satisfies the criteria set forth in divisions (b)(6)B.1.a. to (b)
(6)B.1.d. of this section, the public agency may provide the retired peace
officer with the opportunity to attend a firearms requalification program that
is approved for purposes of firearms requalification required under R.C. §
109.801. The retired peace officer may be required to pay the cost of the
course.
            2.   If a retired peace officer who satisfies the criteria set
forth in divisions (b)(6)B.1.a. to (b)(6)B.1.d. of this section attends a
firearms requalification program that is approved for purposes of firearms
requalification required under R.C. § 109.801, the retired peace officer’s
successful completion of the firearms requalification program requalifies the
retired peace officer for purposes of division (b)(6) of this section for five
years from the date on which the program was successfully completed, and the
requalification is valid during that five-year period. If a retired peace
officer who satisfies the criteria set forth in divisions (b)(6)B.1.a. to (b)
(6)B.1.d. of this section satisfactorily completes such a firearms
requalification program, the retired peace officer shall be issued a firearms
requalification certification that identifies the retired peace officer by
name, identifies the entity that taught the program, specifies that the retired
peace officer successfully completed the program, specifies the date on which
the course was successfully completed, and specifies that the requalification
is valid for five years from that date of successful completion. The firearms
requalification certification for a retired peace officer may be included in
the retired peace officer identification card issued to the retired peace
officer under division (b)(6)B. of this section.
            3.   A retired peace officer who attends a firearms requalification
program that is approved for purposes of firearms requalification required
under R.C. § 109.801 may be required to pay the cost of the program.
      (7)   For the purpose of division (b) of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         A.   FIRE INVESTIGATOR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 109.71.
         B.   GOVERNING BODY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 154.01.
         C.   GOVERNMENT FACILITY OF THIS STATE OR A POLITICAL SUBDIVISION OF
THIS STATE. Any of the following:
            1.   A building or part of a building that is owned or leased by
the government of this state or a political subdivision of this state and where
employees of the government of this state or the political subdivision
regularly are present for the purpose of performing their official duties as
employees of the state or political subdivision;
            2.   The office of a Deputy Registrar serving pursuant to R.C.
Chapter 4503 that is used to perform deputy registrar functions.
         D.   NONPROFIT CORPORATION. Means any private organization that is
exempt from federal income taxation pursuant to subsection 501(a) and described
in subsection 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code.
         E.   QUALIFIED RETIRED PEACE OFFICER. A person who satisfies all of
the following:
            1.   The person satisfies the criteria set forth in divisions (b)
(6)B.1.a. to (b)(6)B.1.d. of this section.
            2.   The person is not under the influence of alcohol or another
intoxicating or hallucinatory drug or substance.
            3.   The person is not prohibited by federal law from receiving
firearms.
         F.   RETIRED PEACE OFFICER IDENTIFICATION CARD. An identification card
that is issued pursuant to division (b)(6)B. of this section to a person who is
a retired peace officer.
         G.   TACTICAL MEDICAL PROFESSIONAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
109.71.
         H.   VALIDATING IDENT-IFICATION. Means photographic identification
issued by the agency for which an individual serves as a peace officer that
identifies the individual as a peace officer of the agency.
(R.C. § 2923.126)
   (c)   Posting of signs prohibiting possession. Each person, board, or entity
that owns or controls any place or premises identified in R.C. § 2923.126(B) as
a place into which a valid license does not authorize the licensee to carry a
concealed handgun, or a designee of such a person, board, or entity, shall post
in the following one or more conspicuous locations in the premises a sign that
contains a statement in substantially the following form: “Unless otherwise
authorized by law, pursuant to the Ohio Revised Code, no person shall knowingly
possess, have under the person’s control, convey, or attempt to convey a deadly
weapon or dangerous ordnance onto these premises.”
(R.C. § 2923.1212)
§ 672.15 DEFACED FIREARMS.
   (a)   No person shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Change, alter, remove, or obliterate the name of the manufacturer,
model, manufacturer’s serial number, or other mark of identification on a
firearm.
      (2)   Possess a firearm knowing or having reasonable cause to believe
that the name of the manufacturer, model, manufacturer’s serial number, or
other mark of identification on the firearm has been changed, altered, removed,
or obliterated.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a)(1) of this section is guilty of
defacing identification marks of a firearm. Except as otherwise provided in
this division, defacing identification marks of a firearm is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (a)(1) of this section, defacing
identification marks of a firearm is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate State law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (a)(2) of this section is guilty of
possessing a defaced firearm. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
possessing a defaced firearm is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of
division (a)(2) of this section, possessing a defaced firearm is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate State law.
   (c)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to any firearm on which no
manufacturer's serial number was inscribed at the time of its manufacture.
(ORC 2923.201)
CHAPTER 698: PENALTIES AND SENTENCING
698.01   Definitions.
698.02   Penalties for misdemeanor.
698.03   Imposing sentence for misdemeanor.
698.04   Organizational penalties.
698.05   Multiple sentences.
698.06   Modification of sentence. (Repealed)
698.07   Suspension of driver’s license.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar State law
   Definition of “imprisoned” - see Ohio R.C. 1.05
   Burden and degree of proof - see Ohio R.C. 2901.05
   Venue - see Ohio R.C. 2901.12
   Procedure on change of venue - see Ohio R.C. 2931.29
   Transfer of prisoner on change of venue - see Ohio R.C. 2931.30
   Payment of costs and expenses on change of venue - see Ohio R.C. 2931.31
   Degree of offense; charge and verdict; prior conviction - see Ohio R.C.
2945.75
   Satisfaction of fine; credit for time served - see Ohio R.C. 2947.14
   Criteria for probation; conditions for probation - see Ohio R.C. 2951.02
   Treatment of drug dependent persons in lieu of conviction - see Ohio R.C.
2951.041
   Administration, enforcement and public service - see GEN. OFF. Ch.
606
   Definitions generally - see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   Culpable mental states - see GEN. OFF.
606.02
   Classification of offenses - see GEN. OFF.
606.03
   Offenses defined - see GEN. OFF.
606.04
   Rules of construction - see GEN. OFF.
606.05
   Criminal law jurisdiction - see GEN. OFF.
606.055
   Limitation on prosecutions - see GEN. OFF.
606.06
   Requirements for criminal liability - see GEN. OFF.
606.07
   Organizational criminal liability - see GEN. OFF.
606.08
   Personal accountability for organizational conduct - see GEN. OFF.
606.09
   Obstructing justice - see GEN. OFF.
606.15
   Sentencing for sexually oriented offenses; sexual predators; registration -
see GEN. OFF.
666.99
§ 698.01 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   DANGEROUS OFFENDER. A person who has committed an offense, whose
history, character and condition reveal a substantial risk that he or she will
be a danger to others, and whose conduct has been characterized by a pattern of
repetitive, compulsive or aggressive behavior with heedless indifference to the
consequences.
   (b)   REPEAT OFFENDER. A person who has a history of persistent criminal
activity and whose character and condition reveal a substantial risk that he or
she will commit another offense. It is prima facie evidence that a person is a
repeat offender if any of the following applies:
      (1)   Having been convicted of one or more offenses of violence, as
defined in Ohio R.C. 2901.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence
for one or more of those offenses, the person commits a subsequent offense of
violence;
      (2)   Having been convicted of one or more sexually oriented offenses, as
defined in Ohio R.C. 2950.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence
for one or more of those offenses, the person commits a subsequent sexually
oriented offense;
      (3)   Having been convicted of one or more theft offenses, as defined in
Ohio R.C. 2913.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for one or
more of those offenses, the person commits a subsequent theft offense;
      (4)   Having been convicted of one or more felony drug abuse offenses, as
defined in Ohio R.C. 2925.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence
for one or more of those offenses, the person commits a subsequent felony drug
abuse offense;
      (5)   Having been convicted of two or more felonies, and having been
imprisoned pursuant to sentence for any such offense, the person commits a
subsequent offense;
      (6)   Having been convicted of three or more offenses of any type or
degree other than traffic offenses, alcoholic intoxication offenses, or minor
misdemeanors, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for any such
offense, the person commits a subsequent offense.
(ORC 2935.36(E))
§ 698.02 PENALTIES FOR MISDEMEANOR.
   (a)   Considerations in misdemeanor sentencing.
      (1)   A court that sentences an offender for a misdemeanor or minor
misdemeanor violation of any provision of the Ohio Revised Code, or of any
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to a misdemeanor or minor
misdemeanor violation of a provision of the Ohio Revised Code, shall be guided
by the overriding purposes of misdemeanor sentencing. The overriding purposes
of misdemeanor sentencing are to protect the public from future crime by the
offender and others and to punish the offender. To achieve those purposes, the
sentencing court shall consider the impact of the offense upon the victim and
the need for changing the offender’s behavior, rehabilitating the offender, and
making restitution to the victim of the offense, the public, or the victim and
the public.
      (2)   A sentence imposed for a misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor violation
of an Ohio Revised Code provision or for a violation of a municipal ordinance
that is subject to division (a)(1) of this section shall be reasonably
calculated to achieve the two overriding purposes of misdemeanor sentencing set
forth in division (a)(1) of this section, commensurate with and not demeaning
to the seriousness of the offender’s conduct and its impact upon the victim,
and consistent with sentences imposed for similar offenses committed by similar
offenders.
      (3)   A court that imposes a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor
or minor misdemeanor violation of an Ohio Revised Code provision or for a
violation of a municipal ordinance that is subject to division (a)(1) of this
section shall not base the sentence upon the race, ethnic background, gender,
or religion of the offender.
      (4)   Divisions (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this section shall not apply to any
offense that is disposed of by a traffic violations bureau of any court
pursuant to Traffic Rule 13 and shall not apply to any violation of any
provision of the Ohio Revised Code that is a minor misdemeanor and that is
disposed of without a court appearance. Divisions (a)(1) to (a)(3) of this
section do not affect any penalties established by the Municipality for a
violation of its ordinances that are not substantially equivalent to a
misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor violation of a provision of the Ohio Revised
Code.
(ORC 2929.21)
   (b)   Misdemeanor jail terms.
      (1)   Except as provided in §
666.99 or
698.03 of this code or R.C. § 2929.22 or 2929.23 or division (b)(5) of this
section and unless another term is required or authorized pursuant to law, if
the sentencing court imposing a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor
elects or is required to impose a jail term on the offender pursuant to this
chapter, the court shall impose a definite jail term that shall be one of the
following:
         A.   For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than 180 days;
         B.   For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than 90 days;
         C.   For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than 60 days;
         D.   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than 30 days.
      (2)   A.   A court that sentences an offender to a jail term under
division (b) of this section may permit the offender to serve the sentence in
intermittent confinement or may authorize a limited release of the offender as
provided in division (d)(2) of this section. The court retains jurisdiction
over every offender sentenced to jail to modify the jail sentence imposed at
any time, but the court shall not reduce any mandatory jail term.
         B.   1.   If a prosecutor, as defined in R.C. § 2935.01, has filed a
notice with the court that the prosecutor wants to be notified about a
particular case and if the court is considering modifying the jail sentence of
the offender in that case, the court shall notify the prosecutor that the court
is considering modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case. The
prosecutor may request a hearing regarding the court’s consideration of
modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case, and, if the
prosecutor requests a hearing, the court shall notify the eligible offender of
the hearing.
            2.   If the prosecutor requests a hearing regarding the court’s
consideration of modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case, the
court shall hold the hearing before considering whether or not to release the
offender from the offender’s jail sentence.
      (3)   If a court sentences an offender to a jail term under division (b)
of this section and the court assigns the offender to a County Jail that has
established a County Jail Industry Program pursuant to R.C. § 5147.30, the
court shall specify, as part of the sentence, whether the offender may be
considered for participation in the program. During the offender’s term in the
County Jail, the court retains jurisdiction to modify its specification
regarding the offender’s participation in the County Jail Industry Program.
      (4)   If a person sentenced to a jail term pursuant to division (b) of
this section, the court may impose as part of the sentence pursuant to R.C. §
2929.28 a reimbursement sanction, and, if the local detention facility in which
the term is to be served is covered by a policy adopted pursuant to R.C. §
307.93, 341.14, 341.19, 341.21, 341.23, 753.02, 753.04, 753.16, 2301.56 or
2947.19 and 2929.37, both of the following apply:
         A.   The court shall specify both of the following as part of the
sentence:
            1.   If the person is presented with an itemized bill pursuant to
R.C. § 2929.37 for payment of the costs of confinement, the person is required
to pay the bill in accordance with that section.
            2.   If the person does not dispute the bill described in division
(b)(4)A.1. of this section and does not pay the bill by the times specified in
R.C. § 2929.37, the Clerk of the Court may issue a certificate of judgment
against the person as described in that section.
         B.   The sentence automatically includes any certificate of judgment
issued as described in division (b)(4)A.2. of this section.
      (5)   A.   If an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
misdemeanor violation of R.C. § 2907.23, 2907.24, 2907.241 or 2907.25, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and to a specification of the
type described in R.C. § 2941.1421 and if the court imposes a jail term on the
offender for the misdemeanor violation, the court may impose upon the offender
an additional definite jail term as follows:
            1.   Subject to division (b)(5)A.2. of this section, an additional
definite jail term of not more than 60 days;
            2.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one or more misdemeanor or felony violations of R.C. § 2907.22,
2907.23, 2907.24, 2907.241 or 2907.25, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, and also was convicted of or pleaded guilty to a
specification of the type described in R.C. § 2941.1421 regarding one or more
of those violations, an additional definite jail term of not more than 120
days.
         B.   In lieu of imposing an additional definite jail term under
division (b)(5)A. of this section, the court may directly impose on the
offender a sanction that requires the offender to wear a real-time processing,
continual tracking electronic monitoring device during the period of time
specified by the court. The period of time specified by the court shall equal
the duration of an additional jail term that the court could have imposed upon
the offender under division (b)(5)A. of this section. A sanction imposed under
this division shall commence on the date specified by the court, provided that
the sanction shall not commence until after the offender has served the jail
term imposed for the misdemeanor violation of R.C. § 2907.23, 2907.24, 2907.241
or 2907.25, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and any
residential sanction imposed for the violation under division (d) of this
section or R.C. § 2929.26. A sanction imposed under this division shall be
considered to be a community control sanction for purposes of division (c) of
this section or R.C. § 2929.25, and all provisions of this Code and the Ohio
Revised Code that pertain to community control sanctions shall apply to a
sanction imposed under this division, except to the extent that they would by
their nature be clearly inapplicable. The offender shall pay all costs
associated with a sanction imposed under this division, including the cost of
the use of the monitoring device.
      (6)   If an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor
violation of R.C. § 2903.13 and also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
specification of the type described in R.C. § 2941.1423 that charges that the
victim of the violation was a woman whom the offender knew was pregnant at the
time of the violation, the court shall impose on the offender a mandatory jail
term that is a definite term of at least 30 days.
      (7)   If a court sentences an offender to a jail term under this division
(b), the sentencing court retains jurisdiction over the offender and the jail
term. Upon motion of either party or upon the court’s own motion, the court, in
the court’s sole discretion and as the circumstances warrant, may substitute
one or more community control sanctions under division (d) or (e) of this
section for any jail days that are not mandatory jail days.
(R.C. § 2929.24)
   (c)   Misdemeanor community control sanctions.
      (1)   A.   Except as provided in §§
666.99 and
698.03 of this code or R.C. §§ 2929.22 and 2929.23 or when a jail term is
required by law, in sentencing an offender for a misdemeanor, other than a
minor misdemeanor, the sentencing court may do either of the following:
            1.   Directly impose a sentence that consists of one or more
community control sanctions authorized by divisions (d), (e) or (f) of this
section. The court may impose any other conditions of release under a community
control sanction that the court considers appropriate. If the court imposes a
jail term upon the offender, the court may impose any community control
sanction or combination of community control sanctions in addition to the jail
term.
            2.   Impose a jail term under division (b) of this section from the
range of jail terms authorized under that division for the offense, suspend all
or a portion of the jail term imposed, and place the offender under a community
control sanction or combination of community control sanctions authorized under
divisions (d), (e) or (f) of this section.
         B.   The duration of all community control sanctions imposed upon an
offender and in effect for an offender at any time shall not exceed five years.
         C.   At sentencing, if a court directly imposes a community control
sanction or combination of community control sanctions pursuant to division (c)
(1)A.1. of this section, the court shall state the duration of the community
control sanctions imposed and shall notify the offender that if any of the
conditions of the community control sanctions are violated the court may do any
of the following:
            1.   Impose a longer time under the same community control sanction
if the total time under all of the offender’s community control sanctions does
not exceed the five-year limit specified in division (c)(1)B. of this section;
            2.   Impose a more restrictive community control sanction under
division (d), (e) or (f) of this section, but the court is not required to
impose any particular sanction or sanctions;
            3.   Impose a definite jail term from the range of jail terms
authorized for the offense under division (b) of this section.
      (2)   If a court sentences an offender to any community control sanction
or combination of community control sanctions pursuant to division (c)(1)A.1.
of this section, the sentencing court retains jurisdiction over the offender
and the period of community control for the duration of the period of community
control. Upon the motion of either party or on the court’s own motion, the
court, in the court’s sole discretion and as the circumstances warrant, may
modify the community control sanctions or conditions of release previously
imposed, substitute a community control sanction or condition of release for
another community control sanction or condition of release previously imposed,
or impose an additional community control sanction or condition of release.
      (3)   A.   If a court sentences an offender to any community control
sanction or combination of community control sanctions authorized under
division (d), (e) or (f) of this section, the court shall place the offender
under the general control and supervision of the court or of a Department of
Probation in the jurisdiction that serves the court for purposes of reporting
to the court a violation of any of the conditions of the sanctions imposed. If
the offender resides in another jurisdiction and a department of probation has
been established to serve the municipal court or county court in that
jurisdiction, the sentencing court may request the municipal court or the
county court to receive the offender into the general control and supervision
of that department of probation for purposes of reporting to the sentencing
court a violation of any of the conditions of the sanctions imposed. The
sentencing court retains jurisdiction over any offender whom it sentences for
the duration of the sanction or sanctions imposed.
         B.   The sentencing court shall require as a condition of any
community control sanction that the offender abide by the law and not leave the
state without the permission of the court or the offender’s probation officer.
In the interests of doing justice, rehabilitating the offender, and ensuring
the offender’s good behavior, the court may impose additional requirements on
the offender. The offender’s compliance with the additional requirements also
shall be a condition of the community control sanction imposed upon the
offender.
      (4)   A.   If the court imposing sentence upon an offender sentences the
offender to any community control sanction or combination of community control
sanctions authorized under division (d), (e) or (f) of this section, and the
offender violates any of the conditions of the sanctions, the public or private
person or entity that supervises or administers the program or activity that
comprises the sanction shall report the violation directly to the sentencing
court or to the Department of Probation or probation officer with general
control and supervision over the offender. If the public or private person or
entity reports the violation to the Department of Probation or probation
officer, the department or officer shall report the violation to the sentencing
court.
         B.   Except as provided in division (c)(4)C. of this section, if an
offender violates any condition of a community control sanction, the sentencing
court may impose upon the violator one or more of the following penalties:
            1.   A longer time under the same community control sanction if the
total time under all of the community control sanctions imposed on the violator
does not exceed the five-year limit specified in division (c)(1)B. of this
section;
            2.   A more restrictive community control sanction;
            3.   A combination of community control sanctions, including a jail
term.
         C.   If an offender was acting pursuant to R.C. § 2925.11(B)(2)(b), or
any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or a related provision under
R.C. § 2925.12, R.C. § 2925.14, or R.C. § 2925.141, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, and in so doing violated the conditions of a
community control sanction based on a minor drug possession offense, as defined
in R.C. § 2925.11, or violated R.C. § 2925.12, R.C. § 2925.14(C)(1), or R.C. §
2925.141, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the sentencing
court shall not impose any of the penalties described in division (c)(4)B. of
this section based on the violation.
         D.   If the court imposes a jail term upon a violator pursuant to
division (c)(4)B. of this section, the total time spent in jail for the
misdemeanor offense and the violation of a condition of the community control
sanction shall not exceed the maximum jail term available for the offense for
which the sanction that was violated was imposed. The court may reduce the
longer period of time that the violator is required to spend under the longer
sanction or the more restrictive sanction imposed under division (c)(4)B. of
this section by all or part of the time the violator successfully spent under
the sanction that was initially imposed.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if an offender, for
a significant period of time, fulfills the conditions of a community control
sanction imposed pursuant to division (d), (e) or (f) of this section in an
exemplary manner, the court may reduce the period of time under the community
control sanction or impose a less restrictive community control sanction.
Fulfilling the conditions of a community control sanction does not relieve the
offender of a duty to make restitution under division (f) of this section.
(R.C. § 2929.25)
   (d)   Community residential sanction.
      (1)   Except when a mandatory jail term is required by law, the court
imposing a sentence for a misdemeanor, other than a minor misdemeanor, may
impose upon the offender any community residential sanction or combination of
community residential sanctions under this division (d). Community residential
sanctions include but are not limited to the following:
         A.   A term of up to 180 days in a halfway house or a term in a
halfway house not to exceed the longest jail term available for the offense,
whichever is shorter, if the political subdivision that would have
responsibility for paying the costs of confining the offender in a jail has
entered into a contract with the halfway house for use of the facility for
misdemeanor offenders;
         B.   If the offender is an eligible offender, as defined in R.C. §
307.932, a term in a community alternative sentencing center or district
community alternative sentencing center established and operated in accordance
with that section, in the circumstances specified in that section, with one of
the conditions of the sanction being that the offender successfully complete
the portion of the sentence to be served in the center.
      (2)   A sentence to a community residential sanction under division (d)
(1)B. of this section shall be in accordance with R.C. § 307.932. In all other
cases, the court that sentences an offender to a community residential sanction
under this division (d) may do either or both of the following:
         A.   Permit the offender to serve the offender’s sentence in
intermittent confinement, overnight, on weekends or at any other time or times
that will allow the offender to continue at the offender’s occupation or care
for the offender’s family;
         B.   Authorize the offender to be released so that the offender may
seek or maintain employment, receive education or training, receive treatment,
perform community service, or otherwise fulfill an obligation imposed by law or
by the court. A release pursuant to this division shall be only for the
duration of time that is needed to fulfill the purpose of the release and for
travel that reasonably is necessary to fulfill the purposes of release.
      (3)   The court may order that a reasonable portion of the income earned
by the offender upon a release pursuant to division (d)(2) of this section be
applied to any financial sanction imposed under division (f) of this section.
      (4)   No court shall sentence any person to a prison term for a
misdemeanor or to a jail term for a minor misdemeanor.
      (5)   If a court sentences a person who has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a misdemeanor to a community residential sanction as described in
division (d)(1) of this section, at the time of reception and at other times
the person in charge of the operation of the halfway house, community
alternative sentencing center, district community alternative sentencing
center, or other place at which the offender will serve the residential
sanction determines to be appropriate, the person in charge of the operation of
the halfway house, community alternative sentencing center, district community
alternative sentencing center, or other place may cause the convicted offender
to be examined and tested for tuberculosis, HIV infection, hepatitis, including
but not limited to hepatitis A, B and C, and other contagious diseases. The
person in charge of the operation of the halfway house, community alternative
sentencing center, district community alternative sentencing center, or other
place at which the offender will serve the residential sanction may cause a
convicted offender in the halfway house, community alternative sentencing
center, district community alternative sentencing center, or other place who
refuses to be tested or treated for tuberculosis, HIV infection, hepatitis,
including but not limited to hepatitis A, B and C, or another contagious
disease to be tested and treated involuntarily.
      (6)   The municipality may enter into a contract with a halfway house for
use of the halfway house to house misdemeanor offenders under a sanction
imposed under division (d)(1)A. of this section.
(R.C. § 2929.26)
   (e)   Nonresidential sanction where jail term is not mandatory.
      (1)   Except when a mandatory jail term is required by law, the court
imposing a sentence for a misdemeanor, other than a minor misdemeanor, may
impose upon the offender any nonresidential sanction or combination of
nonresidential sanctions authorized under this division. Nonresidential
sanctions include but are not limited to the following:
         A.   A term of day reporting;
         B.   A term of house arrest with electronic monitoring or continuous
alcohol monitoring or both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol
monitoring, a term of electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring
without house arrest, or a term of house arrest without electronic monitoring
or continuous alcohol monitoring;
         C.   A term of community service of up to 500 hours for misdemeanor of
the first degree or 200 hours for a misdemeanor of the second, third or fourth
degree;
         D.   A term in a drug treatment program with a level of security for
the offender as determined necessary by the court;
         E.   A term of intensive probation supervision;
         F.   A term of basic probation supervision;
         G.   A term of monitored time;
         H.   A term of drug and alcohol use monitoring, including random drug
testing;
         I.   A curfew term;
         J.   A requirement that the offender obtain employment;
         K.   A requirement that the offender obtain education or training;
         L.   Provided the court obtains the prior approval of the victim, a
requirement that the offender participate in victim-offender mediation;
         M.   If authorized by law, suspension of the offender’s privilege to
operate a motor vehicle, immobilization or forfeiture of the offender’s motor
vehicle, a requirement that the offender obtain a valid motor vehicle
operator’s license, or any other related sanction;
         N.   A requirement that the offender obtain counseling if the offense
is a violation of R.C. § 2919.25 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance or a violation of R.C. § 2903.13 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance involving a person who was a family or household member at
the time of the violation, if the offender committed the offense in the
vicinity of one or more children who are not victims of the offense, and if the
offender or the victim of the offense is a parent, guardian, custodian or
person in loco parentis of one or more of those children. This division does
not limit the court in requiring that the offender obtain counseling for any
offense or in any circumstance not specified in this division.
      (2)   If the court imposes a term of community service pursuant to
division (e)(1)C. of this section, the offender may request that the court
modify the sentence to authorize the offender to make a reasonable
contribution, as determined by the court, to the general fund of the county,
municipality, or other local entity that provides funding to the court. The
court may grant the request if the offender demonstrates a change in
circumstances from the date the court imposes the sentence or that the
modification would otherwise be in the interests of justice. If the court
grants the request, the offender shall make a reasonable contribution to the
court, and the clerk of the court shall deposit that contribution into the
general fund of the county, municipality, or other local entity that provides
funding to the court. If more than one entity provides funding to the court,
the clerk shall deposit a percentage of the reasonable contribution equal to
the percentage of funding the entity provides to the court in that entity’s
general fund.
      (3)   In addition to the sanctions authorized under division (e)(1) of
this section, the court imposing a sentence for a misdemeanor, other than a
minor misdemeanor, upon an offender who is not required to serve a mandatory
jail term may impose any other sanction that is intended to discourage the
offender or other persons from committing a similar offense if the sanction is
reasonably related to the overriding purposes and principles of misdemeanor
sentencing.
      (4)   The court imposing a sentence for a minor misdemeanor may impose a
term of community service in lieu of all or part of a fine. The term of
community service imposed for a minor misdemeanor shall not exceed 30 hours.
After imposing a term of community service, the court may modify the sentence
to authorize a reasonable contribution, as determined by the court, to the
appropriate general fund as provided in division (e)(2) of this section.
(R.C. § 2929.27)
   (f)   Financial sanctions.
      (1)   In addition t to imposing court costs pursuant to R.C. § 2947.23,
the court imposing a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor, including a
minor misdemeanor, may sentence the offender to any financial sanction or
combination of financial sanctions authorized under this division (f) and, if
the offender is being sentenced for a criminal offense as defined in R.C. §
2930.01, shall sentence the offender to make restitution pursuant to this
division (f) and R.C. § 2929.281. If the court, in its discretion or as
required by this division (f), imposes one or more financial sanctions, the
financial sanctions that may be imposed pursuant to this division (f) include,
but are not limited to, the following:
         A.   Restitution.
            1.   Unless the misdemeanor offense could be disposed of by the
traffic violations bureau serving the court under Traffic Rule 13, restitution
by the offender to the victim of the offender's crime or the victim's estate,
in an amount based on the victim's economic loss. The court may not impose
restitution as a sanction pursuant to this division if the offense could be
disposed of by the traffic violations bureau serving the court under Traffic
Rule 13. If the court requires restitution, the court shall order that the
restitution be made to the victim in open court or to the adult probation
department that serves the jurisdiction or the clerk of the court on behalf of
the victim.
            2.   The court shall determine the amount of restitution to be paid
by the offender. The victim, victim's representative, victim's attorney, if
applicable, the prosecutor or the prosecutor's designee, and the offender may
provide information relevant to the determination of the amount of restitution.
The amount the court orders as restitution shall not exceed the amount of the
economic loss suffered by the victim as a direct and proximate result of the
commission of the offense. If the court imposes restitution for the cost of
accounting or auditing done to determine the extent of economic loss, the court
may order restitution for any amount of the victim's costs of accounting or
auditing provided that the amount of restitution is reasonable and does not
exceed the value of property or services stolen or damaged as a result of the
offense. If the court decides to or is required to impose restitution, the
court shall hold an evidentiary hearing on restitution if the offender, victim,
victim's representative, victim's attorney, if applicable, or victim's estate
disputes the amount of restitution. The court shall determine the amount of
full restitution by a preponderance of the evidence.
            3.   All restitution payments shall be credited against any
recovery of economic loss in a civil action brought by the victim or the
victim's estate against the offender. No person may introduce evidence of an
award of restitution under this division (f) in a civil action for purposes of
imposing liability against an insurer under R.C. § 3937.18.
            4.   The court may order that the offender pay a surcharge, of not
more than 5% of the amount of the restitution otherwise ordered, to the entity
responsible for collecting and processing restitution payments.
            5.   The victim, victim's attorney, if applicable, or the attorney
for the victim's estate may request that the prosecutor in the case file a
motion, or the offender may file a motion, for modification of the payment
terms of any restitution ordered. If the court grants the motion, it may modify
the payment terms as it determines appropriate but shall not reduce the amount
of restitution ordered, except as provided in R.C. § 2929.281(A).
         B.   Fines. A fine of the type described in divisions (f)(1)B.1. and
(f)(1)B.2. of this section payable to the appropriate entity as required by
law:
            1.   A fine in the following amount:
               a.   For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than
$1,000;
               b.   For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than $750;
               c.   For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than $500;
               d.   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than $250;
               e.   For a minor misdemeanor, not more than $150.
            2.   A state fine or cost as defined in R.C. § 2949.111.
         C.   Reimbursement.
            1.   Reimbursement by the offender of any or all of the costs of
sanctions incurred by the government, including but not limited to the
following:
               a.   All or part of the costs of implementing any community
control sanction, including a supervision fee under R.C. § 2951.021 and the
costs of global positioning system device monitoring;
               b.   All or part of the costs of confinement in a jail or other
residential facility, including but not limited to a per diem fee for room and
board, the costs of medical and dental treatment, and the costs of repairing
property damaged by the offender while confined;
               c.   All or part of the cost of purchasing and using an
immobilizing or disabling device, including a certified ignition interlock
device, or a remote alcohol monitoring device that a court orders an offender
to use under R.C. § 4510.13.
            2.   The amount of reimbursement under division (f)(1)C.1. of this
section shall not exceed the total amount of reimbursement the offender is able
to pay and shall not exceed the actual cost of the sanctions. The court may
collect any amount of reimbursement the offender is required to pay under that
division. If the court does not order reimbursement under that division,
confinement costs may be assessed pursuant to a repayment policy adopted under
R.C. § 2929.37. In addition, the offender may be required to pay the fees
specified in R.C. § 2929.38 in accordance with that section.
      (2)   A.   If the court determines a hearing is necessary, the court may
hold a hearing to determine whether the offender is able to pay the financial
sanction imposed pursuant to this division (f) or court costs or is likely in
the future to be able to pay the sanction or costs.
         B.   If the court determines that the offender is indigent and unable
to pay the financial sanction or court costs, the court shall consider imposing
and may impose a term of community service under division (e)(1) of this
section in lieu of imposing a financial sanction or court costs. If the court
does not determine that the offender is indigent, the court may impose a term
of community service under division (e)(1) of this section in lieu of or in
addition to imposing a financial sanction under this division (f) and in
addition to imposing court costs. The court may order community service for a
minor misdemeanor pursuant to division (e)(4) of this section in lieu of or in
addition to imposing a financial sanction under this section and in addition to
imposing court costs. If a person fails to pay a financial sanction or court
costs, the court may order community service in lieu of the financial sanction
or court costs.
      (3)   A.   The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed upon the
offender pursuant to division (f)(1)C. of this section to pay the costs
incurred by a county pursuant to any sanction imposed under division (d), (e)
or (f) of this section or in operating a facility used to confine offenders
pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (d) of this section to the County
Treasurer. The County Treasurer shall deposit the reimbursements in the
county’s General Fund. The county shall use the amounts deposited in the Fund
to pay the costs incurred by the county pursuant to any sanction imposed under
division (d), (e) or (f) of this section or in operating a facility used to
confine offenders pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (d) of this
section.
         B.   The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed upon the offender
pursuant to division (f)(1)C. of this section to pay the costs incurred by a
municipal corporation pursuant to any sanction imposed under division (d), (e)
or (f) of this section or in operating a facility used to confine offenders
pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (d) of this section to the
Treasurer of the municipal corporation. The Treasurer shall deposit the
reimbursements in the municipal corporation’s General Fund. The municipal
corporation shall use the amounts deposited in the Fund to pay the costs
incurred by the municipal corporation pursuant to any sanction imposed under
division (d), (e) or (f) of this section or in operating a facility used to
confine offenders pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (d) of this
section.
         C.   The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed pursuant to
division (f)(1)C. of this section for the costs incurred by a private provider
pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (d), (e) or (f) of this section
to the provider.
      (4)   A.   In addition to any other fine that is or may be imposed under
this section, the court imposing sentence upon an offender for misdemeanor
domestic violence or menacing by stalking may impose a fine of not less than
$70 nor more than $500, which shall, except as provided in divisions (f)(4)B.
and (f)(4)C. of this section, be transmitted to the Treasurer of Ohio to be
credited to the address confidentiality program fund created by R.C. § 111.48.
         B.   A court that imposes a fine under division (f)(4)A. of this
section may retain up to 25% of amounts collected in satisfaction of the fine
to cover administrative costs.
         C.   A court that imposes a fine under division (f)(4)A. of this
section may assign up to 25% of amounts collected in satisfaction of the fine
to reimburse the prosecuting attorney for costs associated with prosecution of
the offense.
      (5)   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this division (f)(5), a
financial sanction imposed under division (f)(1) of this section is a judgment
in favor of the state or the political subdivision that operates the court that
imposed the financial sanction, and the offender subject to the financial
sanction is the judgment debtor. A financial sanction of reimbursement imposed
pursuant to division (f)(1)C.1.a. of this section upon an offender is a
judgment in favor of the entity administering the community control sanction,
and the offender subject to the financial sanction is the judgment debtor. A
financial sanction of reimbursement imposed pursuant to division (f)(1)C.1.b.
of this section upon an offender confined in a jail or other residential
facility is a judgment in favor of the entity operating the jail or other
residential facility, and the offender subject to the financial sanction is the
judgment debtor. A financial sanction of restitution imposed pursuant to
division (f)(1)A. of this section is an order in favor of the victim of the
offender’s criminal act that can be collected through a certificate of judgment
as described in division (f)(5)B.1. of this section, through execution as
described in division (f)(5)B.2. of this section or through an order as
described in division (f)(5)B.3. of this section and the offender shall be
considered for purposes of the collection as a judgment debtor.
         B.   Once a financial sanction is imposed as a judgment or order under
this division, the victim, private provider, state or political subdivision may
do any of the following:
            1.   Obtain from the clerk of the court in which the judgment was
entered, at no charge, a certificate of judgment that shall be in the same
manner and form as a certificate of judgment issued in a civil action;
            2.   Obtain execution of the judgment or order through any
available procedure, including any of the procedures identified in R.C. §
2929.18(D)(1) and (D)(2) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
            3.   Obtain an order for the assignment of wages of the judgment
debtor under R.C. § 1321.33 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (6)   The civil remedies authorized under division (f)(4) of this section
for the collection of the financial sanction supplement, but do not preclude,
enforcement of the criminal sentence.
      (7)   Each court imposing a financial sanction upon an offender under
this division (f) may designate the Clerk of the Court or another person to
collect the financial sanction. The Clerk, or another person authorized by law
or the court to collect the financial sanction may do the following:
         A.   Enter into contracts with one or more public agencies or private
vendors for the collection of amounts due under the sanction. Before entering
into a contract for the collection of amounts due from an offender pursuant to
any financial sanction imposed pursuant to this division (f), a court shall
comply with R.C. §§ 307.86 to 307.92.
         B.   Permit payment of all or any portion of the sanction in
installments, by financial transaction device if the court is a county court or
a municipal court operated by a county, or by any other reasonable method, in
any time, and on any terms that the court considers just. If the court is a
county court or a municipal court operated by a county, the acceptance of
payments by any financial transaction device shall be governed by the policy
adopted by the Board of County Commissioners of the county pursuant to R.C. §
301.28. If the court is a municipal court not operated by a county, the Clerk
may pay any fee associated with processing an electronic transfer out of public
money or may charge the fee to the offender.
         C.   To defray administrative costs, charge a reasonable fee to an
offender who elects a payment plan rather than a lump sum payment of any
financial sanction.
      (8)   No financial sanction imposed under this division (f) shall
preclude a victim from bringing a civil action against the offender.
      (9)   If the court imposes restitution, fines, fees, or incarceration
costs on a business or corporation, it is the duty of the person authorized to
make disbursements from assets of the business or corporation to pay the
restitution, fines, fees, or incarceration costs from those assets.
(R.C. § 2929.28)
§ 698.03 IMPOSING SENTENCE FOR MISDEMEANOR.
   (a)   (1)   Unless a mandatory jail term is required to be imposed by Ohio
R.C. 1547.99(G), 4510.14(B), or 4511.19(G), or any other provision of the
Revised Code, or any municipal ordinance, a court that imposes a sentence under
this chapter upon an offender for a misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor has
discretion to determine the most effective way to achieve the purposes and
principles of sentencing set forth in Section 698.02.
      (2)   Unless a specific sanction is required to be imposed or is
precluded from being imposed by the section setting forth an offense or the
penalty for an offense or by any provision of Sections 666.99 or 698.02 of this
Code or Ohio R.C. 2929.23 to 2929.28, a court that imposes a sentence upon an
offender for a misdemeanor may impose on the offender any sanction or
combination of sanctions under Section 698.02(b) to (f). The court shall not
impose a sentence that imposes an unnecessary burden on local government
resources.
   (b)   (1)   In determining the appropriate sentence for a misdemeanor, the
court shall consider all of the following factors:
         A.   The nature and circumstances of the offense or offenses;
         B.   Whether the circumstances regarding the offender and the offense
or offenses indicate that the offender has a history of persistent criminal
activity and that the offender’s character and condition reveal a substantial
risk that the offender will commit another offense;
         C.   Whether the circumstances regarding the offender and the offense
or offenses indicate that the offender’s history, character, and condition
reveal a substantial risk that the offender will be a danger to others and that
the offender’s conduct has been characterized by a pattern of repetitive,
compulsive, or aggressive behavior with heedless indifference to the
consequences;
         D.   Whether the victim’s youth, age, disability, or other factor made
the victim particularly vulnerable to the offense or made the impact of the
offense more serious;
         E.   Whether the offender is likely to commit future crimes in
general, in addition to the circumstances described in divisions (b)(1)B. and
C. of this section;
         F.   Whether the offender has an emotional, mental, or physical
condition that is traceable to the offender’s service in the armed forces of
the United States and that was a contributing factor in the offender’s
commission of the offense or offenses;
         G.   The offender’s military service record.
      (2)   In determining the appropriate sentence for a misdemeanor, if the
offender enters an Alford plea, the sentencing court shall not consider whether
the offender showed genuine remorse for the offense.
      (3)   In determining the appropriate sentence for a misdemeanor, in
addition to complying with division (b)(1) of this section, the court may
consider any other factors that are relevant to achieving the purposes and
principles of sentencing set forth in Section
698.02(a).
   (c)   Before imposing a jail term as a sentence for a misdemeanor, a court
shall consider the appropriateness of imposing a community control sanction or
a combination of community control sanctions under §
698.02(c), (d), (e), and (f). A court may impose the longest jail term
authorized under §
698.02(b) only upon offenders who commit the worst forms of the offense or upon
offenders whose conduct and response to prior sanctions for prior offenses
demonstrate that the imposition of the longest jail term is necessary to deter
the offender from committing a future criminal offense.
   (d)   (1)   A sentencing court shall consider any relevant oral and written
statement made by the victim, the victim's representative, the victim's
attorney, if applicable, the defendant, the defense attorney, and the
prosecuting authority regarding sentencing for a misdemeanor. This division
does not create any rights to notice other than those rights authorized by R.C.
Chapter 2930.
      (2)   At the time of sentencing for a misdemeanor or as soon as possible
after sentencing, the court shall notify the victim of the offense of the
victim’s right to file an application for an award of reparations pursuant to
Ohio R.C. 2743.51 to 2743.72.
(R.C. § 2929.22)
§ 698.04 ORGANIZATIONAL PENALTIES.
   (a)   Regardless of the other penalties provided in Section
698.02, an organization convicted of an offense pursuant to Section 606.08
shall be fined by the court as follows:
      (1)   For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00);
      (2)   For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than four thousand
dollars ($4,000.00);
      (3)   For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than three thousand
dollars ($3,000.00);
      (4)   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than two thousand
dollars ($2,000.00);
      (5)   For a minor misdemeanor, not more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00);
      (6)   For a misdemeanor not specifically classified, not more than two
thousand dollars ($2,000.00);
      (7)   For a minor misdemeanor not specifically classified, not more than
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
   (b)   When an organization is convicted of an offense not specifically
classified, and the section defining the offense or penalty plainly indicates a
purpose to impose the penalty provided for violation upon organizations, then
such penalty shall be imposed in lieu of the penalty provided in this section.
   (c)   When an organization is convicted of an offense not specifically
classified, and the penalty provided includes a higher fine than that provided
in this section, then the penalty imposed shall be pursuant to the penalty
provided for violation of the section defining the offense.
   (d)   This section does not prevent the imposition of available civil
sanctions against an organization convicted of an offense pursuant to Section
606.08, either in addition to or in lieu of a fine imposed pursuant to this
section.
(ORC 2929.31)
§ 698.05 MULTIPLE SENTENCES.
   (a)   Except as provided in division (b) of this section, Ohio R.C. 2929.14
(C) or Ohio R.C. 2971.03(D) or (E), a prison term, jail term, or sentence of
imprisonment shall be served concurrently with any other prison term, jail
term, or sentence of imprisonment imposed by a court of this Municipality, the
State, another State, or the United States. Except as provided in division (b)
(2) of this section, a jail term or sentence of imprisonment for misdemeanor
shall be served concurrently with a prison term or sentence of imprisonment for
felony served in a State or Federal correctional institution.
   (b)   (1)   A jail term or sentence of imprisonment for a misdemeanor shall
be served consecutively to any other prison term, jail term, or sentence of
imprisonment when the trial court specifies that it is to be served
consecutively or when it is imposed for a misdemeanor violation of Ohio R.C.
2907.322, 2921.34 or 2923.131. When consecutive sentences are imposed for
misdemeanors under this division, the term to be served is the aggregate of the
consecutive terms imposed, except that the aggregate term to be served shall
not exceed 18 months.
      (2)   A jail term or sentence of imprisonment imposed for a misdemeanor
violation of R.C. § 4510.14, 4510.16, 4510.21 or 4511.19, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, shall be served consecutively to a prison term
that is imposed for a felony violation of R.C. § 2903.06, 2903.08 or 4511.19 or
a felony violation of R.C. § 2903.04 involving the operation of a vehicle by
the offender and that is served in a state correctional institution when the
trial court specifies that it is to be served consecutively. When consecutive
jail terms or sentences of imprisonment and prison terms are imposed for one or
more misdemeanors and one or more felonies under this division, the term to be
served is the aggregate of the consecutive terms imposed, and the offender
shall serve all terms imposed for a felony before serving any term imposed for
a misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 2929.41)
§ 698.06 MODIFICATION OF SENTENCE. (REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
   Section 698.06 was repealed as part of the 2005 updating and revision of
these Codified Ordinances because substantially equivalent State law (Ohio R.C.
2929.51) was repealed by the Ohio General Assembly.
§ 698.07 SUSPENSION OF DRIVER’S LICENSE.
   Except as otherwise provided in Ohio R.C. 4510.07 or in any other provision
of the Revised Code, whenever an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of any provision of this Code of
Ordinances that is substantially equivalent to a provision of the Revised Code,
and a court is permitted or required to suspend a person’s driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit for a violation of that provision, a
court, in addition to any other penalties authorized by law, may suspend the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident
operating privileges for the period of time the court determines appropriate,
but the period of suspension imposed for the violation of the provision of this
Code of Ordinances shall not exceed the period of suspension that is permitted
or required to be imposed for the violation of the provision of the Revised
Code to which the provision of this Code of Ordinances is substantially
equivalent.
(ORC 4510.05)
PART EIGHT: BUSINESS REGULATION AND TAXATION CODE
TITLE TWO - Business Regulation
         
Chap. 808.   Amusement Devices.
         
Chap. 812.   Cable Television Systems.
         
Chap. 816.   VSP Fees.
           
Chap. 828.   Garage and Yard Sales.
           
Chap. 854.   Peddlers and Solicitors.
           
Chap. 868.   Taxicabs.
TITLE FOUR - Taxation
         
Chap. 880.   Admission Tax.
         
Chap. 882.   Municipal Income Tax.
         
Chap. 884.   Motor Vehicle License Tax.
TITLE TWO: BUSINESS REGULATION
CHAPTER 808: AMUSEMENT DEVICES
808.01   Definitions.
808.02   License required.
808.03   License fees.
808.04   License application.
808.05   Character of licensees.
808.06   Mechanical requirements.
808.07   Operation near schools.
808.08   Playing by minors.
808.09   License transfer.
808.10   Change of location.
808.11   Inspection by police.
808.12   License revocation.
808.13   Seizure and destruction of devices.
808.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Coin machine defined - see Ohio R.C. 2913.01
   Coin machines - see GEN. OFF.
642.13,
642.16
   Gambling - see GEN. OFF. Ch.
630
§ 808.01 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   AMUSEMENT DEVICE. Any mechanical and/or electronic machine, device or
game, including video games, pinball machines, marble machines and any similar
amusement machines or devices operated by the insertion of a coin, disc or
other insertion piece, and which register a score after the insertion of such
coin, disc or other insertion piece. The term does not include coin-operated
vending machines, music machines, motion picture machines or other machines or
devices used bona fide and solely for the vending of service, food, merchandise
or entertainment.
   (b)   EXHIBITOR. A person, firm or corporation, owning or conducting a place
of  business in the Village and operating and using or exhibiting one or more
amusement devices at such place of business.
§ 808.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in the business of operating, using or exhibiting
amusement devices without first obtaining a license to do so and complying with
the provisions of this chapter.
§ 808.03 LICENSE FEES.
   Every exhibitor shall pay an annual license fee of twenty-five dollars
($25.00) plus an annual fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each amusement device
maintained or exhibited. An exhibitor operating at more than one location shall
pay a license fee for each location.
§ 808.04 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   An application for an exhibitor’s license or for an amusement device shall
be made to the Clerk of Council on forms provided by him or her. Applications
for an exhibitor’s license shall set forth the places of business and residence
of the exhibitor. If the exhibitor is a firm, the place of residence of all the
partners shall be furnished. If the exhibitor is a corporation, the place of
residence of the chief business manager or other controlling executive officer
shall be furnished. Such application shall, in addition, state the number of
amusement devices for which licenses are requested, the location of the
premises and the particular room on the premises in which such amusement
devices are to be exhibited. If the Clerk of Council is satisfied that the
applicant has complied with all of the provisions of this chapter, and is
otherwise eligible to be a licensee, he or she shall issue the license upon
payment of the license fees. Licenses for amusement devices shall specify the
locations in which they are to be exhibited or maintained. Each license shall
be attached to the machine for which it is issued, so as to be in plain view of
the persons playing the same.
§ 808.05 CHARACTER OF LICENSEES.
   No person shall be licensed as an exhibitor under this chapter unless he or
she is of good moral character. No firm or corporation shall be licensed as an
exhibitor unless all of the members of such firm or all of the officers and
directors of such corporation and the chief business manager of such firm or
corporation are of good moral character. A person convicted within the
preceding five years of a felony or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude
shall be considered as being not of good moral character.
§ 808.06 MECHANICAL REQUIREMENTS.
   No exhibitor or other person shall exhibit, operate or have in his or her
possession an amusement device which is so constructed as to make possible,
either directly or by the use of an adjustment, the return of cash, tickets,
discs or other tokens or certificates of any kind to a player operating the
same, whether or not such tokens or certificates have a value of any kind or
authorize further playing or other privileges. Only machines operated
exclusively for the amusement provided by the operation thereof shall be
licensed.
§ 808.07 OPERATION NEAR SCHOOLS.
   No person shall maintain or exhibit an amusement device on any premises
situated less than 300 feet from the building and grounds of any elementary or
high school, such 300 feet to be measured along the line of the nearest curb.
§ 808.08 PLAYING BY MINORS.
   No exhibitor of one or more amusement devices shall permit the same to be
played or used by a person under 21 years of age.
§ 808.09 LICENSE TRANSFER.
   When the business of an exhibitor is sold or otherwise transferred, the
license of such exhibitor may be transferred to the transferee with the consent
of the Clerk of Council for the remainder of the license period, if the latter
is satisfied that such successor would be eligible to receive a new license.
The transfer of an exhibitor’s license shall carry with it the transfer of the
amusement device license issued to him or her, but the transfer shall be noted
on the books of the Clerk of Council and upon the licenses issued for such
amusement devices.
§ 808.10 CHANGE OF LOCATION.
   No licensed amusement device shall be removed from one premises to another
or from one room to another room on the same premises, unless the new location
is approved by the Clerk of Council and duly noted on the license and on his or
her record. Nothing herein, however, shall be understood to prevent the
replacement of one device by another and the transfer of the license to such
substituted machine, if the same complies with the requirements of this
chapter.
§ 808.11 INSPECTION BY POLICE.
   All amusement devices and all premises in which devices are maintained or
exhibited shall be open to inspection by police officers during normal business
hours. No person shall fail to give any police officer access to any machine
for such purpose.
§ 808.12 LICENSE REVOCATION.
   Should any exhibitor violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter, it shall be the duty of the Clerk of Council to revoke his or her
license. The exhibitor shall be provided notice of the revocation and afforded
an opportunity to appeal the revocation to the Village Council within 20 days
following receipt of the notice. In the case of the revocation of an
exhibitor’s license, the licenses of all devices operated by him or her on his
or her premises shall be revoked and such devices removed from the premises
within 24 hours thereafter.
§ 808.13 SEIZURE AND DESTRUCTION OF DEVICES.
   If any amusement device is used as a gambling device or is otherwise
operated contrary to the provisions of State law or this chapter or any other
ordinance of the Village, such device may, at the discretion of the Mayor, be
seized and destroyed, as in the case of gaming devices.
§ 808.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or
continues.
CHAPTER 812: CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEMS
812.01   Definitions.
812.02   Initial review and establishment of basic cable rates.
812.03   Review and approval of requests for increases in basic cable rates.
812.04   Cable operator information.
812.05   Automatic rate adjustments.
812.06   Refunds.
812.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Cable television contracts - see Ohio R.C. 505.90 et seq.
   Interrupting or impairing television service - see Ohio R.C. 2909.04
   Regulation of political broadcasts - see Ohio R.C. 3599.09
   “Property” defined to include cable television service - see GEN. OFF.
606.01(n)
   “Services” defined to include cable television service - see GEN. OFF.
642.01(a), (q)
§ 812.01 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   BASIC CABLE RATES. The monthly charges for a subscription to the basic
service tier and the associated equipment.
   (b)   BASIC SERVICE TIER. A separately available service tier to which
subscription is required for access to any other tier of service, including, as
a minimum, but not limited to, all must-carry signals, all PEG channels and all
domestic television signals other than superstations.
   (c)   BENCHMARK. A per-channel rate of charge for cable service and
associated equipment which the FCC has determined is reasonable.
   (d)   CABLE ACT OF 1992. The Cable Television Consumer Protection and
Competition Act of 1992, being 47 U.S.C. §§ 554 et seq.
   (e)   CABLE OPERATOR. Any person or group of persons who or which:
      (1)   Provides cable service over a cable system and, directly or through
one or more affiliates, owns a significant interest in such a cable system; or
      (2)   Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement,
the management and operation of such a cable system.
   (f)   CHANNEL. A unit of cable service identified and selected by a channel
number or similar designation.
   (g)   COST OF SERVICE SHOWING. A filing in which a cable operator attempts
to show that the benchmark rate or the price cap is not sufficient to allow the
cable operator to fully recover the costs of providing the basic service tier
and to continue to attract capital.
   (h)   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission.
   (i)   INITIAL BASIC CABLE RATES. The rates that a cable operator is charging
for the basic service tier, including charges for associated equipment, at the
time the Village notifies the cable operator of the Village’s qualification and
intent to regulate basic cable rates.
   (j)   INTERCOMMUNITY CABLE REGULATORY COMMISSION (ICR). A regional council
of governments organized under Ohio law, of which the Village is a member,
having the authority to conduct certain administrative procedures on behalf of
the Village in relation to this chapter.
   (k)   MUST-CARRY SIGNAL. The signal of any local broadcast station (except
superstations) which is required to be carried on the basic service tier.
   (l)   PEG CHANNEL. The channel capacity designated for public, educational
or governmental use, and facilities and equipment for the use of that channel
capacity.
   (m)   PRICE CAP. The ceiling set by the FCC on future increases in basic
cable rates regulated by the Village, based on a formula using the Gross
National Product fixed weight price index, reflecting general increases in the
cost of doing business and changes in overall inflation.
   (n)   REASONABLE RATE STANDARD. A per channel rate that is at, or below, the
benchmark or price cap level.
   (o)   SUPERSTATION. Any non-local broadcast signal secondarily transmitted
by satellite.
(Ord. 9-1994, passed 2-8-94)
§ 812.02 INITIAL REVIEW AND ESTABLISHMENT OF BASIC CABLE RATES.
   (a)   Notification of operators of village’s intent to regulate. Upon the
adoption of this section and the certification of the Village by the FCC, the
Village or the ICRC shall immediately notify all cable operators in the
Village, by certified mail, return receipt requested, that the Village intends
to regulate subscriber rates charged for the basic service tier and associated
equipment as authorized by the Cable Act of 1992, being 47 U.S.C. §§ 554 et
seq.
   (b)   Cable operator response. Within 30 days of receiving notice from the
Village or the ICRC, a cable operator shall file with the Village or the ICRC,
its current rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment and any
supporting material concerning the reasonableness of its rates.
   (c)   Expedited determination of rates.
      (1)   If Council is able to expeditiously determine that a cable
operator’s rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment are within
the FCC’s reasonable rate standard, as determined by the applicable benchmark,
Council shall:
         A.   Hold a public hearing at which interested persons may express
their views; and
         B.   Act to approve the rates within 30 days from the date the cable
operator filed its basic cable rates with the Village.
      (2)   If Council or the ICRC takes no action within 30 days from the date
the cable operator filed its basic cable rates with the Village, the proposed
rates will continue in effect.
      (3)   Such public hearing may be held in conjunction with other ICRC
communities under the direction of the ICRC.
   (d)   Extended review of rates. 
      (1)   If Council is unable to determine whether the rates at issue are
within the FCC’s reasonable rate standard based on the material before it, or
if the cable operator submits a cost-of-service showing, Council shall, within
60 days from the date the cable operator filed its basic cable rates with the
Village, and by adoption of a formal resolution, invoke the following
additional periods of time, as applicable, to make a final determination:
         A.   Ninety days if Council needs more time to ensure that a rate is
within the FCC’s reasonable rate standard; or
         B.   150 days if the cable operator has submitted a cost-of-service
showing seeking to justify a rate above the applicable benchmark.
      (2)   If Council has not made a decision within the ninety or 150-day
period, it shall issue a brief written order at the end of the period
requesting the cable operator to keep an accurate account of all amounts
received by reason of the proposed rate and on whose behalf the amounts are
paid.
   (e)   Public hearings. During the extended review period and before taking
action on the proposed rate, Council or the ICRC shall hold at least one public
hearing at which interested persons may express their views and record
objections.
   (f)   Objections. An interested person who wishes to make an objection to
the proposed initial basic rate may request the secretary to record the
objection during the public hearing or may submit the objection in writing
anytime before the decision resolution is adopted. In order for an objection to
be made part of the record, the objector must provide the secretary with the
objector’s name and address.
   (g)   Benchmark analysis. If a cable operator submits its current basic
cable rate schedule as being in compliance with the FCC’s reasonable rate
standard, Council or the ICRC shall review the rates using the benchmark
analysis in accordance with the standard form authorized by the FCC. Based on
the Village Council or the ICRC’s findings, the initial basic cable rates shall
be established as follows:
      (1)   If the current basic cable rates are below the benchmark, those
rates shall become the initial basic cable rates, and the cable operator’s
rates will be capped at that level.
      (2)   If the current basic cable rates exceed the benchmark, the rates
shall be the greater of the cable operator’s per channel rate on September 30,
1992, reduced by ten percent, or the applicable benchmark, adjusted for
inflation and any change in the number of channels occurring between September
30, 1992, and the initial date of regulation.
      (3)   If the current basic cable rates exceed the benchmark, but the
cable operator’s per channel rate was below the benchmark on September 30,
1992, the initial basic cable rate shall be the benchmark, adjusted for
inflation.
   (h)   Cost-of-service showings. If a cable operator does not wish to reduce
the rates to the permitted level, the cable operator shall have the opportunity
to submit a cost-of-service showing in an attempt to justify initial basic
cable rates above the FCC’s reasonable rate standard. Council will review a
cost-of-service submission pursuant to FCC standards for cost-of-service
review. Council may approve initial basic cable rates above the benchmark if
the cable operator makes the necessary showing. However, a cost-of-service
determination resulting in rates below the benchmark or below the cable
operator’s September 30, 1992, rates minus ten percent, will prescribe the
cable operator’s new rates.
   (i)   Decisions of Council.
      (1)   Contents of formal resolutions. After completion by the Village or
the ICRC of the cable operator’s proposed rates, Council shall adopt its
decision by formal resolution. The decision shall include one of the following:
         A.   If the proposal is within the FCC’s reasonable rate standard or
is justified by a cost-of- service analysis, Council shall approve the initial
basic cable rates proposed by the cable operator; or
         B.   If the proposal is not within the FCC’s reasonable rate standard
and the cost-of-service analysis, if any, does not justify the proposed rates,
Council shall establish initial basic cable rates that are within the FCC’s
reasonable rate standard or that are justified by a cost-of-service analysis.
      (2)   Rollbacks and refunds. If Council determines that the initial basic
cable rates as submitted exceed the reasonable rate standard or that the cable
operator’s cost-of-service showing justifies lower rates, Council may order the
rates reduced in accordance with subsection (g) or (h) hereof, as applicable.
In addition, Council may order the cable operator to pay to subscribers refunds
of the excessive portion of the rates, with interest (computed at applicable
rates published by the Internal Revenue Service for tax refunds and additional
tax payments), retroactive to September 1, 1993. The method for paying any
refund and the interest rate will be in accordance with FCC regulations as
directed in Council’s decision resolution.
      (3)   Statements of reasons for decisions and public notice. If rates
proposed by a cable operator are disapproved, in whole or in part, or if there
were objections made by other parties to the proposed rates, the resolution
must state the reasons for the decision and Council must give public notice of
its decision. Public notice will be given by advertisement once in the official
newspaper of the Village.
   (j)   Appeals. Council’s decision concerning rates for the basic service
tier or associated equipment may be appealed to the FCC in accordance with
applicable Federal regulations.
(Ord. 9-1994, passed 2-8-94)
§ 812.03 REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF REQUESTS FOR INCREASES IN BASIC CABLE RATES.
   (a)   Notification to Village and subscribers of proposed increases. A cable
operator in the Village who wishes to increase the rates for the basic service
tier or associated equipment shall file a request with the Village and the ICRC
and notify all subscribers at least thirty days before the cable operator
desires the increase to take effect. This notice may not be given more often
than annually and not until at least one year after the determination of the
initial basic cable rates.
   (b)   Expedited determination of rates.
      (1)   If Council or the ICRC is able to expeditiously determine that the
cable operator’s rate increase request for basic cable service is within the
FCC’s reasonable rate standard, as determined by the applicable price cap,
Council shall:
         A.   Hold a public hearing at which interested persons may express
their views; and
         B.   Act to approve the rate increase within thirty days from the date
the cable operator filed its request with the Village.
      (2)   If Council takes no action within thirty days from the date the
cable operator filed its request with the Village, the proposed rates will go
into effect.
      (3)   During the extended review period and before taking action on the
proposed rate, Council or the ICRC shall hold at least one public hearing at
which interested persons may express their views and record objections.
   (c)   Extended review of rates.
      (1)   If Council and the ICRC are unable to determine whether the rate
increase is within the FCC’s reasonable rate standard based on the material
before it, or if the cable operator submits a cost-of- service showing, Council
shall, by adoption of a formal resolution, invoke the following additional
periods of time, as applicable, to make a final determination:
         A.   Ninety days if Council or the ICRC needs more time to ensure that
the requested increase is within the FCC’s reasonable rate standard as
determined by the applicable price cap; and
         B.   150 days if the cable operator has submitted a cost-of-service
showing seeking to justify a rate increase above the applicable price cap.
      (2)   The proposed rate increase shall be tolled during the extended
review period.
      (3)   If Council has not made a decision within the 90 or 150-day period,
it shall issue a brief written order at the end of the period requesting the
cable operator to keep an accurate account of all amounts received by reason of
the proposed rate increase and on whose behalf the amounts are paid.
   (d)   Public hearings. During the extended review period and before taking
action on the requested rate increase, Council or the ICRC shall hold at least
one public hearing at which interested persons may express their views and
record objections.
   (e)   Objections. An interested person who wishes to make an objection to
the proposed rate increase may request the secretary to record the objection
during the public hearing or may submit  the objection in writing anytime
before the decision resolution is adopted. In order for an objection to be made
part of the record, the objector must provide the secretary with the objector’s
name and address.
   (f)   Delayed determinations. If Council is unable to make a final
determination concerning a requested rate increase within the extended time
period, the cable operator may put the increase into effect, subject to
subsequent refund if Council later issues a decision disapproving any portion
of the increase.
   (g)   Price cap analysis. If a cable operator presents its request for a
rate increase as being in compliance with the FCC’s price cap, Council shall
review the rate using the price cap analysis in accordance with the standard
form authorized by the FCC. Based on Council’s findings, the basic cable rate
shall be established as follows:
      (1)   If the proposed basic cable rate increase is within the price cap
established by the FCC, the proposed rates shall become the new basic cable
rates.
      (2)   If the proposed basic cable rate increase exceeds the price cap
established by the FCC, Council shall disapprove the proposed rate increase and
order an increase that is in compliance with the price cap.
   (h)   Cost-of-Service Showings. If a cable operator submits a cost-of-
service showing in an attempt to justify a rate increase above the price cap,
Council will review the submission pursuant to FCC standards for cost-of-
service review. Council may approve a rate increase above the price cap if the
cable operator makes the necessary showing. However, a cost-of-service
determination resulting in a rate below the price cap or below the cable
operator’s then-current rate will prescribe the cable operator’s new rate.
   (i)   Decisions of Council. Council’s decision concerning the requested rate
increase shall be adopted by formal resolution. If a rate increase proposed by
a cable operator is disapproved, in whole or in part, or if objections were
made by other parties to the proposed rate increase, then the resolution must
state the reasons for the decision. Objections may be made at the public
hearing by a person requesting the secretary to record the objection or may be
submitted in writing at any time before the decision resolution is adopted.
   (j)   Refunds.
      (1)   Council may order refunds of subscribers’ rate payments, with
interest, if:
         A.   Council was unable to make a decision within the extended time
period described in subsection (c) hereof; and
         B.   The cable operator implemented the rate increase at the end of
the extended review period; and
         C.   Council determines that the rate increase as submitted exceeds
the applicable price cap or that the cable operator failed to justify the rate
increase by a cost-of-service showing, and Council disapproves any portion of
the rate increase.
      (2)   The method for paying any refund and the interest rate will be in
accordance with FCC regulations as directed in Council’s decision resolution.
   (k)   Appeals. Council’s decision concerning rate increases for the basic
service tier or associated equipment may be appealed to the FCC in accordance
with applicable Federal regulations.
(Ord. 9-1994, passed 2-8-94)
§ 812.04 CABLE OPERATOR INFORMATION.
   (a)   Required.
      (1)   In those cases when the cable operator has submitted initial rates
or proposed an increase that exceeds the reasonable rate standard, Council or
the ICRC may require the cable operator to produce information in addition to
that submitted, including proprietary information, if needed to make a rate
determination. In these cases, a cable operator may request that the
information be kept confidential in accordance with this section.
      (2)   In cases where initial or proposed rates comply with the reasonable
rate standard, Council or the ICRC may request additional information only in
order to document that the cable operator’s rates are in accordance with the
standard.
   (b)   Requests for confidentiality. 
      (1)   A cable operator submitting information to Council may request, in
writing, that the information not be made routinely available for public
inspection. A copy of the request shall be attached to and cover all of the
information and all copies of the information to which it applies.
      (2)   If feasible, the information to which the request applies shall be
physically separated from any information to which the request does not apply.
If this is not feasible, the portion of the information to which the request
applies shall be identified.
      (3)   Each request shall contain a statement of the reasons for
withholding inspection and a statement of the facts upon which those reasons
are based.
      (4)   Casual requests which do not comply with the requirements of this
subsection shall not be considered.
   (c)   Council action. Requests which comply with the requirements of
subsection (b) hereof will be acted upon by Council. Council will grant the
request if the cable operator presents, by a preponderance of the evidence, a
case for nondisclosure consistent  with applicable Federal regulations. If the
request is granted, the ruling will be placed in a public file in lieu of the
information withheld from public inspection. If the request does not present a
case for nondisclosure and Council denies the request, Council shall take one
of the following actions:
      (1)   If the information has been submitted voluntarily without any
direction from the Village, the cable operator may request that the Village
return the information without considering it. Ordinarily, the Village will
comply with this request. Only in the unusual instance when the public interest
so requires will the information be made available for public inspection.
      (2)   If the information was required to be submitted by Council, the
information will be made available for public inspection.
   (d)   Appeals. If Council denies the request for confidentiality, the cable
operator may seek review of that decision from the FCC within five working days
of Council’s decision, and the release of the information will be stayed
pending review.
(Ord. 9-1994, passed 2-8-94)
§ 812.05 AUTOMATIC RATE ADJUSTMENTS.
   (a)   Annual inflation adjustment. In accordance with FCC regulations, the
cable operator may adjust its capped base per-channel rate for the basic
service tier annually by the final GNP-PI Index.
   (b)   Other external costs.
      (1)   The FCC regulations also allow the cable operator to increase its
rate for the basic service tier automatically to reflect certain external cost
factors to the extent that the increase in cost of those factors exceeds the
GNP-PI. These factors include retransmission consent fees, programming costs,
State and local taxes applicable to the provision of cable television service
and costs of franchise requirements. The total cost of an increase in a
franchise fee may be automatically added to the base per channel rate, without
regard to its relation to the GNP-PI.
      (2)   For all categories of external costs other than retransmission
consent and franchise fees, the starting date for measuring changes in external
costs for which the basic service per-channel rate may be adjusted will be the
date on which the basic service tier becomes subject to regulation, or February
28, 1994, whichever occurs first. The permitted per- channel charge may not be
adjusted for costs of retransmission consent fees or changes in those fees
incurred before October 6, 1994.
   (c)   Notification and review. The cable operator shall notify the Village
at least 30 days in advance of a rate increase based on automatic adjustment
items. The Village shall review the increase to determine whether the item or
items qualify as automatic adjustments. If the Village makes no objection
within 30 days of receiving notice of the increase, the increase may go into
effect.
(Ord. 9-1994, passed 2-8-1994)
§ 812.06 REFUNDS.
   The Village may order the cable operator to refund to subscribers a portion
of previously paid rates under the following circumstances:
   (a)   A portion of the previously paid rates have been determined to be in
excess of the permitted tier charge or above the actual cost of equipment; or
   (b)   The cable operator has failed to comply with a valid rate order issued
by the Village.
(Ord. 9-1994, passed 2-8-94)
§ 812.99 PENALTY.
   If a cable operator fails to comply with a rate decision or refund order,
the cable operator shall be subject to a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00)
for each day that the cable operator fails to comply.
(Ord. 9-1994, passed 2-8-1994)
CHAPTER 816: VSP FEES
816.01   Definitions.
816.02   VSP fee.
816.03   VSP fee notice provision.
816.04   VSP access provision.
816.05   Access programming requirements.
816.06   Fee payment requirements.
816.07   PEG origination point.
816.08   Notice requirement.
816.09   Application to incumbent cable providers.
§ 816.01 DEFINITIONS.
   The following definitions apply to the terms used herein:
   (a)   INCUMBENT CABLE PROVIDER means any person who on the effective date of
this chapter is the holder of a cable franchise agreement with Woodlawn as
granted pursuant to requirements of 47 U.S.C. 541.
   (b)   PEG means the activities or actions performed for the benefit of
public, educational and government video programming by the Village.
   (c)   VIDEO SERVICE means the service defined in Ohio R.C. § 1332.21(1).
   (d)   VIDEO SERVICE AUTHORIZATION or VSA means the authorization granted to
a video service provider in accordance with the requirements of Ohio R.C.§§
1332.21 to 1332.34 et seq.
   (e)   VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE or VSP FEE means the fee paid by a VSP in
accordance with the requirements of Ohio R.C. § 1332.32.
   (f)   VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER or VSP means a person, firm, or corporation
granted a video service authorization under Ohio R.C. §§ 1332.21 to 1332.34 et
seq.
(Res. 24-2009, passed 9-29-2009)
§ 816.02 VSP FEE.
   In accordance with the requirements of Ohio R.C. § 1332.32, all VSPs
providing video service in the Village pursuant to a VSA obtained from the
Director of the Ohio Department of Commerce shall pay a VSP fee in the amount
of 5% of gross revenues received from providing video service in the Village,
which gross revenue base shall include advertising revenues. The VSP fee shall
be paid quarterly, not later than 60 days after the end of each calendar
quarter.
(Res. 24-2009, passed 9-29-2009)
§ 816.03 VSP FEE NOTICE PROVISION.
   Upon receipt of notice from a VSP that it will begin providing Video Service
in Woodlawn pursuant to a state-issued video service authorization, the Mayor
or his or her designee is authorized and directed to provide such VSP with
notice of the VSP Fee as determined by this chapter, which notice shall be
delivered in a manner that provides for proof of timely delivery.
(Res. 24-2009, passed 9-29-2009)
§ 816.04 VSP ACCESS PROVISION.
   Upon receipt of notice from a VSP that it will begin providing video service
in the Village pursuant to a VSA, the Mayor or his or her designee is
authorized and directed to provide such VSP with notice that the VSP shall be
required to provide the same number of PEG channels in the Village under the
same service tier conditions and subject to the same channel reclamation
conditions as may be proscribed by Ohio R.C. § 1332.30(A)(i)(a) and (b) for the
incumbent cable provider with the most recent obligation in the Village, which
notice shall be delivered in a manner that provides for proof of timely
delivery and shall state the appropriate number of PEG channels and service
tiers required to be provided by the VSP within the Village within 120 days
after delivery of such notice.
(Res. 24-2009, passed 9-29-2009)
§ 816.05 ACCESS PROGRAMMING REQUIREMENTS.
   In accordance with the requirements of Ohio R.C. § 1332.30(A)(1)(a) when
more than three PEG access channels are provided to the Village by an incumbent
cable provider or VSP, such additional channel shall be programmed by the
Village with at least 40 hours of non-character generated content per week with
at least 60% of the programming being non-repeat and locally produced. For the
purposes of this section NON-REPEAT AND LOCALLY PRODUCED shall mean the first
three playbacks of programming produced or provided by any local resident, the
Village or its affiliates, or any local public or private agency that provides
services to residents of Hamilton County, or any transmission of a meeting or
proceeding of any local, state, or federal governmental entity.
(Res. 24-2009, passed 9-29-2009)
§ 816.06 FEE PAYMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   Any VSP fee or community service fee payments required to be paid to the
Village by a VSP shall be made quarterly and be remitted directly to the
Village via appropriate negotiable instrument made payable to the Village of
Woodlawn, 10141 Woodlawn Boulevard, Woodlawn, Ohio 45215, not later than 60
days after the end of each calendar quarter.
(Res. 24-2009, passed 9-29-2009)
§ 816.07 PEG ORIGINATION POINT.
   The PEG programming origination point of the Village for the delivery of VSP
access services shall be located at ICRC, 2492 Commodity Circle, Cincinnati,
Ohio 45241.
(Res. 24-2009, passed 9-29-2009)
§ 816.08 NOTICE REQUIREMENT.
   Any notice of the Village that is required of a VSP in accordance with Ohio
R.C. §§ 1332.21 through 1332.34 shall be provided in written form to the Mayor,
either by certified mail, express mail or upon personal delivery, all evidenced
by a return receipt.
(Res. 24-2009, passed 9-29-2009)
§ 816.09 APPLICATION TO INCUMBENT CABLE PROVIDERS.
   The additional requirements applicable to VSPs enacted in this chapter shall
not apply to incumbent cable providers. The relationship between the Village
and such providers shall continue to be governed by the franchise agreement
between the parties until its expiration or until the incumbent cable provider
is granted a VSA in accordance with Ohio R.C. §§ 1332.21 through 1332.34 et
seq.
(Res. 24-2009, passed 9-29-2009)
CHAPTER 828: GARAGE AND YARD SALES
828.01   Continuous sales.
828.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Auctions - see Ohio R.C. 1302.41, Ch. 4707
   Christmas tree sales - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4551
   Peddlers and solicitors - see B. R. & T. Ch.
854
§ 828.01 CONTINUOUS SALES.
   No person shall conduct a garage sale or yard sale continuously. As used in
this section, “continuously” means more often than every six months and for a
continuous period of more than two three-day periods per year.
(Ord. 10-1986, passed 3-11-86)
§ 828.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for
each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 10-1986, passed 3-11-86)
CHAPTER 854: PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
854.01   Definitions.
854.02   General rules.
854.03   Commercial solicitation permit requirements.
854.04   Applications for commercial solicitation permits.
854.05   Investigation.
854.06   Appeal of denial.
854.07   Issuance of commercial solicitation permit.
854.08   Revocation of commercial solicitation permits.
854.09   No solicitation notice.
854.10   Violations.
854.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Home solicitation sales - see Ohio R.C. 1345.21 et seq.
   Charitable solicitations - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 1716
   Frozen desserts - see Ohio R.C. 3717.51 et seq.
   Sales of goods and services within right of way of Interstate and other
State highways - see Ohio R.C. 5517.07
   Littering - see GEN. OFF.
660.03
§ 854.01 DEFINITIONS.
   The following definitions shall be applicable to this chapter:
   CANVASSERS. Any person traveling door-to-door within the community, to
canvas or advocate for a cause, organization or person, or any person
conducting a survey, advocating a religious organization or ministry, or
presenting handbills for a person, cause or organization so long as such
canvassing does not involve the solicitation or request for donations.
   COMMERCIAL SOLICITORS. Any individual, group of individuals, business
entity, organization (both for-profit or not-for-profit) or any agent of such
business entity or organization which travels door-to-door within the
community, which either solicits or offers for sale either for present or
future delivery any goods, merchandise or services, whether  monies are
collected at the time of such solicitation or to be paid in the future.
   COMMUNITY. As referenced herein, the term community shall mean the Village
of Woodlawn, Ohio.
   DOOR-TO-DOOR. Travel by foot, motor vehicle or any other type of conveyance
from house-to-house, building-to-building or door-to-door within the community.
Such solicitation does not include telephone, internet or any other electronic
communication. Door-to-door travel is intended to mean the personal contact
between two or more individuals at a home, office or building within the
community.
   NON-COMMERCIAL SOLICITORS. Any individual, group of individuals, business
entity, organization (both for-profit or not- for-profit) or any agent of such
business entity or organization which  travels door-to-door within the
community, which either solicits or requests donations for any organization,
person or cause, whether monies are collected at the time of such solicitation
or to be paid in the future.
(Ord. 29-2024, passed 12-17-2024)
§ 854.02 GENERAL RULES.
   (a)   In addition to the requirements set forth below for permits by
commercial solicitors, all solicitors, commercial or non-commercial, or
canvassers traveling door-to-door within any residential area of the Village to
solicit donations, canvas, or offer goods or services for sale, shall carry
appropriate photo identification and shall exhibit the same upon the request of
any resident contacted within the Village.
   (b)   In addition to the permit required for commercial solicitors as set
forth below, any solicitor, commercial or non-commercial, or canvasser under 18
years of age traveling door-to-door within any residential area of the Village
to solicit donations, canvas, or offer goods or services for sale, must be
accompanied by a parent, guardian or supervising adult. Such parent, guardian
or supervising adult shall have photo identification for himself or herself
with him or her at all times and shall exhibit the same upon request of any
resident contacted within the community.
   (c)   No person or organization shall solicit, whether commercial or non-
commercial, or canvass within any residential area of the community between the
hours of 7:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. daily.
(Ord. 29-2024, passed 12-17-2024)
§ 854.03 COMMERCIAL SOLICITATION PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   Commercial solicitors intending to sell or offer for sale goods or services
through door-to-door solicitation in any residential area of the Village shall
be required to register in advance with the Village through the Police
Department. Each organization, business entity, groups of individuals or
individuals
will be issued a permit upon appropriate application to the Village so long as
such organization, business entity, group of individuals or individuals meet
the requirements of this chapter for appropriate registration and authorization
to conduct the solicitation within the community.
(Ord. 29-2024, passed 12-17-2024)
§ 854.04 APPLICATIONS FOR COMMERCIAL SOLICITATION PERMITS.
   (a)   Applicants for permits shall file an application with the Chief of
Police containing the following information:
      (1)   Name of applicant and all agents of the applicant who will offer or
sell goods or services within the Village.
      (2)   Permanent home address and/or business address of the applicant who
will offer for sale or solicit sales of goods or services within the Village.
      (3)   A brief description of the nature of the business or organization
offering such goods or services to be sold and a brief description of the goods
or services to be sold.
      (4)   The length of time during which the right to do business or the
right to solicit sales within the community is desired; provided, however, that
this right may not exceed a period of three months. This shall not restrict a
commercial solicitor from selling or soliciting for sale for a period of 12
months throughout the community, but the commercial solicitor must renew such
permit after its three-month expiration with such renewal being the same
procedure for the issuance of a new permit.
      (5)   Photographic identification of the applicant and photographic
identification of all agents of the applicant who will be selling or soliciting
for sales within the Village.
      (6)   A statement as to whether the applicant, or any agent of the
applicant who will be selling or soliciting for sales within the Village, has
been convicted of any crime or misdemeanor, the nature of the offense and the
punishment or penalty assessed for such violation. The application shall
acknowledge that the Chief of Police shall access and review the applicant's
and any agent of the applicant's criminal record.
   (b)   All new and renewal applications must be accompanied by a non-
refundable application fee in accordance with the most current schedule of fees
adopted by Village Council.
(Ord. 29-2024, passed 12-17-2024)
§ 854.05 INVESTIGATION.
   (a)   Upon receipt of the completed application for a commercial
solicitation permit by the Chief of Police, the Chief of Police shall cause an
investigation of the applicant's or applicant's agent's business and moral
character to be made as the Chief may deem necessary for the protection of the
public good. This review shall be completed by the Chief of Police within five
business days. If the investigation is not completed within that period of time
the applicant may deem the application to be denied and the applicant may
appeal the deemed denial similar to an appeal as set forth in § 854.06.
   (b)   If the Chief of Police's review of the application determines that any
applicant or agent of the applicant has been convicted of a crime of moral
turpitude, any crime of violence which may present a danger to the public, any
sex offense crime, any crime of theft or deception, or any drug offense, the
application, or the right of any agent of the applicant to solicit in the
community, may be denied. If such application is denied the Chief of Police
shall endorse such denial upon the application and state the reasons for the
same and then return the application to the applicant with a copy to the
Municipal Manager. A copy of the application shall be returned either in person
or by ordinary mail directed to the applicant's address as listed on the
original application.
(Ord. 29-2024, passed 12-17-2024)
§ 854.06 APPEAL OF DENIAL.
   (a)   If an application has been denied as stated herein, the applicant may
file such appeal within ten calendar days after written notice of such denial
has been either delivered to the applicant or mailed to the applicant by
ordinary mail to the applicant's last known address. Such appeal shall be
brought to the Municipal Manager by filing a copy with the office of the
Municipal Manager and a copy with the Chief of Police.
   (b)   The Municipal Manager or his or her designee shall then hold a hearing
upon such appeal at which the Chief of Police or their designee shall present
the appropriate evidence to the Municipal Manager upon which the application
was denied. The applicant may be present at the public hearing and may present
evidence to refute the findings of the Chief of Police. Upon hearing all
evidence the Municipal Manager may affirm, modify or, for good cause shown,
overrule the decision of the Chief of Police. The decision of the Municipal
Manager shall be rendered within ten days of the conclusion of the hearing.
Such decision shall be made in writing and presented personally to the
applicant or mailed by ordinary mail to the applicant at the last known address
provided in the application. The decision by the Municipal Manager may be
appealed as an administrative decision according to Ohio law.
(Ord. 29-2024, passed 12-17-2024)
§ 854.07 ISSUANCE OF COMMERCIAL SOLICITATION PERMIT.
   (a)   If as a result of the investigation the Chief of Police approves the
permit, the Chief shall endorse such approval upon the commercial solicitation
permit application. Each application shall then be assigned an appropriate
permit number and a copy of the approved application shall be returned to the
applicant. The applicant must at all times carry a copy of such approved permit
and appropriate photo identification upon his or her person when soliciting for
sales within the Village. A copy of the approved application shall be provided
to all agents of the applicant who have been identified to solicit sales within
the community, all of whom shall carry a copy of the permit and appropriate
identification when soliciting sales within the Village.
   (b)   In addition to any criminal offense for a violation of this section,
the approved permit granted to such applicant or the applicant's agent may
immediately be suspended for failure to comply with this section. Any such
suspension may be appealed by the permittee under the same procedure set forth
in §
854.06.
(Ord. 29-2024, passed 12-17-2024)
§ 854.08 REVOCATION OF COMMERCIAL SOLICITATION PERMITS.
   (a)   Commercial solicitation permits issued under the provisions of this
chapter may be revoked by the Chief of Police after notice and hearing for any
of the following causes:
      (1)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for a permit;
      (2)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on the business of the commercial solicitor;
      (3)   Any violation of this chapter;
      (4)   Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving any crime of
violence which may present a danger to the public or any sex offense crime or
drug offense; or
      (5)   Conducting the business of the commercial solicitor in an unlawful
manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of peace or a menace to
the health, safety or general welfare of the public.
   (b)   An issued permit will be immediately suspended upon the issuance of a
notice of hearing by the Chief of Police, under this section, and will remain
suspended pending a decision to reinstate the permit by the Municipal Manager.
   (c)   Notice of the hearing for revocation of permits shall be given in
writing setting forth specifically the grounds for such revocation and the time
and place of the hearing. The notice shall be delivered personally to the
permit holder or mailed to the permittee at his or her last known address at
least five business days prior to the date set for the hearing. Such hearing
shall be held within ten business days of the notice of revocation unless
extended by agreement with the permit holder.
   (d)   Such hearing shall be conducted by the Municipal Manager, or his or
her designee, as a public hearing. The Municipal Manager, upon reviewing the
evidence presented, may uphold the decision of the Chief of Police to revoke
the commercial solicitation permit, may modify the decision or may overrule the
decision of the Chief of Police. The Municipal Manager's decision shall be
rendered within ten calendar days of the hearing and shall be rendered in
writing with a copy mailed, postage prepaid, to the permittee at his or her
last known address. Pending a review by the Municipal Manager the commercial
solicitation permit shall be temporarily suspended. If the Municipal Manager
fails to render a decision within ten calendar days after the hearing then a
decision of the Chief of Police shall be deemed to be overruled and the permit
reinstated.
(Ord. 29-2024, passed 12-17-2024)
§ 854.09 NO SOLICITATION NOTICE.
   Any resident or business within the community may post a no solicitation
sign conspicuously on the property to bar entry to the property from any
commercial or non-commercial solicitors and canvassers. No commercial or non-
commercial solicitors or canvassers shall enter upon such residential or
business property where such sign has been posted.
(Ord. 29-2024, passed 12-17-2024)
§ 854.10 VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, organization or entity regulated by
this chapter to:
   (a)   Enter upon any residential or business property within the community
if such property has been appropriately posted to prohibit on-site
solicitation;
   (b)   To solicit, whether commercial or non-commercial, or canvas within any
residential area of the community between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
daily;
   (c)   To solicit sales within the community without appropriately obtaining
a permit in advance;
   (d)   To solicit sales within the community without having a copy of such
permit on such person;
   (e)   To solicit, whether commercial or non-commercial, or canvas in the
community without appropriate photo identification or refuse to exhibit such
photo identification to a resident or business resident when requested;
   (f)   Solicit, whether commercial or non-commercial, or canvas in the
community without being accompanied by a parent, guardian or supervising adult
if such solicitor or canvasser is under the age of 18 years;
   (g)   Accompany an underage solicitor or canvasser as an accompanying
parent, guardian or supervising adult without appropriate photo identification;
   (h)   Remain on such residential or business property without permission of
the occupant or homeowner after the commercial or non-commercial solicitor or
canvasser has been requested by the owner/occupant or person in charge of the
premises to leave such private premises;
   (i)   Make any false statement or misrepresentation in the process of
applying for a commercial solicitation permit; or
   (j)   Violate any other section of this chapter not specified herein.
(Ord. 29-2024, passed 12-17-2024)
§ 854.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a minor
misdemeanor for a first offense. A subsequent violation of the provisions of
this chapter within one year shall be a misdemeanor of the fourth degree
punishable by a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and
incarceration for not more than 30 days.
(Ord. 29-2024, passed 12-17-2024)
CHAPTER 868: TAXICABS
868.01   Definitions.
868.02   License required; fee.
868.03   License application.
868.04   License issuance.
868.05   Extent of liability.
868.06   Bond in lieu of insurance.
868.07   Termination of insurance or bond.
868.08   Methods of determining fares.
868.09   Rate schedules.
868.10   Employment of unlicensed drivers.
868.11   License transfer, owner to owner.
868.12   Private carrying of passengers for hire.
868.13   Nonresident owners.
868.14   Motor vehicles resembling public vehicles.
868.15   Immoral use of public vehicles; license revocation.
868.16   Rules and regulations.
868.17   License revocation, suspension or    refusal.
868.18   Revocation or suspension procedure.
868.19   Appeal.
868.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Power to regulate - see Ohio R.C. 715.22, 715.25
   Power to establish stands and fix rates - see Ohio R.C. 715.25; TRAF.
406.03(1)
   Operation generally - see TRAF. Ch.
432
   Safety and equipment - see TRAF. Ch.
438
   Taxicab stands - see TRAF.
452.10
§ 868.01 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   COMPENSATION. Any fare, reward, tip, donation or other thing of value
which a driver or owner of a vehicle accepts or receives or offers to accept or
receive in return for furnishing the service of transporting any person.
   (b)   LICENSEE. Any person to whom the Mayor has issued a public vehicle
license.
   (c)   OWNER OF A PUBLIC VEHICLE. The person who has good title to a public
vehicle or a lawful bill of sale or certificate of title and who, in the
conduct of his or her business, operates or rents such public vehicle.
   (d)   PERSON. An individual firm, partnership, association or corporation.
   (e)   PUBLIC VEHICLE. A vehicle by which individual service for compensation
in the transportation of persons on the public streets is furnished or offered
to be furnished. PUBLIC VEHICLES are classified as taxicabs.
   Vehicles furnishing mass transportation service of persons, such as motor
and trolley buses, which are operated over fixed routes on a fixed schedule or
between fixed termini, are not included in the term “public vehicle,” but must
comply with the appropriate provisions of law.
   (f)   TAXICAB. Any public vehicle licensed hereunder to be used in securing
or accepting any passenger for compensation on the public streets or on any
public or quasipublic place, or in accepting any passenger for compensation
upon hail or request made on the public streets or on public or quasipublic
places.
(Ord. 3-1965, passed 3-23-65)
§ 868.02 LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE.
   No person, either as an owner of a public vehicle or as an agent, employee
or driver for, or lessee of, such owner shall operate or permit to be operated
any vehicle as a public vehicle or shall proffer the services of such vehicle
as a public vehicle by solicitation by voice, sign, public advertisement, light
or otherwise, unless the proper license has been issued to the owner thereof
and is in force.
   Every license shall expire on December 31 of the year for which it is
issued. A license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each public vehicle shall
be payable to the Clerk of Council. However, if a license is issued on or after
July 1 of any year, the fee therefor shall be one-half the applicable annual
fee. The license fee required by this section shall be in addition to any fee
required by the laws of the State.
§ 868.03 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   Applications for licenses for public vehicles shall be made to the Village
upon blanks provided by the Mayor and shall set forth the name and address of
the applicant; the trade name under which he or she does business; the class of
each vehicle for which a license is desired; the seating capacity of the
vehicle; the design, color scheme and lettering and marks to be used on such
vehicle; the proposed schedule of fares; and any other information required by
the Village. When an applicant applies for the first public vehicle license
taken out in his or her name, the applicant shall pay to the Clerk of Council
twenty dollars ($20.00) upon filing for each such public vehicle license, which
fee shall not be refunded. If the application is approved, the applicant shall
furnish the Clerk of Council, prior to the issuance of the decal insignia,
information covering the particular vehicle to be licensed, such information to
include the make, the State license number, the length of time the vehicle has
been in use, and the name and address of the person from whom the vehicle was
purchased, and any other information required by the Village pertinent to the
issuance of a license.
§ 868.04 LICENSE ISSUANCE.
   The Mayor shall investigate and hold a hearing as to each application for a
license for a taxicab. If the Mayor finds from such investigation and hearing
that the public convenience and necessity justify the operation of the vehicle
for which a license is desired, and approves the proposed schedule of fares, he
or she shall forthwith notify the applicant of his or her finding. Within 60
days thereafter the applicant shall furnish the Mayor with any additional
information required, and if the Mayor then finds that such vehicle is a safe
and fit conveyance and that it complies with all the requirements of these
Codified Ordinances, he or she shall notify the Clerk of Council, who shall
issue a license to the applicant upon payment of the proper license fee and the
furnishing of the bond or insurance required. If the applicant does not comply
with the requirements of this section within 60 days, the affirmative finding
of the Mayor shall be null and void.
   If the Mayor finds from such investigation and hearing that the public
convenience and necessity do not justify the operation of the vehicle for which
a license is desired, he or she shall forthwith notify the applicant of his or
her finding.
   No license to operate any public vehicle shall be issued or renewed by the
Mayor and no person shall operate any public vehicle, or permit the same to be
operated, unless and until the applicant deposits with the Village a policy or
policies of liability insurance issued by a responsible insurance company,
approved as to sufficiency by the Mayor and as to form by the Law Director,
providing indemnity for or protection to the insured against loss in the
amounts provided for in §
868.05 and agreeing to pay, within the limits of the amounts fixed in §
868.05 to any judgment creditor who has filed his or her suit or filed notice
of a claim for such loss with the Mayor during the license year in which the
injury occurred or six months thereafter, any final judgment rendered against
the insured by reason of the liability of the insured to pay damages to others
for bodily injuries, including death at any time resulting therefrom, and for
damages to or destruction of property sustained during the terms of such policy
by any person other than the insured and employees of the insured, and
resulting from negligent operation, maintenance or use of such licensed public
vehicle.
   The policy of insurance aforesaid and the bond given in lieu thereof, as
hereinafter referred to, shall provide that in case the vehicle is operated,
maintained or used with the consent or acquiescence of the owner, by one other
than the owner, his or her agent or employee, and an injury results to person
or property as indicated above, due to the negligent operation, maintenance or
use of such vehicle, that the insurer or the obligors in the bond, as the case
may be, shall pay to any judgment creditor of such person so maintaining, using
or operating such vehicle, any final judgment rendered against such person so
maintaining, using or operating such vehicle, provided that such judgment
creditor has filed his or her suit or filed notice of claim for such loss in
all respects as is provided for the judgment creditor of the insured in the
foregoing paragraph.
   The policy or policies of insurance and the bond or bonds hereinbefore
required shall be valid and effective for the same period for which the license
is issued.
(Ord. 3-1965, passed 3-23-1965)
§ 868.05 EXTENT OF LIABILITY.
   The extent of the liability of an insurer or surety shall be, as to any one
licensed public vehicle, the sum of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00)
on account of injuries to or death of any one person in any one accident; and
subject to such limit as respects injury to or death of one person, three
hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) on account of any one accident resulting
in injury to or death of more than one person; and fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00) on account of damage to property in any one accident.
§ 868.06 BOND IN LIEU OF INSURANCE.
   In lieu of the policy or policies of insurance herein provided for, the
applicant may furnish a bond executed by a surety company authorized to do
business in the State, approved as to sufficiency by the Mayor and as to form
by the Law Director, holding and binding the principal and sureties to the same
liability and subject to the same conditions as in the case of policies of
insurance provided for herein. It shall further be permissible for the
applicant to furnish insurance as to damages for personal injuries, including
death, and an indemnity bond or bonds as to the property damages, or vice
versa.
§ 868.07 TERMINATION OF INSURANCE OR BOND.
   Every such policy or certificate of insurance or bond shall contain a clause
obligating the insurer or surety to give to the Mayor at least ten days written
notice before the cancellation, expiration, lapse or other termination of such
insurance or the expiration, withdrawal of the surety therefrom or other
termination of such bond, and the license granted shall be suspended upon the
termination of the insurance or bond or upon the termination of the liability
of the insurer or surety thereon, in accordance with such notice, unless and
until a new policy or certificate of liability insurance or a new indemnity
bond, approved as hereinbefore provided, is substituted therefor. Failure to
give the notice required shall operate to continue the liability of the insurer
or surety for the benefit of persons injured or damaged, and such policy shall
continue in full force and effect.
(Ord. 3-1965, passed 3-23-1965)
§ 868.08 METHODS OF DETERMINING FARES.
   All fares or charges for the use of a taxicab shall be determined by the
regular trip rate, the hourly rate or the special trip rate, and by no other
method. All fares or charges shall be in conformity with the schedule of fares
approved by the Mayor.
(Ord. 3-1965, passed 3-23-1965)
§ 868.09 RATE SCHEDULES.
   Every owner of one or more public vehicles shall file in the office of the
Mayor the complete schedule of rates offered and used, which must be approved
by him or her.
   Rate schedules may be changed by the owner. No change in schedule shall
become effective until one day after it is filed with and approved by the
Mayor. Not more than one amended schedule shall be filed by an owner, in any
period of thirty days, unless with the consent of the Mayor.
   All schedules of rates of fare on file with the Mayor shall be open to
public inspection.
   No driver or other person in control of a taxicab shall make any charge
except in accordance with the schedules of rates filed as herein provided.
(Ord. 3-1965, passed 3-23-1965)
§ 868.10 EMPLOYMENT OF UNLICENSED DRIVERS.
   No licensee or owner of any public vehicle shall permit the same to be
driven for hire by any one who is not an Ohio licensed driver.
(Ord. 3-1965, passed 3-23-1965)
§ 868.11 LICENSE TRANSFER, OWNER TO OWNER.
   No public vehicle license shall be transferred from one owner to another by
the Mayor except after a finding of public convenience and necessity by the
Mayor. Such findings shall be arrived at in the same manner as in the case of
an original application. The applicant for the transfer of a license shall file
with his or her application the consent, in writing, of the former owner of the
license and shall comply with all the terms and conditions of the ordinances
governing public vehicles. The transfer fee shall be one hundred dollars
($100.00) per license.
(Ord. 3-1965, passed 3-23-1965)
§ 868.12 PRIVATE CARRYING OF PASSENGERS FOR HIRE.
   No operator of any vehicle other than a public vehicle duly licensed under
and operating in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, or motor buses
operating under proper authority, shall accept or offer to accept passengers
for compensation.
(Ord. 3-1965, passed 3-23-1965)
§ 868.13 NONRESIDENT OWNERS.
   The owner of a public vehicle having no license to operate in the Village,
but who has his or her principal office or place of business in a municipality
which has a valid and existing ordinance regulating public vehicles, which
ordinance provides for reciprocal recognition of this chapter, may operate such
public vehicle in the Village and be granted a Woodlawn license as required by
this chapter, without fee. However, in any event such owner shall comply with
all other terms, conditions and regulations contained in this chapter.
(Ord. 11-1965, passed 9-28-1965)
§ 868.14 MOTOR VEHICLES RESEMBLING PUBLIC VEHICLES.
   No person shall equip, mark, paint, display marking lights or windshield
lights or in any way cause a motor vehicle to resemble a duly licensed public
vehicle or to create a public impression that a motor vehicle is a duly
licensed public vehicle approved by the Mayor under authority of this chapter.
(Ord. 3-1965, passed 3-23-1965)
§ 868.15 IMMORAL USE OF PUBLIC VEHICLES; LICENSE REVOCATION.
   (a)   No person shall use a public vehicle for an unlawful or immoral
purpose.
   (b)   When such unlawful or immoral use has occurred with the knowledge of
the person owning the public vehicle or when, within any period of five years,
two such convictions have occurred involving the vehicle or vehicles covered by
a given public vehicle license, the Mayor shall revoke the public vehicle
license for the vehicle involved.
   (c)   When such unlawful or immoral use has occurred with the knowledge of
the person driving the public vehicle, the Mayor shall revoke the driver’s
license of such person.
   (d)   In cases of license revocations under subsections (b) and (e) hereof,
the licensees shall have the right of appeal to Council as provided in §
868.19.
(Ord. 3-1965, passed 3-23-1965)
§ 868.16 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Mayor is hereby authorized and directed to establish rules and
regulations necessary for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
Violation of any such regulation or failure to comply with a lawful order of
the Mayor shall be cause for revocation of any license issued under authority
of this chapter.
(Ord. 3-1965, passed 3-23-1965)
§ 868.17 LICENSE REVOCATION, SUSPENSION OR REFUSAL.
   Any license provided for in this chapter may be revoked, suspended or
refused by the Mayor for any of the following causes, in addition to other
causes provided for in this chapter and in addition to the penalties provided
in this chapter:
   (a)   Misrepresentation or false statement made in obtaining a license;
   (b)   A violation or failure to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter or any regulation or lawful order of the Mayor promulgated or issued
pursuant to this chapter;
   (c)   Failure to comply with an order of any Village department having
jurisdiction over the subject matter of this chapter;
   (d)   Any misconduct or unlawful act which, under the circumstances, the
Mayor deems sufficient to find the applicant or licensee unfit to operate a
public vehicle;
   (e)   A finding by the Mayor that the applicant or licensee had, within six
months prior to the date of a hearing, operated or caused or permitted to be
operated a vehicle on the public streets for compensation without first having
obtained a public vehicle license as provided in this chapter; or
   (f)   Any series of violations of any of the provisions of this chapter or
of the rules and regulations promulgated hereunder, the accumulation of which
results in a finding by the Mayor that the applicant or licensee is an
irresponsible or unreliable person regarding compliance with the provisions of
this chapter.
(Ord. 3-1965, passed 3-23-1965)
§ 868.18 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION PROCEDURE.
   No license provided for in this chapter shall be suspended or revoked
without a hearing or opportunity to be heard before the Mayor. When the charges
as to one or more of the items set forth in §§
868.15 and
868.17 have been sustained, the Mayor shall thereupon suspend or revoke the
license in accordance with his or her decision.
(Ord. 3-1965, passed 3-23-1965)
§ 868.19 APPEAL.
   When the Mayor has refused, suspended or revoked a license provided for in
this chapter, the applicant or licensee may appeal within ten days after such
refusal, suspension or revocation, by filing with the Mayor a written notice of
appeal and filing with Council a written appeal. Council, upon hearing such
appeal, may either affirm, modify or set aside the findings of the Mayor. The
decision of Council is final.
(Ord. 3-1965, passed 3-23-1965)
§ 868.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree and shall be fined not
more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or imprisoned not more than 30
days, or both, for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues.
TITLE FOUR: TAXATION
CHAPTER 880: ADMISSION TAX
880.01   Definitions.
880.02   Rates.
880.03   Exemptions from tax.
880.04   Information required on tickets; overcharging.
880.05   Manner of filing returns; payment of tax; interest on unpaid tax.
880.06   Rules and regulations; records; bonds; sale of securities.
880.07   Admission Tax Rotary Fund.
880.08   Liens for unpaid taxes.
880.09   Additional assessments.
880.10   Failure to file returns or permit examination of records; estimated
assessments; surcharge on unpaid tax.
880.11   Time limit for payment.
880.12   Reassessment applications; appeals.
880.13   Service of notices.
880.14   Refund of erroneously collected taxes.
880.15   Moneys deposited in General Fund.
880.16   Violations.
880.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Tax/Payroll Clerk - see ADM.
237.10
   Tax Commissioner - see ADM.
237.11
   Safety of crowds attending live entertainment performances - see GEN. OFF.
636.18
   Municipal Income Tax - see B.R. & T.
Ch. 882
§ 880.01 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   ADMISSION. Includes seats, chairs, tables and benches, reserved or
otherwise, and other similar accommodations, and charges made or fees collected
for forms of entertainment or amusement.
   (b)   DIRECTOR. The Village Finance Director.
§ 880.02 RATES.
   For the purpose of providing revenue to defray a portion of current expenses
and other expenditures of the Village, there is hereby levied:
   (a)   A tax of three percent on the amount received for admission to any
place, including admission by season ticket or subscription;
   (b)   A tax of three percent on the excess of amounts received for tickets
or cards of admission to theaters, operas and other places of amusement or
entertainment sold at newsstands, hotels and places other than the ticket
offices of such theaters, operas or other places of amusement or entertainment,
over and above the amounts representing the established price therefor at such
ticket offices. Such tax shall be returned and paid in the manner and subject
to the interest provided in §
880.05 by the person selling such tickets.
   (c)   A tax of three percent on the amount received for admission to any
public performance for profit at any roof garden, cabaret or other similar
entertainment where the charge for admission is in the form of a service
charge, cover charge or similar charge in any form, provided that if such
charge is in the form of a fixed minimum service charge to the admittee, the
tax shall be computed upon one-third of such fixed minimum service charge;
   (d)   A tax of three percent on fees collected by horse riding academies,
whether for membership or for rental or hire of horses or other services; and
   (e)   A tax of three percent on fees collected by bowling alleys, miniature
golf courses, golf practice ranges, swimming pools and other similar amusement
or entertainment places or devices, for the use of such facilities.
(Ord. 6-1959, passed 1-13-1959; Ord. 10-2010, passed 5-27-2010)
§ 880.03 EXEMPTIONS FROM TAX.
   (a)   No admission tax shall be levied on any admissions, all the proceeds
of which inure exclusively to the benefit of:
      (1)   Religious, educational or charitable institutions, societies or
organizations; societies or organizations for the prevention of cruelty to
children or animals; or societies or organizations conducted for the sole
purpose of maintaining symphony orchestras and receiving substantial support
from voluntary contributions; if no part of the net earnings thereof inures to
the benefit of any private stockholder or individual;
      (2)   Persons in the military or naval forces of the United States, or of
national guard organizations, reserve officers associations or organizations of
war veterans, or military units or societies of any such posts or
organizations, if such posts, organizations, units or societies are organized
in the State and if no part of their net earnings inure to the benefit of any
private stockholder or individual;
      (3)   Persons who have served in the military or naval forces of the
United States and are in need; or
      (4)   Members of a police department or fire department of the County or
a municipal corporation or the dependents or heirs of such members.
   (b)   The exemption from the admission tax provided for in this section
shall not be allowed in the case of admissions to wrestling matches, prize
fights or boxing, sparring or other pugilistic matches or exhibitions; or in
the case of admissions to any athletic game or exhibition, the proceeds of
which inure wholly or partly to the benefit of any high school, academy,
preparatory or other school, wherein the admission price is four dollars
($4.00) or more, or which inure wholly or partly to the benefit of any college
or university.
§ 880.04 INFORMATION REQUIRED ON TICKETS; OVERCHARGING.
   The price, exclusive of the admission tax to be paid by the person paying
for admission, at which every admission ticket or card is sold, shall be
conspicuously and indelibly printed, stamped or written on the face or back of
that part of the ticket which is to be taken up by the management of the
theater, opera or other place of amusement, together with the name of the
vendor, if sold other than at a ticket office of the place of amusement. No
person shall sell an admission ticket or card on which the name of the vendor
and price is not so printed, stamped or written, or at a price in excess of the
price so printed, stamped or written thereon.
(Ord. 8-1947, passed 11-11-1947)
§ 880.05 MANNER OF FILING RETURNS; PAYMENT OF TAX; INTEREST ON UNPAID TAX.
   (a)   Each person receiving any payment for admission, dues or fees taxable
under this chapter shall, on or before the tenth day of each calendar month,
make a return in duplicate under oath to the Director of Finance, in such form
as the Director of Finance may prescribe, showing the number of taxable
admissions issued or disposed of and/or the amount of taxable dues and/or fees
collected during the preceding calendar month, the amount of tax hereby imposed
on the same and such other facts and information as the Director of Finance may
require in the form of returns prescribed by him or her. One copy of such
return shall be for the use of the Director of Finance and the other shall be
filed by the Director of Finance in the Village offices.
   (b)   Each person who makes such a return shall, at the time of making it,
pay the amount of taxes shown thereon to the Director of Finance. Such payments
shall be paid into the Village treasury. The Director of Finance may adopt
uniform rules and regulations not inconsistent with this section governing the
method of making returns and payments.
   (c)   If the tax imposed by this chapter is not paid when due, there shall
be added, as a part of the tax, interest at the rate of one percent per month
from the time when the tax became due until it is paid.
§ 880.06 RULES AND REGULATIONS; RECORDS; BONDS; SALE OF SECURITIES.
   (a)   The Director of Finance may adopt and promulgate such rules and
regulations as he or she deems necessary to carry out the provisions of this
chapter.
   (b)   Each person required by this chapter to collect and/or pay the
admission tax shall keep such records of receipts, issuances of complimentary
tickets, etc., together with ticket stubs and other pertinent requirements in
such form as the Director of Finance may, by regulation, require. Such records
and other documents shall be open at any time during business hours to the
inspection of the Director of Finance and shall be preserved for a period of
three years, unless the Director of Finance, in writing, consents to their
destruction within that period or requires that they be kept longer. The
Director of Finance may require any person required to collect and/or pay the
tax to file with him or her a bond, subject to the approval of the Law
Director, with security subject to the approval of the Director of Finance, in
such amount as the Director of Finance may fix, conditioned on the collection
and/or payment of any such taxes due, or which may become due, from such
person. Such bond, when approved by the Director of Finance, shall be deposited
in his or her office. In lieu of such bond, securities approved by the Director
of Finance may be deposited with him or her and shall be kept by him or her as
security for the payment of such tax, interest or penalty, or both. The
Director of Finance may sell any securities so deposited with him or her at
public or private sale without notice to the depositor thereof, if it becomes
necessary to do so in order to recover the amount of such tax, interest or
penalty, or both, due or unpaid. Upon any such sale, the surplus, if any, above
such amounts so due and unpaid shall be returned to the depositor of the
securities.
   (c)   The Director of Finance may, by regulation, permit any person making a
refund of any payment upon which a tax is collected under this chapter to repay
therewith the amount of the tax collected on such payment, and provide for the
crediting of the amount on a subsequent return.
§ 880.07 ADMISSION TAX ROTARY FUND.
   For the purpose of paying refunds of erroneously paid or overpaid taxes
under this chapter, the Director of Finance shall place one hundred dollars
($100.00) from taxes collected under this chapter in a special fund, which the
Director of Finance is hereby authorized and directed to establish, to be known
as the Admission Tax Rotary Fund. Thereafter, as required by the depletion
thereof, he or she shall place to the credit of such Fund a sum sufficient to
make the total of such Fund, at the time of each such credit, amount to one
hundred dollars ($100.00).
§ 880.08 LIENS FOR UNPAID TAXES.
   The tax imposed by this chapter shall be a lien upon the property of any
person required to collect and/or pay such tax. If he or she sells or quits his
or her business, he or she shall make out the return provided for under this
chapter within 30 days after the date of the sale of such business or
retirement therefrom, and his or her successor in business shall be required to
withhold a sufficient amount of the purchase money to cover the amount of such
taxes so collected and unpaid, together with interest, if any, until such time
as the former owner produces a receipt from the Director of Finance showing
that the taxes have been paid or a certificate that no taxes are due. If the
purchaser of a business fails to withhold purchase money as provided in this
section, and the taxes so collected are due and unpaid after the 30-day period
allowed, the purchaser shall be liable for the payment of the taxes collected
and unpaid on account of the operation of the business by the former owner,
together with interest, as provided in this chapter.
   The lien for unpaid taxes imposed under this section shall not become
effective until such time as the Director of Finance certifies to the County
Auditor the amount of taxes delinquent and such certification is placed on
record by the County Recorder in a book maintained for that purpose.
§ 880.09 ADDITIONAL ASSESSMENTS.
   If the Director of Finance is not satisfied with the return and payment of
taxes made by any person under this chapter, he or she is hereby authorized to
make an additional assessment of the tax due by such taxpayer, based upon the
facts contained in the return or otherwise acquired. Promptly after the date of
such additional assessment, the Director of Finance shall give or send by mail
a notice thereof to such person, together with written notice of the time when
and place where such person may be heard on a petition for reassessment as
provided in this chapter.
§ 880.10 FAILURE TO FILE RETURNS OR PERMIT EXAMINATION OF RECORDS; ESTIMATED
ASSESSMENTS; SURCHARGE ON UNPAID TAX.
   (a)   If a person whose duty it is to collect and/or pay the tax imposed by
this chapter neglects or refuses to file any return required by this chapter
or, having tendered a return, neglects or refuses to pay the amount of tax
imposed by this chapter as shown by such return, the Director of Finance shall
make an estimated assessment of the probable amount of the tax payable by such
person, to which shall be added a penalty of ten percent of the amount
assessed. The Director of Finance shall promptly thereafter give or send by
mail a notice of such estimated assessment and penalty to the person against
whom such assessment and penalty has been made.
   (b)   The Director of Finance may make an estimated additional assessment,
to which shall be added a penalty of ten percent of the assessment, against any
person who files any return as required by this chapter but who refuses to
permit the Director of Finance or a duly authorized deputy to examine his or
her books of account and papers pertaining to the business for which the return
was made. The Director of Finance shall promptly thereafter give or send by
mail a notice of such estimated additional assessment and penalty to such
person, together with written notice of the time when and the place where such
person may be heard on a petition for reassessment, as provided in this
chapter.
§ 880.11 TIME LIMIT FOR PAYMENT.
   Taxes and penalties resulting from any assessments made by the Director of
Finance pursuant to this chapter shall be due and payable ten days after notice
thereof is given or sent by mail to the person against whom such assessment has
been made.
§ 880.12 REASSESSMENT APPLICATIONS; APPEALS.
   A person against whom an additional assessment, estimated assessment or
estimated additional assessment has been made by the Director of Finance may
file an application for reassessment with the Director of Finance. Such
application shall be filed within 30 days after receipt of notice of such
additional assessment, estimated assessment or estimated additional assessment
and penalty from the Director of Finance, and shall contain all the arguments
and reasons why such assessment and/or penalty should be reversed, vacated or
modified. Within 20 days of the filing of such application for reassessment,
the Director of Finance shall redetermine his or her former assessment,
estimated assessment or estimated additional assessment, and shall affirm,
reverse, vacate or modify such assessment.
   Such determination shall be final, and the assessment, estimated assessment
or estimated additional assessment shall become payable ten days after notice
thereof is given or sent by mail to the person filing the application, unless
such person, within such ten days, gives notice of intention to appeal to the
Common Pleas Court of the County. The appeal to such Court shall be filed
within 30 days after receipt of the notice from the Director of Finance.
§ 880.13 SERVICE OF NOTICES.
   A notice authorized or required under this chapter may be given by mailing
the same to the person for whom it is intended, in a postpaid envelope
addressed to such person at the address given in the last return filed by him
or her pursuant to this chapter, or if no such return has been filed, then to
such address as may be obtainable. The mailing of such notice shall be prima-
facie evidence of the receipt of the same by the person to whom it was
addressed. Any period of time which is determined according to this chapter by
the giving of notice shall commence from the date of mailing such notice.
(Ord. 8-1947, passed 11-11-47)
§ 880.14 REFUND OF ERRONEOUSLY COLLECTED TAXES.
   If, within one year from the payment of any tax or penalty, the payer
thereof, or his or her executors, administrators, successors or assigns, makes
application for a refund thereof, for the benefit of the person from whom the
tax was collected, and the Director of Finance determines that such tax or
penalty, or any portion thereof, was erroneously or illegally collected, and
that the same can and will be duly refunded to the person from whom the same
was collected, the Director of Finance shall pay such amount to the person
entitled to such refund, out of the Admission Tax Rotary Fund. For like cause
and within the same period, a refund may be so made on the initiative of the
Director of Finance, but no refund shall be made of a tax or penalty paid
pursuant to a determination of the Director of Finance, as provided for in §
880.12, unless the Director of Finance, after a hearing pursuant to §
880.12, or on his or her own motion, reduced the tax or penalty or it has been
established by an appeal to the Common Pleas Court of the County, pursuant to §
880.12, that such determination was erroneous or illegal, in which event a
refund shall be made as set forth in this section, upon the termination of such
appeal. An application for a refund made as provided in this section shall be
deemed a petition for reassessment within the meaning of §
880.12, and the Director of Finance may receive additional evidence with
respect thereto. After making his or her determination, the Director of Finance
shall give notice thereof to the applicant and the applicant shall have the
right to appeal as provided in §
880.12.
§ 880.15 MONEYS DEPOSITED IN GENERAL FUND.
   The moneys received under this chapter shall be credited to the General Fund
of the Village.
(Ord. 8-1947, passed 11-11-1947)
§ 880.16 VIOLATIONS.
   No person who is charged under this chapter with the duty of collecting or
paying the tax imposed by this chapter shall fail or neglect to:
   (a)   Charge and collect or pay such tax or make a return to the Director of
Finance pursuant to this chapter;
   (b)   Permit the Director of Finance or a duly authorized agent thereof to
examine the person’s books and other records, in or upon any premises where
such records are kept, to the extent necessary to verify any return made or to
ascertain and assess the tax imposed by this chapter if no such return was
made; or
   (c)   Maintain or keep for three years, or such lesser or greater time as
may be permitted or required by the Director of Finance, such records, ticket
stubs and other documents pertaining to the sale or other disposition of
admissions, as may be required by the Director of Finance.
§ 880.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of Section 880.16 shall, for a first
offense, be guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall, for a subsequent offense,
be guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. Such person shall be fined not
more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first offense and not more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisoned not more than sixty days, or
both, for a subsequent offense. However, if such person is an organization, it
shall be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for a first
offense and three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) for a subsequent offense.
CHAPTER 882: MUNICIPAL INCOME TAX
Section
882.01   Authority to levy tax; purposes of tax; rate
   
882.011   Authority to levy tax.
   
882.012   Purposes of tax; rate.
   
882.013   Statement of procedural history; State mandated changes to municipal
income tax.
882.02   Effective date.
882.03   Definitions.
882.04   Income subject to tax for individuals
   
882.041   Determining municipal taxable income for individuals.
   
882.042   Domicile.
   
882.043   Exemption for member or employee of General Assembly and certain
judges.
882.05   Collection at source
   
882.051   Collection at source; withholding from qualifying wages.
   
882.052   Collection at source; occasional entrant.
   
882.053   Collection at source; casino and VLT.
882.06   Income subject to net profit tax
   
882.061   Determining municipal taxable income for taxpayers who are not
individuals.
   
882.062   Net profit; income subject to net profit tax; alternative
apportionment.
   
882.063   Consolidated Federal income tax return.
   
882.064   Tax credit for businesses that foster new jobs in Ohio.
   
882.065   Tax credits to foster job retention.
882.07   Declaration of estimated tax.
882.08   Credit for tax paid
   
882.081   Credit for tax paid to another municipality.
   
882.082   Refundable credit for qualifying loss.
   
882.083   Credit for person working in joint economic development district or
zone.
   
882.084   Credit for tax beyond statute for obtaining refund.
882.09   Annual return
   
882.091   Return and payment of tax.
   
882.092   Return and payment of tax; individuals serving in combat zone.
   
882.093   Use of Ohio Business Gateway; types of filings authorized.
   
882.094   Extension of time to file.
   
882.095   Amended returns.
   
882.096   Refunds.
882.10   Penalty, interest, fees and charges.
882.11   Audit.
882.12   Rounding.
882.13   Authority and powers of the Tax Administrator
   
882.131   Authority of Tax Administrator; administrative powers of the Tax
Administrator.
   
882.132   Authority of Tax Administrator; compromise of claim and payment over
time.
   
882.133   Authority of Tax Administrator; right to examine.
   
882.134   Authority of Tax Administrator; requiring identifying information.
882.14   Confidentiality.
882.15   Fraud.
882.16   Opinion of the Tax Administrator.
882.17   Assessment; appeal based on presumption of delivery.
882.18   Local Board of Tax Review; appeal to Local Board of Tax Review.
882.19   Actions to recover; statute of limitations.
882.20   Adoption of rules.
882.21   Collection after termination of chapter.
882.22   Savings clause.
882.23   Filing net profit taxes; election to be subject to provisions of
chapter.
882.24   Definitions.
882.25   Applicability; taxable situs; apportionment.
882.26   Information provided to tax administrators; confidentiality.
882.27   Filing of annual return; remittance; disposition of funds.
882.28   Electronic filing.
882.29   Consolidated returns.
882.30   Failure to pay tax.
882.31   Declaration of estimated taxes.
882.32   Additional penalties.
882.33   Assessments against taxpayer.
882.34   Refund applications.
882.35   Amended returns.
882.36   Examination of records and other documents and persons.
882.37   Credits.
882.38   Reckless violations; penalties.
882.99   Violations; penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Power to levy income tax - see Ohio Const., Art. XII, Secs. 3, 5, Art.
XVIII, Sec. 3
   Payroll deductions - see Ohio R.C. 9.42
   Municipal income taxes - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 718
   Landlord to furnish information re tenants - see ADM.
237.06
   Tax/Payroll Clerk - see ADM.
237.10
   Tax Commissioner - see ADM.
237.11
   Admission Tax - see B.R. & T.
Ch. 880
§ 882.01 AUTHORITY TO LEVY TAX; PURPOSES OF TAX; RATE
§ 882.011 AUTHORITY TO LEVY TAX.
   (a)   The tax on income and the withholding tax established by this chapter
are authorized by Article XVIII, Section 3 of the Ohio Constitution. The tax on
income and the withholding tax established by this chapter are deemed to be
levied in accordance with, and to be consistent with, the provisions and
limitations of R.C. Chapter 718. This chapter is deemed to incorporate the
provisions of R.C. Chapter 718.
   (b)   The tax is an annual tax levied on the income of every person residing
in or earning or receiving income in the municipal corporation, and shall be
measured by municipal taxable income. The Village
shall tax income at a uniform rate. The tax is levied on municipal taxable
income, as defined herein.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to tax income and withhold tax, see R.C. § 718.04
§ 882.012 PURPOSES OF TAX; RATE.
   (a)   The purpose of this chapter is to provide funds for the purpose of
general municipal operations, maintenance, new equipment, extension and
enlargement of municipal services and facilities and capital improvements.
   (b)   There is hereby levied a tax on income, qualifying wages, commissions,
and other compensation, and on net profits as hereinafter provided, at the rate
of two percent per annum.
   (c)    Effective January 1, 2024, in addition to the tax imposed by division
(b) of this section, there is levied an additional tax of three-tenths of one
percent (0.3%) for a period of five years for the sole purpose of construction,
repair, improvement, and maintenance of streets, roads, curbs, and sidewalks in
the Village and appurtenances thereto including principal and interest on bonds
or notes issued for any of those purposes.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018; Ord. 17-2018, passed 7-31-2018; Ord. 21-2023,
passed 6-27- 2023)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see R.C. § 718.04
§ 882.013 STATEMENT OF PROCEDURAL HISTORY; STATE MANDATED CHANGES TO MUNICIPAL
INCOME TAX.
   (a)   Significant and wide-ranging amendments to R.C. Chapter 718 were
enacted by Am Sub H.B. 5, passed by the 130th General Assembly, and signed by
Governor Kasich on December 19, 2014, and H.B. 5 required municipal
corporations to conform to and adopt the provisions of R.C. Chapter 718 in
order to have the authority to impose, enforce, administer and collect a
municipal income tax.
   (b)   As mandated by the above amendments, the Village passed Ordinance No.
20-2015, effective January 1, 2016, which comprehensively amended Chapter 882
in accordance with the provisions of R.C. Chapter 718 to allow the Village to
continue the income tax and withholding tax administration and collection
efforts on behalf of the Village.
   (c)    Ordinance 20-2015, effective January 1, 2016, and corresponding
changes to R.C. Chapter 718, apply to taxable years beginning on or after
January 1, 2016. All provisions of this chapter apply to taxable years
beginning 2016 and succeeding taxable years.
   (d)   House Bill 49, passed by the 132nd General Assembly, includes Section
803.100, purporting to require that municipalities, on or before January 31,
2018, adopt certain municipal income tax provisions to authorize state
officials to collect and administer municipal net profit taxes. Section 803.100
of House Bill 49 references and relies upon R.C. § 718.04(A), which purports to
make municipal income taxing authority conditional upon a municipality's
adoption of code sections as dictated by the State.
   (e)   As mandated by the above amendments, the Village passed Ordinance 05-
2018 which amends Chapter 882 to adopt the required code sections to authorize
State officials to collect and administer the net profit taxes due to the
Village.
   (f)   Sub. House Bill 33, passed by the 135th General Assembly, made
additional changes to R.C. Chapter 718 requiring municipalities, on or before
January 1, 2024, to adopt certain municipal income tax provisions in order to
conform with the new requirements set forth in R.C. Chapter 718.
   (g)   As required by House Bill 33, the Village passed Ordinance 40-2023
which amends Chapter 882 to adopt the required changes required by the
amendments to R.C. Chapter 718.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018; Ord. 40-2023, passed 12-19-2023)
882.02 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   (a)   Ordinance 20-2015, effective January 1, 2016, and corresponding
changes to R.C. Chapter 718, apply to municipal taxable years beginning on or
after January 1, 2016. All provisions of this chapter apply to taxable years
beginning 2016 and succeeding taxable years.
   (b)   Ordinance 20-2015 does not repeal the existing sections of Chapter 882
for any taxable year prior to 2016, but rather amends Chapter 882 effective
January 1, 2016. For municipal taxable years beginning before January 1, 2016,
the Village shall continue to administer, audit, and enforce the income tax of
the Village under R.C. Chapter 718 and ordinances and resolutions of the
Village as that chapter and those ordinances and resolutions existed before
January 1, 2016.
   (c)   Ordinance 05-2018, effective January 1, 2018, and corresponding
changes to R.C. Chapter 718, apply to municipal taxable years beginning on or
after January 1, 2018. All provisions of this chapter apply to taxable years
beginning 2018 and succeeding taxable years.
   (d)    Ordinance 05-2018 does not repeal the existing sections of Chapter
882 for any taxable year prior to 2018, but rather amends Chapter 882 effective
January 1, 2018. For taxable years beginning before January 1, 2018, the
Village shall continue to administer, audit, and enforce the income tax of the
Village under R.C. Chapter 718 and chapters and resolutions of the Village as
that R.C. Chapter 718 and those chapters and resolutions existed before January
1, 2018.
   (e)   Ordinance 40-2023, effective January 1, 2024, and corresponding
changes to R.C. Chapter 718, apply to municipal taxable years beginning on or
after January 1, 2024, except as otherwise provided herein. All provisions of
this Chapter 882 apply to taxable years beginning 2024 and succeeding taxable
year.
   (f)   Unless otherwise specifically provided herein, Ordinance 40-2023 does
not repeal the existing sections of Chapter 882 for any taxable year prior to
2024, but rather amends Chapter 882 effective January 1, 2024. For taxable
years beginning before January 1, 2024, the Village shall continue to
administer, audit, and enforce the income tax of the Village under R.C. Chapter
718 and chapters and resolutions of the Village as that R.C. Chapter 718 and
those chapters and resolutions existed before January 1, 2024.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018; Ord. 40-2023, passed 12-19-2023)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see R.C. § 718.04
§ 882.03 DEFINITIONS.
   Any term used in this chapter that is not otherwise defined in this chapter
has the same meaning as when used in a comparable context in laws of the United
States relating to Federal income taxation or in R.C. Title LVII, unless a
different meaning is clearly required. If a term used in this chapter that is
not otherwise defined in this chapter is used in a comparable context in both
the laws of the United States relating to Federal income tax and in R.C. Title
LVII and the use is not consistent, then the use of the term in the laws of the
United States relating to Federal income tax shall control over the use of the
term in R.C. Title LVII. For purposes of this section, the singular shall
include the plural, and the masculine shall include the feminine and the
gender-neutral. As used in this chapter:
   (a)   ADJUSTED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME, for a person required to file as a C
corporation, or for a person that has elected to be taxed as a C corporation
under division (u)(4) of this section, means a C corporation's Federal taxable
income before net operating losses and special deductions as determined under
the Internal Revenue Code, adjusted as follows:
      (1)   Deduct intangible income to the extent included in Federal taxable
income. The deduction shall be allowed regardless of whether the intangible
income relates to assets used in a trade or business or assets held for the
production of income.
      (2)   Add an amount equal to five per cent of intangible income deducted
under division (a)(1) of this section, but excluding that portion of intangible
income directly related to the sale, exchange, or other disposition of property
described in section 1221 of the Internal Revenue Code;
      (3)   Add any losses allowed as a deduction in the computation of Federal
taxable income if the losses directly relate to the sale, exchange, or other
disposition of an asset described in section 1221 or 1231 of the Internal
Revenue Code;
      (4)   A.   Except as provided in division (a)(4)B. of this section,
deduct income and gain included in Federal taxable income to the extent the
income and gain directly relate to the sale, exchange, or other disposition of
an asset described in section 1221 or 1231 of the Internal Revenue Code;
         B.   Division (a)(4)A. of this section does not apply to the extent
the income or gain is income or gain described in section 1245 or 1250 of the
Internal Revenue Code;
      (5)   Add taxes on or measured by net income allowed as a deduction in
the computation of Federal taxable income;
      (6)   In the case of a real estate investment trust or regulated
investment company, add all amounts with respect to dividends to, distributions
to, or amounts set aside for or credited to the benefit of investors and
allowed as a deduction in the computation of Federal taxable income;
      (7)   Deduct, to the extent not otherwise deducted or excluded in
computing Federal taxable income, any income derived from a transfer agreement
or from the enterprise transferred under that agreement under R.C. § 4313.02;
      (8)   Deduct exempt income to the extent not otherwise deducted or
excluded in computing adjusted Federal taxable income;
      (9)   Deduct any net profit of a pass-through entity owned directly or
indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer's Federal taxable
income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that net profit in
the group's Federal taxable income in accordance with §
882.063(e)(3)B.;
      (10)   Add any loss incurred by a pass-through entity owned directly or
indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer's Federal taxable
income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that loss in the
group's Federal taxable income in accordance with §
882.063(e)(3)B.
      If the taxpayer is not a C corporation, is not a disregarded entity that
has made the election described in division (ss)(2) of this section, is not a
publicly traded partnership that has made the election described in division
(u)(4) of this section, and is not an individual, the taxpayer shall compute
adjusted Federal taxable income under this section as if the taxpayer were a C
corporation, except guaranteed payments and other similar amounts paid or
accrued to a partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member,
or former member shall not be allowed as a deductible expense unless such
payments are in consideration for the use of capital and treated as payment of
interest under section 469 of the Internal Revenue Code or United States
Treasury regulations. Amounts paid or accrued to a qualified self-employed
retirement plan with respect to a partner, former partner, shareholder, former
shareholder, member, or former member of the taxpayer, amounts paid or accrued
to or for health insurance for a partner, former partner, shareholder, former
shareholder, member, or former member, and amounts paid or accrued to or for
life insurance for a partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder,
member, or former member shall not be allowed as a deduction.
      Nothing in division (a) of this section shall be construed as allowing
the taxpayer to add or deduct any amount more than once or shall be construed
as allowing any taxpayer to deduct any amount paid to or accrued for purposes
of Federal self-employment tax.
   (b)   (1)   ASSESSMENT.
         A.   A written finding by the Tax Administrator that a person has
underpaid municipal income tax, or owes penalty and interest, or any
combination of tax, penalty, or interest, to the municipal corporation;
         B.   A full or partial denial of a refund request issued under §
882.096(b)(2).
         C.   A Tax Administrator's denial of a taxpayer's request for use of
an alternative apportionment method, issued under §
882.062(b)(2).
         D.   A Tax Administrator's requirement for a taxpayer to use an
alternative apportionment method, issued under §
882.062(b)(3).
         E.   For purposes of division (b)(1)A., B., C. and D. of this section,
an assessment shall commence the person's time limitation for making an appeal
to the Local Board of Tax Review pursuant to §
882.18, and shall have "ASSESSMENT" written in all capital letters at the top
of such finding.
      (2)   ASSESSMENT does not include notice(s) denying a request for refund
issued under §
882.096(b)(3), a billing statement notifying a taxpayer of current or past-due
balances owed to the municipal corporation, a Tax Administrator's request for
additional information, a notification to the taxpayer of mathematical errors,
or a Tax Administrator's other written correspondence to a person or taxpayer
that does not meet the criteria prescribed by division (b)(1) of this section.
   (c)   AUDIT. The examination of a person or the inspection of the books,
records, memoranda, or accounts of a person, ordered to appear before the Tax
Administrator, for the purpose of determining liability for the Village income
tax.
   (d)   BOARD OF REVIEW. Has the same meaning as LOCAL BOARD OF TAX REVIEW.
   (e)   CALENDAR QUARTER. The three-month period ending on the last day of
March, June, September, or December.
   (f)   CERTIFIED MAIL, EXPRESS MAIL, UNITED STATES MAIL, POSTAL SERVICE and
similar terms include any delivery service authorized pursuant to R.C. §
5703.056.
   (g)   COMPENSATION. Any form of remuneration paid to an employee for
personal services.
   (h)   DISREGARDED ENTITY. A single member limited liability company, a
qualifying subchapter S subsidiary, or another entity if the company,
subsidiary, or entity is a disregarded entity for Federal income tax purposes.
   (i)   DOMICILE. The true, fixed and permanent home of the taxpayer to which,
whenever absent, the taxpayer intends to return.
   (j)   EXEMPT INCOME. All of the following:
      (1)   The military pay or allowances of members of the armed forces of
the United States or members of their reserve components, including the
national guard of any state.
      (2)   Intangible income.
      (3)   Social security benefits, railroad retirement benefits,
unemployment compensation, pensions, retirement benefit payments, payments from
annuities, and similar payments made to an employee or to the beneficiary of an
employee under a retirement program or plan, disability payments received from
private industry or local, State, or Federal governments or from charitable,
religious or educational organizations, and the proceeds of sickness, accident,
or liability insurance policies. As used in division (j)(3) of this section,
"unemployment compensation" does not include supplemental unemployment
compensation described in section 3402(o)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code.
      (4)   The income of religious, fraternal, charitable, scientific,
literary, or educational institutions to the extent such income is derived from
tax-exempt real estate, tax-exempt tangible or intangible property, or tax-
exempt activities.
      (5)   Compensation paid under R.C. § 3501.28 or 3501.36 to a person
serving as a precinct election official to the extent that such compensation
does not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000) for the taxable year. Such
compensation in excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000) for the taxable year
may be subject to taxation by a municipal corporation. A municipal corporation
shall not require the payer of such compensation to withhold any tax from that
compensation.
      (6)   Dues, contributions, and similar payments received by charitable,
religious, educational, or literary organizations or labor unions, lodges, and
similar organizations.
      (7)   Alimony and child support received.
      (8)   Awards for personal injuries or for damages to property from
insurance proceeds or otherwise, excluding compensation paid for lost salaries
or wages or awards for punitive damages.
      (9)   Income of a public utility when that public utility is subject to
the tax levied under R.C. § 5727.24 or 5727.30. Division (j)(9) of this section
does not apply for purposes of R.C. Chapter 5745.
      (10)   Gains from involuntary conversions, interest on Federal
obligations, items of income subject to a tax levied by the State and that a
municipal corporation is specifically prohibited by law from taxing, and income
of a decedent's estate during the period of administration except such income
from the operation of a trade or business.
      (11)   Compensation or allowances excluded from Federal gross income
under section 107 of the Internal Revenue Code.
      (12)   Employee compensation that is not qualifying wages as defined in
division (gg) of this section.
      (13)   Compensation paid to a person employed within the boundaries of a
United States Air Force base under the jurisdiction of the United States Air
Force that is used for the housing of members of the United States Air Force
and is a center for Air Force operations, unless the person is subject to
taxation because of residence or domicile. If the compensation is subject to
taxation because of residence or domicile, tax on such income shall be payable
only to the municipal corporation of residence or domicile.
      (14)   An S corporation shareholder's distributive share of net profits
of the S corporation, other than any part of the distributive share of net
profits that represents wages as defined in section 3121(a) of the Internal
Revenue Code or net earnings from self-employment as defined in section 1402(a)
of the Internal Revenue Code.
      (15)   All of the municipal taxable income earned by individuals under
eighteen years of age.
      (16)   A.   Except as provided in divisions (j)(16)B., C., and D. of this
section, qualifying wages described in §
882.052(b)(1) or (e) to the extent the qualifying wages are not subject to
withholding for the Village under either of those divisions.
         B.   The exemption provided in division (j)(16)A. of this section does
not apply with respect to the municipal corporation in which the employee
resided at the time the employee earned the qualifying wages.
         C.   The exemption provided in division (j)(16)A. of this section does
not apply to qualifying wages that an employer elects to withhold under §
882.052(d)(2).
         D.   The exemption provided in division (j)(16)A. of this section does
not apply to qualifying wages if both of the following conditions apply:
            1.   For qualifying wages described in §
882.052(b)(1), the employee's employer withholds and remits tax on the
qualifying wages to the municipal corporation in which the employee's principal
place of work is situated, or, for qualifying wages described in §
882.052(e), the employee's employer withholds and remits tax on the qualifying
wages to the municipal corporation in which the employer's fixed location is
located;
            2.   The employee receives a refund of the tax described in
division (j)(16)D.1. of this section on the basis of the employee not
performing services in that municipal corporation.
      (17)   A.   Except as provided in division (j)(17)B. or C. of this
section, compensation that is not qualifying wages paid to a nonresident
individual for personal services performed in the Village on not more than
twenty days in a taxable year.
         B.   The exemption provided in division (j)(17)A. of this section does
not apply under either of the following circumstances:
            1.   The individual's base of operation is located in the Village.
            2.   The individual is a professional athlete, professional
entertainer, or public figure, and the compensation is paid for the performance
of services in the individual's capacity as a professional athlete,
professional entertainer, or public figure. For purposes of division (j)
(17)B.2. of this section, "professional athlete," "professional entertainer,"
and "public figure" have the same meanings as in §
882.052.
         C.   Compensation to which division (j)(17) of this section applies
shall be treated as earned or received at the individual's base of operation.
If the individual does not have a base of operation, the compensation shall be
treated as earned or received where the individual is domiciled.
         D.   For purposes of division (j)(17) of this section, "base of
operation" means the location where an individual owns or rents an office,
storefront, or similar facility to which the individual regularly reports and
at which the individual regularly performs personal services for compensation.
      (18)   Compensation paid to a person for personal services performed for
a political subdivision on property owned by the political subdivision,
regardless of whether the compensation is received by an employee of the
subdivision or another person performing services for the subdivision under a
contract with the subdivision, if the property on which services are performed
is annexed to a municipal corporation pursuant to R.C. § 709.023 on or after
March 27, 2013, unless the person is subject to such taxation because of
residence. If the compensation is subject to taxation because of residence,
municipal income tax shall be payable only to the municipal corporation of
residence.
      (19)   Income the taxation of which is prohibited by the constitution or
laws of the United States.
      (20)   The rental value of a home furnished to a minister of the gospel
as part of his or her compensation, or the rental allowance paid to a minister
of the gospel as part of his or her compensation, to the extent used by him or
her to rent or provide a home pursuant to section 107 of the Internal Revenue
Code.
      Any item of income that is exempt income of a pass-through entity under
division (j) of this section is exempt income of each owner of the pass-through
entity to the extent of that owner's distributive or proportionate share of
that item of the entity's income.
   (k)   FORM 2106. Internal Revenue Service form 2106 filed by a taxpayer
pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
   (l)   GENERIC FORM. An electronic or paper form that is not prescribed by a
particular municipal corporation and that is designed for reporting taxes
withheld by an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer, estimated
municipal income taxes, or annual municipal income tax liability, including a
request for refund.
   (m)   INCOME.
      (1)   A.   For residents, all income, salaries, qualifying wages,
commissions, and other compensation from whatever source earned or received by
the resident, including the resident's distributive share of the net profit of
pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly by the resident and any net
profit of the resident, except as provided in division (u)(4) of this section.
         B.   For the purposes of division (m)(1)A. of this section:
            1.   Any net operating loss of the resident incurred in the taxable
year and the resident's distributive share of any net operating loss generated
in the same taxable year and attributable to the resident's ownership interest
in a pass-through entity shall be allowed as a deduction, for that taxable year
and the following five taxable years, against any other net profit of the
resident or the resident's distributive share of any net profit attributable to
the resident's ownership interest in a pass-through entity until fully
utilized, subject to division (m)(1)D. of this section;
            2.   The resident's distributive share of the net profit of each
pass-through entity owned directly or indirectly by the resident shall be
calculated without regard to any net operating loss that is carried forward by
that entity from a prior taxable year and applied to reduce the entity's net
profit for the current taxable year.
         C.   Division (m)(1)B. of this section does not apply with respect to
any net profit or net operating loss attributable to an ownership interest in
an S corporation unless shareholders' distributive shares of net profits from S
corporations are subject to tax in the municipal corporation as provided in
division (j)(14) or division (j)(15) of this section.
         D.   Any amount of a net operating loss used to reduce a taxpayer's
net profit for a taxable year shall reduce the amount of net operating loss
that may be carried forward to any subsequent year for use by that taxpayer. In
no event shall the cumulative deductions for all taxable years with respect to
a taxpayer's net operating loss exceed the original amount of that net
operating loss available to that taxpayer.
      (2)   In the case of nonresidents, all income, salaries, qualifying
wages, commissions, and other
compensation from whatever source earned or received by the nonresident for
work done, services performed or rendered, or activities conducted in the
Village, including any net profit of the nonresident, but excluding the
nonresident's distributive share of the net profit or loss of only pass-through
entities owned directly or indirectly by the nonresident.
      (3)   For taxpayers that are not individuals, net profit of the taxpayer.
      (4)   Lottery, sweepstakes, gambling and sports winnings, winnings from
games of chance, and prizes and awards. If the taxpayer is a professional
gambler for Federal income tax purposes, the taxpayer may deduct related
wagering losses and expenses to the extent authorized under the Internal
Revenue Code and claimed against such winnings. Credit for tax withheld or paid
to another municipal corporation on such winnings paid to the municipal
corporation where winnings occur is limited to the credit as specified in §
882.081.
      (5)   [INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK]
   (n)   INTANGIBLE INCOME. Income of any of the following types: income yield,
interest, capital gains, dividends, or other income arising from the ownership,
sale, exchange, or other disposition of intangible property including, but not
limited to, investments, deposits, money, or credits as those terms are defined
in R.C. Chapter 5701, and patents, copyrights, trademarks, trade names,
investments in real estate investment trusts, investments in regulated
investment companies, and appreciation on deferred compensation. INTANGIBLE
INCOME does not include prizes, awards, or other income associated with any
lottery winnings, gambling winnings, or other similar games of chance.
   (o)   INTERNAL REVENUE CODE. The "Internal Revenue Code of 1986," 100 Sta.
2085, 26 U.S.C.A. 1, as amended.
   (p)   LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY. A limited liability company formed under
R.C. Chapter 1705 or under the laws of another state.
   (q)   LOCAL BOARD OF TAX REVIEW and BOARD OF TAX REVIEW. The entity created
under §
882.18.
   (r)   MUNICIPAL CORPORATION. In general terms, a status conferred upon a
local government unit, by State law giving the unit certain autonomous
operating authority such as the power of taxation, power of eminent domain,
police power and regulatory power, and includes a joint economic development
district or joint economic development zone that levies an income tax under
R.C. § 715.691, 715.70, 715.71, or 715.74.
   (s)   (1)   MUNICIPAL TAXABLE INCOME.
         A.   For a person other than an individual, apportioned or sitused to
the Village under §
882.062, as applicable, reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward
available to the person for the Village.
         B.   1.   For an individual who is a resident of the Village other
than a qualified municipal corporation, income reduced by exempt income to the
extent otherwise included in income, then reduced as provided in division (s)
(2) of this section, and further reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss
carryforward available to the individual for the Village.
            2.   For an individual who is a resident of a qualified municipal
corporation, Ohio adjusted gross income reduced by income exempted, and
increased by deductions excluded, by the qualified municipal corporation from
the qualified municipal corporation's tax on or before December 31, 2013. If a
qualified municipal corporation, on or before December 31, 2013, exempts income
earned by individuals who are not residents of the qualified municipal
corporation and net profit of persons that are not wholly located within the
qualified municipal corporation, such individual or person shall have no
municipal taxable income for the purposes of the tax levied by the qualified
municipal corporation and may be exempted by the qualified municipal
corporation from the requirements of R.C. § 718.03.
         C.   For an individual who is a nonresident of the Village, income
reduced by exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income and then,
as applicable, apportioned or sitused to the Village under §
882.062, then reduced as provided in division (s)(2) of this section, and
further reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward available to
the individual for the Village.
      (2)   In computing the municipal taxable income of a taxpayer who is an
individual, the taxpayer may subtract, as provided in division (s)(1)B.1. or C.
of this section, the amount of the individual's employee business expenses
reported on the individual's form 2106 that the individual deducted for Federal
income tax purposes for the taxable year, subject to the limitation imposed by
section 67 of the Internal Revenue Code. For the municipal corporation in which
the taxpayer is a resident, the taxpayer may deduct all such expenses allowed
for Federal income tax purposes. For a municipal corporation in which the
taxpayer is not a resident, the taxpayer may deduct such expenses only to the
extent the expenses are related to the taxpayer's performance of personal
services in that nonresident municipal corporation.
   (t)   NET OPERATING LOSS. A loss incurred by a person in the operation of a
trade or business. NET OPERATING LOSS does not include unutilized losses
resulting from basis limitations, at-risk limitations, or passive activity loss
limitations.
   (u)   (1)   NET PROFIT for a person who is an individual means the
individual's net profit required to be reported on schedule C, schedule E, or
schedule F reduced by any net operating loss carried forward. For the purposes
of this division, the net operating loss carried forward shall be calculated
and deducted in the same manner as provided in division (u)(3) of this section.
      (2)   NET PROFIT for a person other than an individual means adjusted
Federal taxable income reduced by any net operating loss incurred by the person
in a taxable year beginning on or after January 1, 2017, subject to the
limitations of division (u)(3) of this section.
      (3)   A.   The amount of such net operating loss shall be deducted from
net profit to the extent necessary to reduce municipal taxable income to zero,
with any remaining unused portion of the net operating loss carried forward to
not more than five consecutive taxable years following the taxable year in
which the loss was incurred, but in no case for more years than necessary for
the deduction to be fully utilized.
         B.   No person shall use the deduction allowed by division (u)(3) of
this section to offset qualifying wages.
         C.   1.   For taxable years beginning in 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021, or
2022, a person may not deduct, for purposes of an income tax levied by a
municipal corporation that levies an income tax before January 1, 2016, more
than fifty percent of the amount of the deduction otherwise allowed by division
(u)(3) of this section.
            2.   For taxable years beginning in 2023 or thereafter, a person
may deduct, for purposes of an income tax levied by a municipal corporation
that levies an income tax before January 1, 2016, the full amount allowed by
division (u)(3) of this section without regard to the limitation of division
(u)(3)B.1. of this section.
         D.   Any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward deduction that is
available may be utilized before a taxpayer may deduct any amount pursuant to
division (u)(3) of this section.
         E.   Nothing in division (u)(3)C.1. of this section precludes a person
from carrying forward, for use with respect to any return filed for a taxable
year beginning after 2018, any amount of net operating loss that was not fully
utilized by operation of division (u)(3)C.1. of this section. To the extent
that an amount of net operating loss that was not fully utilized in one or more
taxable years by operation of division (u)(3)C.1. of this section is carried
forward for use with respect to a return filed for a taxable year beginning in
2019, 2020, 2021, or 2022, the limitation described in division (u)(3)C.1. of
this section shall apply to the amount carried forward.
      (4)   For the purposes of this chapter, and notwithstanding division (u)
(1) of this section, net profit of a disregarded entity shall not be taxable as
against that disregarded entity, but shall instead be included in the net
profit of the owner of the disregarded entity.
      (5)   A.   For purposes of this chapter, "publicly traded partnership"
means any partnership, an interest in which is regularly traded on an
established securities market. A "publicly traded partnership" may have any
number of partners.
         B.   For the purposes of this chapter, and not withstanding any other
provision of this chapter, the net profit of a publicly traded partnership that
makes the election described in division (u)(4) of this section shall be taxed
as if the partnership were a C corporation, and shall not be treated as the net
profit or income of any owner of the partnership.
         C.   A publicly traded partnership that is treated as a partnership
for Federal income tax purposes and that is subject to tax on its net profits
in one or more municipal corporations in this State may elect to be treated as
a C corporation for municipal income tax purposes. The publicly traded
partnership shall make the election in every municipal corporation in which the
partnership is subject to taxation on its net profits. The election shall be
made on the annual tax return filed in each such municipal corporation. Once
the election is made, the election is binding for a five-year period beginning
with the first taxable year of the initial election. The election continues to
be binding for each subsequent five-year period unless the taxpayer elects to
discontinue filing municipal income tax returns as a C corporation for
municipal purposes under division (u)(4)D. of this section.
         D.   An election to discontinue filing as a C corporation must be made
in the first year following the last year of a five-year election period in
effect under division (u)(4)C. of this section. The election to discontinue
filing as a C corporation is binding for a five-year period beginning with the
first taxable year of the election and continues to be binding for each
subsequent five-year period unless the taxpayer elects to discontinue filing
municipal income tax returns as a partnership for municipal purposes. An
election to discontinue filing as a partnership must be made in the first year
following the last year of a five-year election period.
         E.   The publicly traded partnership shall not be required to file the
election with any municipal corporation in which the partnership is not subject
to taxation on its net profits, but division (u)(4) of this section applies to
all municipal corporations in which an individual owner of the partnership
resides.
         F.   The individual owners of the partnership not filing as a C
corporation shall be required to file with their municipal corporation of
residence, and report partnership distribution of net profit.
   (v)   NONRESIDENT. An individual that is not a resident of the Village.
   (w)   OHIO BUSINESS GATEWAY. The online computer network system, created
under R.C. § 125.30, that allows persons to electronically file business reply
forms with State agencies and includes any successor electronic filing and
payment system.
   (x)   OTHER PAYER. Any person, other than an individual's employer or the
employer's agent, that pays an individual any amount included in the Federal
gross income of the individual. OTHER PAYER includes casino operators and video
lottery terminal sales agents.
   (y)   PASS-THROUGH ENTITY. A partnership not treated as an association
taxable as a C corporation for Federal income tax purposes, a limited liability
company not treated as an association taxable as a C corporation for Federal
income tax purposes, an S corporation, or any other class of entity from which
the income or profits of the entity are given pass-through treatment for
Federal income tax purposes. PASS-THROUGH ENTITY does not include a trust,
estate, grantor of a grantor trust, or disregarded entity.
   (z)   PENSION. Any amount paid to an employee or former employee that is
reported to the recipient on an IRS form 1099-R, or successor form. PENSION
does not include deferred compensation, or amounts attributable to nonqualified
deferred compensation plans, reported as FICA/Medicare wages on an IRS form W-
2, Wage and Tax Statement, or successor form.
   (aa)   PERSON. Includes individuals, firms, companies, joint stock
companies, business trusts, estates, trusts, partnerships, limited liability
partnerships, limited liability companies, associations, C corporations, S
corporations, governmental entities, and any other entity.
   (bb)   POSTAL SERVICE. The United States Postal Service, or private delivery
service delivering documents and packages within an agreed upon delivery
schedule, or any other carrier service delivering the item.
   (cc)   POSTMARK DATE, DATE OF POSTMARK, and similar terms include the date
recorded and marked by a delivery service and recorded electronically to a
database kept in the regular course of its business and marked on the cover in
which the payment or document is enclosed, the date on which the payment or
document was given to the delivery service for delivery.
   (dd)   (1)   PRE-2017 NET OPERATING LOSS CARRYFORWARD. Any net operating
loss incurred in a taxable year beginning before January 1, 2017, to the extent
such loss was permitted, by a resolution or ordinance of the Village that was
adopted by the Village before January 1, 2016, to be carried forward and
utilized to offset income or net profit generated in such Village in future
taxable years.
      (2)   For the purpose of calculating municipal taxable income, any pre-
2017 net operating loss carryforward may be carried forward to any taxable
year, including taxable years beginning in 2017 or thereafter, for the number
of taxable years provided in the resolution or ordinance or until fully
utilized, whichever is earlier.
   (ee)   PUBLICALLY TRADED PARTNERSHIP. Any partnership, an interest in which
is regularly traded on an established securities market. A PUBLICLY TRADED
PARTNERSHIP may have any number of partners.
   (ff)   QUALIFIED MUNICIPAL CORPORATION. A municipal corporation that, by
resolution or ordinance adopted on or before December 31, 2011, adopted Ohio
adjusted gross income, as defined by R.C. § 5747.01, as the income subject to
tax for the purposes of imposing a municipal income tax.
   (gg)   QUALIFYING WAGES. Wages, as defined in section 3121(a) of the
Internal Revenue Code, without regard to any wage limitations, adjusted as
follows:
      (1)   Deduct the following amounts:
         A.   Any amount included in wages if the amount constitutes
compensation attributable to a plan or program described in section 125 of the
Internal Revenue Code.
         B.   Any amount included in wages if the amount constitutes payment on
account of a disability related to sickness or an accident paid by a party
unrelated to the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer.
         C.    [INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK]
         D.    [INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK]
         E.   Any amount included in wages that is exempt income.
      (2)   Add the following amounts:
         A.   Any amount not included in wages solely because the employee was
employed by the employer before April 1, 1986.
         B.   Any amount not included in wages because the amount arises from
the sale, exchange, or other disposition of a stock option, the exercise of a
stock option, or the sale, exchange, or other disposition of stock purchased
under a stock option. Division (gg)(2)B. of this section applies only to those
amounts constituting ordinary income.
         C.   Any amount not included in wages if the amount is an amount
described in section 401(k), 403(b), or 457 of the Internal Revenue Code.
Division (gg)(2)C. of this section applies only to employee contributions and
employee deferrals.
         D.   Any amount that is supplemental unemployment compensation
benefits described in section 3402(o)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code and not
included in wages.
         E.   Any amount received that is treated as self-employment income for
Federal tax purposes in accordance with section 1402(a)(8) of the Internal
Revenue Code.
         F.   Any amount not included in wages if all of the following apply:
            1.   For the taxable year the amount is employee compensation that
is earned outside of the United States and that either is included in the
taxpayer's gross income for Federal income tax purposes or would have been
included in the taxpayer's gross income for such purposes if the taxpayer did
not elect to exclude the income under section 911 of the Internal Revenue Code;
            2.   For no preceding taxable year did the amount constitute wages
as defined in section 3121(a) of the Internal Revenue Code;
            3.   For no succeeding taxable year will the amount constitute
wages; and
            4.   For any taxable year the amount has not otherwise been added
to wages pursuant to either division (gg)(2) of this section or R.C. § 718.03,
as that section existed before the effective date of H.B. 5 of the 130th
General Assembly, March 23, 2015.
   (hh)   RELATED ENTITY.
      (1)   An individual stockholder, or a member of the stockholder's family
enumerated in section 318 of the Internal Revenue Code, if the stockholder and
the members of the stockholder's family own directly, indirectly, beneficially,
or constructively, in the aggregate, at least fifty percent of the value of the
taxpayer's outstanding stock;
      (2)   A stockholder, or a stockholder's partnership, estate, trust, or
corporation, if the stockholder and the stockholder's partnerships, estates,
trusts, or corporations own directly, indirectly, beneficially, or
constructively, in the aggregate, at least fifty percent of the value of the
taxpayer's outstanding stock;
      (3)   A corporation, or a party related to the corporation in a manner
that would require an attribution of stock from the corporation to the party or
from the party to the corporation under division (hh)(4) of this section,
provided the taxpayer owns directly, indirectly, beneficially, or
constructively, at least fifty percent of the value of the corporation's
outstanding stock;
      (4)   The attribution rules described in section 318 of the Internal
Revenue Code apply for the purpose of determining whether the ownership
requirements in divisions (hh)(1) to (3) of this section have been met.
   (ii)   RELATED MEMBER. A person that, with respect to the taxpayer during
all or any portion of the taxable year, is either a related entity, a component
member as defined in section 1563(b) of the Internal Revenue Code, or a person
to or from whom there is attribution of stock ownership in accordance with
section 1563(e) of the Internal Revenue Code except, for purposes of
determining whether a person is a related member under this division, "twenty
per cent" shall be substituted for "5 percent" wherever "5 percent" appears in
section 1563(e) of the Internal Revenue Code.
   (jj)   RESIDENT. An individual who is domiciled in the Village as determined
under §
882.042.
   (kk)   SCHEDULE C. Internal Revenue Service schedule C (form 1040) filed by
a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
   (ll)   SCHEDULE E. Internal Revenue Service schedule E (form 1040) filed by
a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
   (mm)   SCHEDULE F. Internal Revenue Service schedule F (form 1040) filed by
a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
   (nn)   SINGLE MEMBER LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY. A limited liability company
that has one direct member.
   (oo)   SMALL EMPLOYER. Any employer that had total revenue of less than five
hundred thousand dollars ($500,000) during the preceding taxable year. For
purposes of this division, "total revenue" means receipts of any type or kind,
including, but not limited to, sales receipts; payments; rents; profits; gains,
dividends, and other investment income; commissions; premiums; money; property;
grants; contributions; donations; gifts; program service revenue; patient
service revenue; premiums; fees, including premium fees and service fees;
tuition payments; unrelated business revenue; reimbursements; any type of
payment from a governmental unit, including grants and other allocations; and
any other similar receipts reported for Federal income tax purposes or under
generally accepted accounting principles. SMALL EMPLOYER does not include the
Federal government; any State government, including any State agency or
instrumentality; any political subdivision; or any entity treated as a
government for financial accounting and reporting purposes.
   (pp)   TAX ADMINISTRATOR. The individual charged with direct responsibility
for administration of an income tax levied by a municipal corporation in
accordance with this chapter. Tax Administrator does not include the State Tax
Commissioner.
   (qq)   TAX COMMISSIONER. The Tax Commissioner appointed under R.C. § 121.03.
   (rr)   TAXABLE YEAR. The corresponding tax reporting period as prescribed
for the taxpayer under the Internal Revenue Code.
   (ss)   (1)   TAXPAYER. A person subject to a tax levied on income by a
municipal corporation in accordance with this chapter. TAXPAYER does not
include a grantor trust or, except as provided in division (ss)(2)A. of this
section, a disregarded entity.
      (2)   A.   A single member limited liability company that is a
disregarded entity for Federal tax purposes may be a separate taxpayer from its
single member in all Ohio municipal corporations in which it either filed as a
separate taxpayer or did not file for its taxable year ending in 2003, if all
of the following conditions are met:
            1.   The limited liability company's single member is also a
limited liability company.
            2.   The limited liability company and its single member were
formed and doing business in one or more Ohio municipal corporations for at
least five years before January 1, 2004.
            3.   Not later than December 31, 2004, the limited liability
company and its single member each made an election to be treated as a separate
taxpayer under division (L) of R.C. § 718.01 as this section existed on
December 31, 2004.
            4.   The limited liability company was not formed for the purpose
of evading or reducing Ohio municipal corporation income tax liability of the
limited liability company or its single member.
            5.   The Ohio municipal corporation that was the primary place of
business of the sole member of the limited liability company consented to the
election.
         B.   For purposes of division (ss)(2)A.5. of this section, a municipal
corporation was the primary place of business of a limited liability company
if, for the limited liability company's taxable year ending in 2003, its income
tax liability was greater in that municipal corporation than in any other
municipal corporation in Ohio, and that tax liability to that municipal
corporation for its taxable year ending in 2003 was at least four hundred
thousand dollars ($400,000).
   (tt)   TAXPAYERS' RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES. The rights provided to
taxpayers in R.C. §§ 718.11, 718.12, 718.19, 718.23, 718.36, 718.37, 718.38,
5717.011, and 5717.03 and any corresponding ordinances of the Village, and the
responsibilities of taxpayers to file, report, withhold, remit, and pay
municipal income tax and otherwise comply with R.C. Chapter 718 and
resolutions, ordinances, and rules adopted by a municipal corporation for the
imposition and administration of a municipal income tax.
   (uu)   VIDEO LOTTERY TERMINAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3770.21.
   (vv)   VIDEO LOTTERY TERMINAL SALES AGENT. A lottery sales agent licensed
under R.C. Chapter 3770 to conduct video lottery terminals on behalf of the
State pursuant to R.C. § 3770.21.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018)
Statutory reference:
   Related definitions, see R.C. § 718.01
§ 882.04 INCOME SUBJECT TO TAX FOR INDIVIDUALS
§ 882.041 DETERMINING MUNICIPAL TAXABLE INCOME FOR INDIVIDUALS.
   (a)   Municipal taxable income for a resident of the Village is calculated
as follows:
      (1)   Income reduced by exempt income to the extent such exempt income is
otherwise included in income, reduced by allowable employee business expense
deduction as found in §
882.03(s)(2), further reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward
equals municipal taxable income.
         A.   INCOME is defined in §
882.03(l).
            1.    QUALIFYING WAGES is defined in §
882.03(gg).
            2.   NET PROFIT is included in income, and is defined in §
882.03(u). This section also provides that the net operating loss carryforward
shall be calculated and deducted in the same manner as provided in §
882.03(a)(8). Treatment of net profits received by an individual taxpayer from
rental real estate is provided in §
882.062(e).
            3.   Section 882.03(l) provides the following: offsetting and net
operating loss carryforward treatment in division (l)(1)B.1.; resident's
distributive share of net profit from pass through entity treatment in division
(l)(1)B.2.; treatment of S corporation distributive share of net profit in the
hands of the shareholder in division (l)(1)C.; restriction of amount of loss
permitted to be carried forward for use by taxpayer in a subsequent taxable
year in division (l)(1)D.
            4.   PASS THROUGH ENTITY is defined in §
882.03(y).
         B.   EXEMPT INCOME is defined in §
882.03(j).
         C.   Allowable employee business expense deduction is described in §
882.03(s)(2), and is subject to the limitations provided in that section.
         D.   PRE-2017 NET OPERATING LOSS CARRYFORWARD is defined in §
882.03(dd).
   (b)   Municipal taxable income for a nonresident of the Village is
calculated as follows:
      (1)   Income reduced by exempt income to the extent such exempt income is
otherwise included in income, as applicable, apportioned or sitused to the
Village as provided in §
882.062, reduced by allowable employee business expense deduction as found in §
882.03(s)(2), further reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward
equals municipal taxable income.
         A.   INCOME is defined in §
882.03(l).
            1.    QUALIFYING WAGES is defined in §
882.03(gg).
            2.   NET PROFIT is included in income, and is defined in §
882.03(u). This section also provides that the net operating loss carryforward
shall be calculated and deducted in the same manner as provided in §
882.03(a)(8). NET PROFIT for a nonresident individual includes any net profit
of the nonresident, but excludes the distributive share of net profit or loss
of only pass through entity owned directly or indirectly by the nonresident.
            3.   PASS THROUGH ENTITY is defined in §
882.03(y).
         B.   EXEMPT INCOME is defined in §
882.03(j).
         C.   Apportioned or sitused to the Village as provided in §
882.062 includes the apportionment of net profit income attributable to work
done or services performed in the Village. Treatment of net profits received by
an individual taxpayer from rental real estate is provided in §
882.062(e).
         D.   Allowable employee business expense deduction as described in §
882.03(s)(2), is subject to the limitations provided in that section. For a
nonresident of the Village, the deduction is limited to the extent the expenses
are related to the performance of personal services by the nonresident in the
Village.
         E.   PRE-2017 NET OPERATING LOSS CARRYFORWARD is defined in §
882.03(dd).
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018)
§ 882.042 DOMICILE.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   DOMICILE means the true, fixed and permanent home of the taxpayer
to which whenever absent, the taxpayer intends to return.
      (2)   An individual is presumed to be domiciled in the Village for all or
part of a taxable year if the individual was domiciled in the Village on the
last day of the immediately preceding taxable year or if the Tax Administrator
reasonably concludes that the individual is domiciled in the Village for all or
part of the taxable year.
      (3)   An individual may rebut the presumption of domicile described in
division (a)(1) of this section if the individual establishes by a
preponderance of the evidence that the individual was not domiciled in the
Village for all or part of the taxable year.
   (b)   For the purpose of determining whether an individual is domiciled in
the Village for all or part of a taxable year, factors that may be considered
include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   The individual's domicile in other taxable years;
      (2)   The location at which the individual is registered to vote;
      (3)   The address on the individual's driver's license;
      (4)   The location of real estate for which the individual claimed a
property tax exemption or reduction allowed on the basis of the individual's
residence or domicile;
      (5)   The location and value of abodes owned or leased by the individual;
      (6)   Declarations, written or oral, made by the individual regarding the
individual's residency;
      (7)   The primary location at which the individual is employed;
      (8)   The location of educational institutions attended by the
individual's dependents as defined in section 152 of the Internal Revenue Code,
to the extent that tuition paid to such educational institution is based on the
residency of the individual or the individual's spouse in the municipal
corporation or state where the educational institution is located;
      (9)   The number of contact periods the individual has with the Village.
For the purposes of this division, an individual has one "contact period" with
the Village if the individual is away overnight from the individual's abode
located outside of the Village and while away overnight from that abode spends
at least some portion, however minimal, of each of two consecutive days in the
Village. For purposes of this section, the State's contact period test or
bright-line test and resulting determination have no bearing on municipal
residency or domicile.
   (c)   All applicable factors are provided in R.C. § 718.012.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018)
Statutory reference:
   Domicile, see R.C. § 718.012
§ 882.043 EXEMPTION FOR MEMBER OR EMPLOYEE OF GENERAL ASSEMBLY AND CERTAIN
JUDGES.
   (a)   Only the municipal corporation of residence shall be permitted to levy
a tax on the income of any member or employee of the Ohio General Assembly,
including the Lieutenant Governor, whose income is received as a result of
services rendered as such member or employee and is paid from appropriated
funds of this State.
   (b)   Only the municipal corporation of residence and the City of Columbus
shall levy a tax on the income of the Chief Justice or a justice of the Supreme
Court received as a result of services rendered as the Chief Justice or
justice. Only the municipal corporation of residence shall levy a tax on the
income
of a judge sitting by assignment of the Chief Justice or on the income of a
district court of appeals judge sitting in multiple locations within the
district, received as a result of services rendered as a judge.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018)
Statutory reference:
   Exclusion of General Assembly employee or member and certain judges from
tax, see R.C. § 718.50
§ 882.05 COLLECTION AT SOURCE
§ 882.051 COLLECTION AT SOURCE; WITHHOLDING FROM QUALIFYING WAGES.
   (a)   (1)   Each employer, agent of an employer, or other payer located or
doing business in the Village shall withhold from each employee an amount equal
to the qualifying wages of the employee earned by the employee in the Village
multiplied by the applicable rate of the Village's income tax, except for
qualifying wages for which withholding is not required under §
882.052 or division (d) or (f) of this section. An employer, agent of an
employer, or other payer shall deduct and withhold the tax from qualifying
wages on the date that the employer, agent, or other payer directly,
indirectly, or constructively pays the qualifying wages to, or credits the
qualifying wages to the benefit of, the employee.
      (2)   In addition to withholding the amounts required under division (a)
(1) of this section, an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer may also
deduct and withhold, on the request of an employee, taxes for the municipal
corporation in which the employee is a resident.
   (b)   (1)   An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer shall remit to
the Tax Administrator of the Village the greater of the income taxes deducted
and withheld or the income taxes required to be deducted and withheld by the
employer, agent, or other payer, along with any report required by the Tax
Administrator to accompany such payment, according to the following schedule:
         A.   Any employer, agent of an employer, or other payer not required
to make payments under division (b)(1)B. or (b)(1)C. of this section of taxes
required to be deducted and withheld shall make quarterly payments to the Tax
Administrator not later than the last day of the month following the last day
of each calendar quarter.
         B.   Taxes required to be deducted and withheld shall be remitted
monthly to the Tax Administrator if the total taxes deducted and withheld or
required to be deducted and withheld by the employer, agent, or other payer on
behalf of the municipal corporation in the preceding calendar year exceeded two
thousand three hundred ninety-nine dollars ($2,399), or if the total amount of
taxes deducted and withheld or required to be deducted and withheld on behalf
of the Village in any month of the preceding calendar quarter exceeded two
hundred dollars ($200.00). Payments under division (b)(1)B. of this section
shall be made to the Tax Administrator not later than fifteen days after the
last day of each month.
   (c)   An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer shall make and file
a return showing the amount of tax withheld by the employer, agent, or other
payer from the qualifying wages of each employee and remitted to the Tax
Administrator. A return filed by an employer, agent, or other payer under this
division shall be accepted by the Village as the return required of an employee
whose sole income subject to the tax under this chapter is the qualifying wages
reported by the employee's employer, agent of an employer, or other payer,
unless the Village requires all resident individual taxpayers to file a tax
return under §
882.091.
   (d)   An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer is not required to
withhold municipal income tax with respect to an individual's disqualifying
disposition of an incentive stock option if, at the time of the disqualifying
disposition, the individual is not an employee of either the corporation with
respect to whose stock the option has been issued or of such corporation's
successor entity.
   (e)   (1)   An employee is not relieved from liability for a tax by the
failure of the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer to withhold the
tax as required under this chapter or by the employer's, agent's, or other
payer's exemption from the requirement to withhold the tax.
      (2)   The failure of an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer to
remit to the Village the tax withheld relieves the employee from liability for
that tax unless the employee colluded with the employer, agent, or other payer
in connection with the failure to remit the tax withheld.
   (f)   Compensation deferred before June 26, 2003, is not subject to any
municipal corporation income tax or municipal income tax withholding
requirement to the extent the deferred compensation does not constitute
qualifying wages at the time the deferred compensation is paid or distributed.
   (g)   Each employer, agent of an employer, or other payer required to
withhold taxes is liable for the payment of that amount required to be
withheld, whether or not such taxes have been withheld, and such amount shall
be deemed to be held in trust for the Village until such time as the withheld
amount is remitted to the Tax Administrator.
   (h)   On or before the last day of February of each year, an employer shall
file a withholding reconciliation return with the Tax Administrator listing the
names, addresses, and social security numbers of all employees from whose
qualifying wages tax was withheld or should have been withheld for the Village
during the preceding calendar year, the amount of tax withheld, if any, from
each such employee's qualifying wage, the total amount of qualifying wages paid
to such employee during the preceding calendar year, the name of every other
municipal corporation for which tax was withheld or should have been withheld
from such employee during the preceding calendar year, any other information
required for Federal income tax reporting purposes on Internal Revenue Service
form W-2 or its equivalent form with respect to such employee, and other
information as may be required by the Tax Administrator.
   (i)   The officer or the employee of the employer, agent of an employer, or
other payer with control or direct supervision of or charged with the
responsibility for withholding the tax or filing the reports and making
payments as required by this section, shall be personally liable for a failure
to file a report or pay the tax due as required by this section. The
dissolution of an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer does not
discharge the officer's or employee's liability for a failure of the employer,
agent of an employer, or other payer to file returns or pay any tax due.
   (j)   An employer is required to deduct and withhold municipal income tax on
tips and gratuities received by the employer's employees and constituting
qualifying wages only to the extent that the tips and gratuities are under the
employer's control. For the purposes of this division, a tip or gratuity is
under the employer's control if the tip or gratuity is paid by the customer to
the employer for subsequent remittance to the employee, or if the customer pays
the tip or gratuity by credit card, debit card, or other electronic means.
   (k)   A Tax Administrator shall consider any tax withheld by an employer at
the request of an employee when such tax is not otherwise required to be
withheld by this Chapter to be tax required to be withheld and remitted for the
purposes of this section.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018)
Statutory reference:
   Withholding from qualifying wages, see R.C. § 718.03
§ 882.052 COLLECTION AT SOURCE; OCCASIONAL ENTRANT.
   (a)   The following terms as used in this section:
      (1)   EMPLOYER includes a person that is a related member to or of an
employer.
      (2)   PROFESSIONAL ATHLETE means an athlete who performs services in a
professional athletic event for wages or other remuneration.
      (3)   PROFESSIONAL ENTERTAINER means a person who performs services in
the professional performing arts for wages or other remuneration on a per-event
basis.
      (4)   PUBLIC FIGURE means a person of prominence who performs services at
discrete events, such as speeches, public appearances, or similar events, for
wages or other remuneration on a per-event basis.
      (5)   FIXED LOCATION means a permanent place of doing business in this
State, such as an office, warehouse, storefront, or similar location owned or
controlled by an employer.
      (6)   WORKSITE LOCATION means a construction site or other temporary
worksite in this State at which the employer provides services for more than
twenty days during the calendar year. WORKSITE LOCATION does not include the
home of an employee.
      (7)   PRINCIPAL PLACE OF WORK means the fixed location to which an
employee is required to report for employment duties on a regular and ordinary
basis. If the employee is not required to report for employment duties on a
regular and ordinary basis to a fixed location, PRINCIPAL PLACE OF WORK means
the worksite location in this State to which the employee is required to report
for employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis. If the employee is not
required to report for employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis to a
fixed location or worksite location, PRINCIPAL PLACE OF WORK means the location
in this State at which the employee spends the greatest number of days in a
calendar year performing services for or on behalf of the employee's employer.
      If there is not a single municipal corporation in which the employee
spent the "greatest number of days in a calendar year" performing services for
or on behalf of the employer, but instead there are two or more municipal
corporations in which the employee spent an identical number of days that is
greater than the number of days the employee spent in any other municipal
corporation, the employer shall allocate any of the employee's qualifying wages
subject to division (b)(1)A. of this section among those two or more municipal
corporations. The allocation shall be made using any fair and reasonable
method, including, but not limited to, an equal allocation among such municipal
corporations or an allocation based upon the time spent or sales made by the
employee in each such municipal corporation. A municipal corporation to which
qualifying wages are allocated under this division shall be the employee's
principal place of work with respect to those qualifying wages for the purposes
of this section.
      For the purposes of this division, the location at which an employee
spends a particular day shall be deemed in accordance with division (b)(2) of
this section, except that "location" shall be substituted for "municipal
corporation" wherever "municipal corporation" appears in that division.
   (b)   (1)   Subject to divisions (c), (e), (f), and (g) of this section, an
employer is not required to withhold municipal income tax on qualifying wages
paid to an employee for the performance of personal services in a municipal
corporation that imposes such a tax if the employee performed such services in
the municipal corporation on twenty or fewer days in a calendar year, unless
one of the following conditions applies:
         A.   The employee's principal place of work is located in the Village.
         B.   The employee performed services at one or more presumed worksite
locations in the Village. For the purposes of this division, PRESUMED WORKSITE
LOCATION means a construction site or other temporary worksite in this State at
which the employer provides services that can reasonably be expected by the
employer to last more than twenty days in a calendar year. Services can
"reasonably be expected by the employer to last more than twenty days" if
either of the following applies at the time the services commence:
            1.   The nature of the services are such that it will require more
than twenty days of actual services to complete the services;
            2.   The agreement between the employer and its customer to perform
services at a location requires the employer to perform actual services at the
location for more than twenty days.
         C.   The employee is a resident of the Village and has requested that
the employer withhold tax from the employee's qualifying wages as provided in §
882.051.
         D.   The employee is a professional athlete, professional entertainer,
or public figure, and the qualifying wages are paid for the performance of
services in the employee's capacity as a professional athlete, professional
entertainer, or public figure within the Village.
      (2)   For the purposes of division (b)(1) of this section, an employee
shall be considered to have spent a day performing services in a municipal
corporation only if the employee spent more time performing services for or on
behalf of the employer in that municipal corporation than in any other
municipal corporation on that day. For the purposes of determining the amount
of time an employee spent in a particular location, the time spent performing
one or more of the following activities shall be considered to have been spent
at the employee's principal place of work:
         A.   Traveling to the location at which the employee will first
perform services for the employer for the day;
         B.   Traveling from a location at which the employee was performing
services for the employer to any other location;
         C.   Traveling from any location to another location in order to pick
up or load, for the purpose of transportation or delivery, property that has
been purchased, sold, assembled, fabricated, repaired, refurbished, processed,
remanufactured, or improved by the employee's employer;
         D.   Transporting or delivering property described in division (b)
(2)C. of this section, provided that, upon delivery of the property, the
employee does not temporarily or permanently affix the property to real estate
owned, used, or controlled by a person other than the employee's employer;
         E.   Traveling from the location at which the employee makes the
employee's final delivery or pick-up for the day to either the employee's
principal place of work or a location at which the employee will not perform
services for the employer.
   (c)   If the principal place of work of an employee is located in a
municipal corporation that imposes an income tax in accordance with this
chapter, the exception from withholding requirements described in division (b)
(1) of this section shall apply only if, with respect to the employee's
qualifying wages described in that division, the employer withholds and remits
tax on such qualifying wages to the municipal corporation in which the
employee's principal place of work is located.
   (d)   (1)   Except as provided in division (d)(2) of this section, if,
during a calendar year, the number of days an employee spends performing
personal services in a municipal corporation exceeds the twenty-day threshold
described in division (b)(1) of this section, the employer shall withhold and
remit tax to that municipal corporation for any subsequent days in that
calendar year on which the employer pays qualifying wages to the employee for
personal services performed in that municipal corporation.
      (2)   An employer required to begin withholding tax for a municipal
corporation under division (d)(1) of this section may elect to withhold tax for
that municipal corporation for the first twenty days on which the employer paid
qualifying wages to the employee for personal services performed in that
municipal corporation.
      (3)   If an employer makes the election described in division (d)(2) of
this section, the taxes withheld and paid by such an employer during those
first twenty days to the municipal corporation in which the employee's
principal place of work is located are refundable to the employee.
   (e)   Without regard to the number of days in a calendar year on which an
employee performs personal services in any municipal corporation, an employer
shall withhold municipal income tax on all of the employee's qualifying wages
for a taxable year and remit that tax only to the municipal corporation in
which the employer's fixed location is located if the employer qualifies as a
small employer as defined in §
882.03. To determine whether an employer qualifies as a small employer for a
taxable year, a Tax Administrator may require the employer to provide the Tax
Administrator with the employer's Federal income tax return for the preceding
taxable year.
   (f)   Divisions (b)(1) and (d) of this section shall not apply to the extent
that a Tax Administrator and an employer enter into an agreement regarding the
manner in which the employer shall comply with the requirements of §
882.051.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018)
Statutory reference:
   Definitions, see R.C. § 718.01
   Occasional entrant, personal services; withholding, see R.C. § 718.011
§ 882.053 COLLECTION AT SOURCE; CASINO AND VLT.
   (a)   The Village shall require a casino facility or a casino operator, as
defined in Section 6(C)(9) of Article XV, Ohio Constitution, and R.C. §
3772.01, respectively, or a lottery sales agent conducting video lottery
terminals sales on behalf of the State to withhold and remit municipal income
tax with respect to amounts other than qualifying wages as provided in this
section.
   (b)   If a person's winnings at a casino facility are an amount for which
reporting to the Internal Revenue Service of the amount is required by section
6041 of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended, the casino operator shall deduct
and withhold municipal income tax from the person's winnings at the rate of the
tax imposed by the municipal corporation in which the casino facility is
located.
   (c)   Amounts deducted and withheld by a casino operator are held in trust
for the benefit of the municipal corporation to which the tax is owed.
      (1)   On or before the tenth day of each month, the casino operator shall
file a return electronically with the Tax Administrator of the Village,
providing the name, address, and social security number of the person from
whose winnings amounts were deducted and withheld, the amount of each such
deduction and withholding during the preceding calendar month, the amount of
the winnings from which each such amount was withheld, the type of casino
gaming that resulted in such winnings, and any other information required by
the Tax Administrator. With this return, the casino operator shall remit
electronically to the Village all amounts deducted and withheld during the
preceding month.
      (2)   Annually, on or before the thirty-first day of January, a casino
operator shall file an annual return electronically with the Tax Administrator
of the municipal corporation in which the casino facility is located,
indicating the total amount deducted and withheld during the preceding calendar
year. The casino operator shall remit electronically with the annual return any
amount that was deducted and withheld and that was not previously remitted. If
the name, address, or social security number of a person or the amount deducted
and withheld with respect to that person was omitted on a monthly return for
that reporting period, that information shall be indicated on the annual
return.
      (3)   Annually, on or before the thirty-first day of January, a casino
operator shall issue an information return to each person with respect to whom
an amount has been deducted and withheld during the preceding calendar year.
The information return shall show the total amount of municipal income tax
deducted from the person's winnings during the preceding year. The casino
operator shall provide to the Tax Administrator a copy of each information
return issued under this division. The Administrator may require that such
copies be transmitted electronically.
      (4)   A casino operator that fails to file a return and remit the amounts
deducted and withheld shall be personally liable for the amount withheld and
not remitted. Such personal liability extends to any penalty and interest
imposed for the late filing of a return or the late payment of tax deducted and
withheld.
      (5)   If a casino operator sells the casino facility or otherwise quits
the casino business, the amounts deducted and withheld along with any penalties
and interest thereon are immediately due and payable. The successor shall
withhold an amount of the purchase money that is sufficient to cover the
amounts deducted and withheld along with any penalties and interest thereon
until the predecessor casino operator produces either of the following:
         A.   A receipt from the Tax Administrator showing that the amounts
deducted and withheld and penalties and interest thereon have been paid;
         B.   A certificate from the Tax Administrator indicating that no
amounts are due.
      If the successor fails to withhold purchase money, the successor is
personally liable for the payment of the amounts deducted and withheld and
penalties and interest thereon.
      (6)   The failure of a casino operator to deduct and withhold the
required amount from a person's winnings does not relieve that person from
liability for the municipal income tax with respect to those winnings.
   (d)   If a person's prize award from a video lottery terminal is an amount
for which reporting to the Internal Revenue Service is required by section 6041
of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended, the video lottery sales agent shall
deduct and withhold municipal income tax from the person's prize award at the
rate of the tax imposed by the municipal corporation in which the video lottery
terminal facility is located.
   (e)   Amounts deducted and withheld by a video lottery sales agent are held
in trust for the benefit of the municipal corporation to which the tax is owed.
      (1)   The video lottery sales agent shall issue to a person from whose
prize award an amount has been deducted and withheld a receipt for the amount
deducted and withheld, and shall obtain from the person receiving a prize award
the person's name, address, and social security number in order to facilitate
the preparation of returns required by this section.
      (2)   On or before the tenth day of each month, the video lottery sales
agent shall file a return electronically with the Tax Administrator of the
Village providing the names, addresses, and social security numbers of the
persons from whose prize awards amounts were deducted and withheld, the amount
of each such deduction and withholding during the preceding calendar month, the
amount of the prize award from which each such amount was withheld, and any
other information required by the Tax Administrator. With the return, the video
lottery sales agent shall remit electronically to the Tax Administrator all
amounts deducted and withheld during the preceding month.
      (3)   A video lottery sales agent shall maintain a record of all receipts
issued under division (e) of this section and shall make those records
available to the Tax Administrator upon request. Such records shall be
maintained in accordance with R.C. § 5747.17 and any rules adopted pursuant
thereto.
      (4)   Annually, on or before the thirty-first day of January, each video
lottery terminal sales agent shall file an annual return electronically with
the Tax Administrator of the municipal corporation in which the facility is
located indicating the total amount deducted and withheld during the preceding
calendar year. The video lottery sales agent shall remit electronically with
the annual return any amount that was deducted and withheld and that was not
previously remitted. If the name, address, or social security number of a
person or the amount deducted and withheld with respect to that person was
omitted on a monthly return for that reporting period, that information shall
be indicated on the annual return.
      (5)   Annually, on or before the thirty-first day of January, a video
lottery sales agent shall issue an information return to each person with
respect to whom an amount has been deducted and withheld during the preceding
calendar year. The information return shall show the total amount of municipal
income tax deducted and withheld from the person's prize award by the video
lottery sales agent during the preceding year. A video lottery sales agent
shall provide to the Tax Administrator of the municipal corporation a copy of
each information return issued under this division. The Tax Administrator may
require that such copies be transmitted electronically.
      (6)   A video lottery sales agent who fails to file a return and remit
the amounts deducted and withheld is personally liable for the amount deducted
and withheld and not remitted. Such personal liability extends to any penalty
and interest imposed for the late filing of a return or the late payment of tax
deducted and withheld.
   (f)   If a video lottery sales agent ceases to operate video lottery
terminals, the amounts deducted and withheld along with any penalties and
interest thereon are immediately due and payable. The successor of the video
lottery sales agent that purchases the video lottery terminals from the agent
shall withhold an amount from the purchase money that is sufficient to cover
the amounts deducted and withheld and any penalties and interest thereon until
the predecessor video lottery sales agent operator produces either of the
following:
      (1)   A receipt from the Tax Administrator showing that the amounts
deducted and withheld and penalties and interest thereon have been paid;
      (2)   A certificate from the Tax Administrator indicating that no amounts
are due.
      If the successor fails to withhold purchase money, the successor is
personally liable for the payment of the amounts deducted and withheld and
penalties and interest thereon.
   (g)   The failure of a video lottery sales agent to deduct and withhold the
required amount from a person's prize award does not relieve that person from
liability for the municipal income tax with respect to that prize award.
   (h)   If a casino operator or lottery sales agent files a return late, fails
to file a return, remits amounts deducted and withheld late, or fails to remit
amounts deducted and withheld as required under this section, the Tax
Administrator of a municipal corporation may impose the following applicable
penalty:
      (1)   For the late remittance of, or failure to remit, tax deducted and
withheld under this section, a penalty equal to fifty percent of the tax
deducted and withheld;
      (2)   For the failure to file, or the late filing of, a monthly or annual
return, a penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each return not filed
or filed late. Interest shall accrue on past due amounts deducted and withheld
at the rate prescribed in R.C. § 5703.47.
   (i)   Amounts deducted and withheld on behalf of a municipal corporation
shall be allowed as a credit against payment of the tax imposed by the
municipal corporation and shall be treated as taxes paid for purposes of §
882.07. This division applies only to the person for whom the amount is
deducted and withheld.
   (j)   The Tax Administrator shall prescribe the forms of the receipts and
returns required under this section.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018)
Statutory reference:
   Withholding by casinos and lottery sales agents, see R.C. § 718.031
§ 882.06 INCOME SUBJECT TO NET PROFIT TAX
§ 882.061 DETERMINING MUNICIPAL TAXABLE INCOME FOR TAXPAYERS WHO ARE NOT
INDIVIDUALS.
   Municipal taxable income for a taxpayer who is not an individual for the
Village is calculated as follows:
   (a)   Income reduced by exempt income to the extent otherwise included in
income, multiplied by apportionment, further reduced by any pre-2017 net
operating loss carryforward equals municipal taxable income.
      (1)   Income for a taxpayer that is not an individual means the net
profit of the taxpayer.
         A.   NET PROFIT for a person other than an individual is defined in §
882.03(u).
         B.   ADJUSTED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME is defined in §
882.03(a).
      (2)   EXEMPT INCOME is defined in §
882.03(j).
      (3)   APPORTIONMENT means the apportionment as determined by §
882.062.
      (4)   PRE-2017 NET OPERATING LOSS CARRYFORWARD is defined in §
882.03(dd).
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018)
Statutory reference:
   Definitions, see R.C. § 718.01
§ 882.062 NET PROFIT; INCOME SUBJECT TO NET PROFIT TAX; ALTERNATIVE
APPORTIONMENT.
   This section applies to any taxpayer engaged in a business or profession in
the Village unless the taxpayer is an individual who resides in the Village or
the taxpayer is an electric company, combined company, or telephone company
that is subject to and required to file reports under R.C. Chapter 5745.
   (a)   Net profit from a business or profession conducted both within and
without the boundaries of the Village shall be considered as having a taxable
situs in the Village for purposes of municipal income taxation in the same
proportion as the average ratio of the following:
      (1)   The average original cost of the real property and tangible
personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or profession
in the Village during the taxable period to the average original cost of all of
the real and tangible personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the
business or profession during the same period, wherever situated.
         As used in the preceding paragraph, tangible personal or real property
shall include property rented or leased by the taxpayer and the value of such
property shall be determined by multiplying the annual rental thereon by eight;
      (2)   Wages, salaries, and other compensation paid during the taxable
period to individuals employed in the business or profession for services
performed in the Village to wages, salaries, and other compensation paid during
the same period to individuals employed in the business or profession, wherever
the individual's services are performed, excluding compensation from which
taxes are not required to be withheld under §
882.052;
      (3)   Total gross receipts of the business or profession from sales and
rentals made and services performed during the taxable period in the Village to
total gross receipts of the business or profession during the same period from
sales, rentals, and services, wherever made or performed.
   (b)   (1)   If the apportionment factors described in division (a) of this
section do not fairly represent the extent of a taxpayer's business activity in
the Village, the taxpayer may request, or the Tax Administrator of the Village
may require, that the taxpayer use, with respect to all or any portion of the
income of the taxpayer, an alternative apportionment method involving one or
more of the following:
         A.   Separate accounting;
         B.   The exclusion of one or more of the factors;
         C.   The inclusion of one or more additional factors that would
provide for a more fair apportionment of the income of the taxpayer to the
Village;
         D.   A modification of one or more of the factors.
      (2)   A taxpayer request to use an alternative apportionment method shall
be in writing and shall accompany a tax return, timely filed appeal of an
assessment, or timely filed amended tax return. The taxpayer may use the
requested alternative method unless the Tax Administrator denies the request in
an assessment issued within the period prescribed by of §
882.19(a).
      (3)   A Tax Administrator may require a taxpayer to use an alternative
apportionment method as described in division (b)(1) of this section only by
issuing an assessment to the taxpayer within the period prescribed by §
882.19(a).
      (4)   Nothing in division (b) of this section nullifies or otherwise
affects any alternative apportionment arrangement approved by a Tax
Administrator or otherwise agreed upon by both the Tax Administrator and
taxpayer before January 1, 2016.
   (c)   As used in division (a)(2) of this section, "wages, salaries, and
other compensation" includes only wages, salaries, or other compensation paid
to an employee for services performed at any of the following locations:
      (1)   A location that is owned, controlled, or used by, rented to, or
under the possession of one of the following:
         A.   The employer;
         B.   A vendor, customer, client, or patient of the employer, or a
related member of such a vendor, customer, client, or patient;
         C.   A vendor, customer, client, or patient of a person described in
division (c)(1)B. of this section, or a related member of such a vendor,
customer, client, or patient.
      (2)    Any location at which a trial, appeal, hearing, investigation,
inquiry, review, court-martial, or similar administrative, judicial, or
legislative matter or proceeding is being conducted, provided that the
compensation is paid for services performed for, or on behalf of, the employer
or that the employee's presence at the location directly or indirectly benefits
the employer;
      (3)   A.   As used in this division:
            1.    QUALIFYING REMOTE EMPLOYEE OR OWNER means an individual who
is an employee of a taxpayer or who is a partner or member holding an ownership
interest in a taxpayer that is treated as a partnership for federal income tax
purposes, provided that the individual meets both of the following criteria:
               a.   The taxpayer has assigned the individual to a qualifying
reporting location.
               b.   The individual is permitted or required to perform services
for the taxpayer at a qualifying remote work location.
            2.    QUALIFYING REMOTE WORK LOCATION means a permanent or
temporary location at which an employee or owner chooses or is required to
perform services for the taxpayer, other than a reporting location of the
taxpayer or any other location owned or controlled by a customer or client of
the taxpayer. QUALIFYING REMOTE WORK LOCATION may include the residence of an
employee or owner and may be located outside of a municipal corporation that
imposes an income tax in accordance with this chapter. An employee or owner may
have more than one qualifying remote work location during a taxable year.
            3.    REPORTING LOCATION means either of the following:
               a.   A permanent or temporary place of doing business, such as
an office, warehouse, storefront, construction site, or similar location, that
is owned or controlled directly or indirectly by the taxpayer;
               b.   Any location in this state owned or controlled by a
customer or client of the taxpayer, provided that the taxpayer is required to
withhold taxes under § 882.05 on qualifying wages paid to an employee for the
performance of personal services at that location.
            4.    QUALIFYING REPORTING LOCATION means one of the following:
               a.   The reporting location in this state at which an employee
or owner performs services for the taxpayer on a regular or periodic basis
during the taxable year;
               b.   If no reporting location exists in this state for an
employee or owner under division (g)(1)D.1. of this section, the reporting
location in this state at which the employee's or owner's supervisor regularly
or periodically reports during the taxable year;
               c.   If no reporting location exists in this state for an
employee or owner under division (g)(1)D.1. or 2. of this section, the location
that the taxpayer otherwise assigns as the employee's or owner's qualifying
reporting location, provided the assignment is made in good faith and is
recorded and maintained in the taxpayer's business records. A taxpayer may
change the qualifying reporting location designated for an employee or owner
under this division at any time.
         B.   For tax years ending on or after December 31, 2023, a taxpayer
may elect to apply the provisions of this division to the apportionment of its
net profit from a business or profession. For taxpayers that make this
election, the provisions of division (f) of this section apply to such
apportionment except as otherwise provided in this division.
         A taxpayer shall make the election allowed under this division in
writing on or with the taxpayer's net profit return or, if applicable, a timely
filed amended net profit return or a timely filed appeal of an assessment. The
election applies to the taxable year for which that return or appeal is filed
and for all subsequent taxable years, until the taxpayer revokes the election.
         The taxpayer shall make the initial election with the tax
administrator of each municipal corporation with which, after applying the
apportionment provisions authorized in this division, the taxpayer is required
to file a net profit tax return for that taxable year. A taxpayer shall not be
required to notify the tax administrator of a municipal corporation in which a
qualifying remote employee's or owner's qualifying remote work location is
located, unless the taxpayer is otherwise required to file a net profit return
with that municipal corporation due to business operations that are unrelated
to the employee's or owner's activity at the qualifying remote work location.
         After the taxpayer makes the initial election, the election applies to
every municipal corporation in which the taxpayer conducts business. The
taxpayer shall not be required to file a net profit return with a municipal
corporation solely because a qualifying remote employee's or owner's qualifying
remote work location is located in such municipal corporation.
         Nothing in this division prohibits a taxpayer from making a new
election under this division after properly revoking a prior election.
         C.   For the purpose of calculating the ratios described in division
(f)(1) of this section, all of the following apply to a taxpayer that has made
the election described in division (g)(2):
            1.   For the purpose of division (f)(1)A. of this section, the
average original cost of any tangible personal property used by a qualifying
remote employee or owner at that individual's qualifying remote work location
shall be sitused to that individual's qualifying reporting location.
            2.   For the purpose of division (f)(1)B. of this section, any
wages, salaries, and other compensation paid during the taxable period to a
qualifying remote employee or owner for services performed at that individual's
qualifying remote work location shall be sitused to that individual's
qualifying reporting location.
            3.   For the purpose of division (f)(1)C. of this section, and
notwithstanding division (f)(4) of this section, any gross receipts of the
business or profession from services performed during the taxable period by a
qualifying remote employee or owner for services performed at that individual's
qualifying remote work location shall be sitused to that individual's
qualifying reporting location.
         D.   Nothing in this division prevents a taxpayer from requesting, or
a tax administrator from requiring, that the taxpayer use, with respect to all
or a portion of the income of the taxpayer, an alternative apportionment method
as described in division (f)(2) of this section. However, a tax administrator
shall not require an alternative apportionment method in such a manner that it
would require a taxpayer to file a net profit return with a municipal
corporation solely because a qualifying remote employee's or owner's qualifying
remote work location is located in that municipal corporation.
         E.   Except as otherwise provided in this division, nothing in this
division is intended to affect the withholding of taxes on qualifying wages
pursuant to §
882.05.
      (4)   Any other location, if the Tax Administrator determines that the
employer directed the employee to perform the services at the other location in
lieu of a location described in division (c)(1) or (c)(2) of this section
solely in order to avoid or reduce the employer's municipal income tax
liability. If a Tax Administrator makes such a determination, the employer may
dispute the determination by establishing, by a preponderance of the evidence,
that the Tax Administrator's determination was unreasonable.
   (d)   For the purposes of division (a)(3) of this section, receipts from
sales and rentals made and services performed shall be sitused to a municipal
corporation as follows:
      (1)   Gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property shall be
sitused to the municipal corporation in which the sale originated. For the
purposes of this division, a sale of property originates in a municipal
corporation if, regardless of where title passes, the property meets any of the
following criteria:
         A.   The property is shipped to or delivered within the municipal
corporation from a stock of goods located within the municipal corporation.
         B.   The property is delivered within the municipal corporation from a
location outside the municipal corporation, provided the taxpayer is regularly
engaged through its own employees in the solicitation or promotion of sales
within such municipal corporation and the sales result from such solicitation
or promotion.
         C.   The property is shipped from a place within the municipal
corporation to purchasers outside the municipal corporation, provided that the
taxpayer is not, through its own employees, regularly engaged in the
solicitation or promotion of sales at the place where delivery is made.
      (2)   Gross receipts from the sale of services shall be sitused to the
municipal corporation to the extent that such services are performed in the
municipal corporation.
      (3)   To the extent included in income, gross receipts from the sale of
real property located in the municipal corporation shall be sitused to the
municipal corporation.
      (4)   To the extent included in income, gross receipts from rents and
royalties from real property located in the municipal corporation shall be
sitused to the municipal corporation.
      (5)   Gross receipts from rents and royalties from tangible personal
property shall be sitused to the municipal corporation based upon the extent to
which
the tangible personal property is used in the municipal corporation.
   (e)   The net profit received by an individual taxpayer from the rental of
real estate owned directly by the individual or by a disregarded entity owned
by the individual shall be subject to tax only by the municipal corporation in
which the property generating the net profit is located and the municipal
corporation in which the individual taxpayer that receives the net profit
resides.
      A municipal corporation shall allow such taxpayers to elect to use
separate accounting for the purpose of calculating net profit sitused under
this division to the municipal corporation in which the property is located.
   (f)   (1)   Except as provided in division (f)(2) of this section,
commissions received by a real estate agent or broker relating to the sale,
purchase, or lease of real estate shall be sitused to the municipal corporation
in which the real estate is located. Net profit reported by the real estate
agent or broker shall be allocated to a municipal corporation based upon the
ratio of the commissions the agent or broker received from the sale, purchase,
or lease of real estate located in the municipal corporation to the commissions
received from the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate everywhere in the
taxable year.
      (2)   An individual who is a resident of a municipal corporation that
imposes a municipal income tax shall report the individual's net profit from
all real estate activity on the individual's annual tax return for that
municipal corporation. The individual may claim a credit for taxes the
individual paid on such net profit to another municipal corporation to the
extent that such credit is allowed under §
882.081.
   (g)   If, in computing a taxpayer's adjusted Federal taxable income, the
taxpayer deducted any amount with respect to a stock option granted to an
employee, and if the employee is not required to include in the employee's
income any such amount or a portion thereof because it is exempted from
taxation under §
882.03(j)(12) and (dd)(1)D., by a municipal corporation to which the taxpayer
has apportioned a portion of its net profit, the taxpayer shall add the amount
that is exempt from taxation to the taxpayer's net profit that was apportioned
to that municipal corporation. In no case shall a taxpayer be required to add
to its net profit that was apportioned to that municipal corporation any amount
other than the amount upon which the employee would be required to pay tax were
the amount related to the stock option not exempted from taxation.
      This division applies solely for the purpose of making an adjustment to
the amount of a taxpayer's net profit that was apportioned to a municipal
corporation under this section.
   (h)   When calculating the ratios described in division (a) of this section
for the purposes of that division or division (b) of this section, the owner of
a disregarded entity shall include in the owner's ratios the property, payroll,
and gross receipts of such disregarded entity.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018; Ord. 40-2023, passed 12-19-2023)
Statutory reference:
   Income subject to tax, see R.C. § 718.02
§ 882.063 CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL INCOME TAX RETURN.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   AFFILIATED GROUP OF CORPORATIONS means an affiliated group as
defined in section 1504 of the Internal Revenue Code, except that, if such a
group includes at least one incumbent local exchange carrier that is primarily
engaged in the business of providing local exchange telephone service in this
State, the affiliated group shall not include any incumbent local exchange
carrier that would otherwise be included in the group.
      (2)   CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL INCOME TAX RETURN means a consolidated return
filed for Federal income tax purposes pursuant to section 1501 of the Internal
Revenue Code.
      (3)   CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME means the consolidated taxable
income of an affiliated group of corporations, as computed for the purposes of
filing a consolidated Federal income tax return, before consideration of net
operating losses or special deductions. CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME
does not include income or loss of an incumbent local exchange carrier that is
excluded from the affiliated group under division (a)(1) of this section.
      (4)   INCUMBENT LOCAL EXCHANGE CARRIER has the same meaning as in R.C. §
4927.01.
      (5)   LOCAL EXCHANGE TELEPHONE SERVICE has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5727.01.
   (b)   (1)   For taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2016, a
taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations may elect to
file a consolidated municipal income tax return for a taxable year if at least
one member of the affiliated group of corporations is subject to the municipal
income tax in that taxable year and if the affiliated group of corporations
filed a consolidated Federal income tax return with respect to that taxable
year.
         A.   The election is binding for a five-year period beginning with the
first taxable year of the initial election unless a change in the reporting
method is required under Federal law;
         B.   The election continues to be binding for each subsequent five-
year period unless the taxpayer elects to discontinue filing consolidated
municipal income tax returns under division (b)(2) of this section; or
         C.   A taxpayer receives permission from the Tax Administrator. The
Tax Administrator shall approve such a request for good cause shown.
      (2)   An election to discontinue filing consolidated municipal income tax
returns under this section must be made in the first year following the last
year of a five-year consolidated municipal income tax return election period in
effect under division (b)(1) of this section. The election to discontinue
filing a consolidated municipal income tax return is binding for a five-year
period beginning with the first taxable year of the election.
      (3)   An election made under division (b)(1) or (b)(2) of this section is
binding on all members of the affiliated group of corporations subject to a
municipal income tax.
   (c)   A taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations
that filed a consolidated Federal income tax return for a taxable year shall
file a consolidated municipal income tax return for that taxable year if the
Tax Administrator determines, by a preponderance of the evidence, that
intercompany transactions have not been conducted at arm's length and that
there has been a distortive shifting of income or expenses with regard to
allocation of net profits to the municipal corporation. A taxpayer that is
required to file a consolidated municipal income tax return for a taxable year
shall file a consolidated municipal income tax return for all subsequent
taxable years unless the taxpayer requests and receives written permission from
the Tax Administrator to file a separate return or a taxpayer has experienced a
change in circumstances.
   (d)   A taxpayer shall prepare a consolidated municipal income tax return in
the same manner as is required under the United States Department of Treasury
regulations that prescribe procedures for the preparation of the consolidated
Federal income tax return required to be filed by the common parent of the
affiliated group of which the taxpayer is a member.
   (e)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (e)(2), (e)(3), and
(e)(4) of this section, corporations that file a consolidated municipal income
tax return shall compute adjusted Federal taxable income, as defined in §
882.03(a), by substituting "consolidated Federal taxable income" for "Federal
taxable income" wherever "Federal taxable income" appears in that division and
by substituting "an affiliated group of corporation's" for "a C corporation's"
wherever "a C corporation's" appears in that division.
      (2)   No corporation filing a consolidated municipal income tax return
shall make any adjustment otherwise required under §
882.03(a) to the extent that the item of income or deduction otherwise subject
to the adjustment has been eliminated or consolidated in the computation of
consolidated Federal taxable income.
      (3)   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having at least
eighty percent of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled,
directly or indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in
that affiliated group's consolidated Federal taxable income for a taxable year,
the corporation filing a consolidated municipal income tax return shall do one
of the following with respect to that pass-through entity's net profit or loss
for that taxable year:
         A.   Exclude the pass-through entity's net profit or loss from the
consolidated Federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purpose of making the computations required in §
882.062, exclude the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-through
entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit sitused to a
municipal corporation. If the entity's net profit or loss is so excluded, the
entity shall be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on the basis of the
entity's net profits that would otherwise be included in the consolidated
Federal taxable income of the affiliated group.
         B.   Include the pass-through entity's net profit or loss in the
consolidated Federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purpose of making the computations required in §
882.062, include the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-through
entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit sitused to a
municipal corporation. If the entity's net profit or loss is so included, the
entity shall not be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on the basis of
the entity's net profits that are included in the consolidated Federal taxable
income of the affiliated group.
      (4)   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having less than
eighty percent of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled,
directly or indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in
that affiliated group's consolidated Federal taxable income for a taxable year,
all of the following shall apply:
         A.   The corporation filing the consolidated municipal income tax
return shall exclude the pass-through entity's net profit or loss from the
consolidated Federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purposes of making the computations required in §
882.062, exclude the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-through
entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit sitused to a
municipal corporation;
         B.   The pass-through entity shall be subject to municipal income
taxation as a separate taxpayer in accordance with this chapter on the basis of
the entity's net profits that would otherwise be included in the consolidated
Federal taxable income of the affiliated group.
   (f)   Corporations filing a consolidated municipal income tax return shall
make the computations required under §
882.062 by substituting "consolidated Federal taxable income attributable to"
for "net profit from" wherever "net profit from" appears in that section and by
substituting "affiliated group of corporations" for "taxpayer" wherever
"taxpayer" appears in that section.
   (g)   Each corporation filing a consolidated municipal income tax return is
jointly and severally liable for any tax, interest, penalties, fines, charges,
or other amounts imposed by a municipal corporation in accordance with this
chapter on the corporation, an affiliated group of which the corporation is a
member for any portion of the taxable year, or any one or more members of such
an affiliated group.
   (h)   Corporations and their affiliates that made an election or entered
into an agreement with a municipal corporation before January 1, 2016, to file
a consolidated or combined tax return with such municipal corporation may
continue to file consolidated or combined tax returns in accordance with such
election or agreement for taxable years beginning on and after January 1, 2016.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018)
Statutory reference:
   Consolidated municipal tax return, see R.C. § 718.06
§ 882.064 TAX CREDIT FOR BUSINESSES THAT FOSTER NEW JOBS IN OHIO.
   The Village, by ordinance, may grant a refundable or nonrefundable credit
against its tax on income to a taxpayer to foster job creation in the Village.
If a credit is granted under this section, it shall be measured as a percentage
of the new income tax revenue the Village derives from new employees of the
taxpayer and shall be for a term not exceeding fifteen years. Before the
Village passes an ordinance granting a credit, the Village and the taxpayer
shall enter into an agreement specifying all the conditions of the credit.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018)
Statutory reference:
   Fostering new jobs; tax credits, see R.C. § 718.15
§ 882.065 TAX CREDITS TO FOSTER JOB RETENTION.
   The Village, by ordinance, may grant a refundable or nonrefundable credit
against its tax on income to a taxpayer for the purpose of fostering job
retention in the Village. If a credit is granted under this section, it shall
be measured as a percentage of the income tax revenue the Village derives from
the retained employees of the taxpayer, and shall be for a term not exceeding
fifteen years. Before the Village passes an ordinance allowing such a credit,
the Village and the taxpayer shall enter into an agreement specifying all the
conditions of the credit.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018)
Statutory reference:
   Fostering job retention; tax credits, see R.C. § 718.151
§ 882.07 DECLARATION OF ESTIMATED TAX.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   ESTIMATED TAXES means the amount that the taxpayer reasonably
estimates to be the taxpayer's tax liability for a municipal corporation's
income tax for the current taxable year.
      (2)   TAX LIABILITY means the total taxes due to a municipal corporation
for the taxable year, after allowing any credit to which the taxpayer is
entitled, and after applying any estimated tax payment, withholding payment, or
credit from another taxable year.
   (b)   (1)   Every taxpayer shall make a declaration of estimated taxes for
the current taxable year, on the form prescribed by the Tax Administrator, if
the amount payable as estimated taxes is at least two hundred dollars
($200.00). For the purposes of this section:
         A.   Taxes withheld from qualifying wages shall be considered as paid
to the municipal corporation for which the taxes were withheld in equal amounts
on each payment date. If the taxpayer establishes the dates on which all
amounts were actually withheld, the amounts withheld shall be considered as
paid on the dates on which the amounts were actually withheld.
         B.   An overpayment of tax applied as a credit to a subsequent taxable
year is deemed to be paid on the date of the postmark stamped on the cover in
which the payment is mailed or, if the payment is made by electronic funds
transfer, the date the payment is submitted. As used in this division, DATE OF
THE POSTMARK means, in the event there is more than one date on the cover, the
earliest date imprinted on the cover by the postal service.
         C.   A taxpayer having a taxable year of less than twelve months shall
make a declaration under rules prescribed by the Tax Administrator.
         D.   Taxes withheld by a casino operator or by a lottery sales agent
under R.C. § 718.031 are deemed to be paid to the municipal corporation for
which the taxes were withheld on the date the taxes are withheld from the
taxpayer's winnings.
      (2)   Taxpayers filing joint returns shall file joint declarations of
estimated taxes.
      (3)   The declaration of estimated taxes shall be filed on or before the
date prescribed for the filing of municipal income tax returns under §
882.091(g) or on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month of the first
taxable year after the taxpayer becomes subject to tax for the first time.
      (4)   Taxpayers reporting on a fiscal year basis shall file a declaration
on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the beginning of each
fiscal year or period.
      (5)   The original declaration or any subsequent amendment may be
increased or decreased on or before any subsequent quarterly payment day as
provided in this section.
   (c)   (1)   The required portion of the tax liability for the taxable year
that shall be paid through estimated taxes made payable to the Village or Tax
Administrator, including the application of tax refunds to estimated taxes and
withholding on or before the applicable payment date, shall be as follows:
         A.   On or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the
beginning of the taxable year, twenty-two and one-half percent of the tax
liability for the taxable year;
         B.   On or before the fifteenth day of the sixth month after the
beginning of the taxable year, forty-five percent of the tax liability for the
taxable year;
         C.   On or before the fifteenth day of the ninth month after the
beginning of the taxable year, sixty-seven and one-half percent of the tax
liability for the taxable year;
         D.   On or before the fifteenth day of the twelfth month of the
taxable year, ninety percent of the tax liability for the taxable year.
      (2)   A taxpayer may amend a declaration under rules prescribed by the
Tax Administrator. When an amended declaration has been filed, the unpaid
balance shown due on the amended declaration shall be paid in equal
installments on or before the remaining payment dates. The amended declaration
must be filed on the next applicable due date as outlined in division (c)(1)A.
through D. of this section.
      (3)   On or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month of the year
following that for which the declaration or amended declaration was filed, an
annual return shall be filed and any balance which may be due shall be paid
with the return in accordance with §
882.091.
         A.   For taxpayers who are individuals, or who are not individuals and
are reporting and filing on a calendar year basis, the annual tax return is due
on the same date as the filing of the Federal tax return, unless extended
pursuant to division (G) of R.C. § 5747.08.
         B.   For taxpayers who are not individuals, and are reporting and
filing on a fiscal year basis or any period other than a calendar year, the
annual return is due on the fifteenth day of the fourth month following the end
of the taxable year or period.
      (4)   An amended declaration is required whenever the taxpayer's
estimated tax liability changes during the taxable year. A change in estimated
tax liability may either increase or decrease the estimated tax liability for
the taxable year.
   (d)   (1)   In the case of any underpayment of any portion of a tax
liability, penalty and interest may be imposed pursuant to §
882.10 upon the amount of underpayment for the period of underpayment, unless
the underpayment is due to reasonable cause as described in division (e) of
this section. The amount of the underpayment shall be determined as follows:
         A.   For the first payment of estimated taxes each year, twenty-two
and one-half percent of the tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the
date prescribed for that payment;
         B.   For the second payment of estimated taxes each year, forty-five
percent of the tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date
prescribed for that payment;
         C.   For the third payment of estimated taxes each year, sixty-seven
and one-half percent of the tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the
date prescribed for that payment;
         D.   For the fourth payment of estimated taxes each year, ninety
percent of the tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date
prescribed for that payment.
      (2)   The period of the underpayment shall run from the day the estimated
payment was required to be made to the date on which the payment is made. For
purposes of this section, a payment of estimated taxes on or before any payment
date shall be considered a payment of any previous underpayment only to the
extent the payment of estimated taxes exceeds the amount of the payment
presently required to be paid to avoid any penalty.
   (e)   An underpayment of any portion of tax liability determined under
division (d) of this section shall be due to reasonable cause and the penalty
imposed by this section shall not be added to the taxes for the taxable year if
any of the following apply:
      (1)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least ninety
percent of the tax liability for the current taxable year, determined by
annualizing the income received during the year up to the end of the month
immediately preceding the month in which the payment is due.
      (2)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least 100
percent of the tax liability shown on the return of the taxpayer for the
preceding taxable year, provided that the immediately preceding taxable year
reflected a period of twelve months and the taxpayer filed a return with the
municipal corporation under §
882.091 for that year.
      (3)   The taxpayer is an individual who resides in the Village but was
not domiciled there on the first day of January of the calendar year that
includes the first day of the taxable year.
   (f)   A Tax Administrator may waive the requirement for filing a declaration
of estimated taxes for any class of taxpayers after finding that the waiver is
reasonable and proper in view of administrative costs and other factors.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018)
Statutory reference:
   Estimated taxes, see R.C. § 718.08
§ 882.08 CREDIT FOR TAX PAID
§ 882.081 CREDIT FOR TAX PAID TO ANOTHER MUNICIPALITY.
   (a)   Where a resident of the Village is subject to a municipal income tax
in another municipality, that resident may not be required to pay a total
municipal income tax on the same income greater than the tax imposed at the
higher rate.
   (b)   Every individual taxpayer who resides in the Village but who receives
net profits, salaries, wages, commissions, or other personal service
compensation for work done outside the Village, if it is made to appear that
the taxpayer has paid a municipal income tax on the same income taxable under
this chapter to another municipality, will be allowed a credit against the tax
imposed by this chapter of the amount so paid by the taxpayer or on the
taxpayer's behalf to such other municipality. The credit may not exceed the tax
assessed by this chapter on such income earned in such other municipality or
municipalities where that tax is paid.
   (c)   A claim for refund or credit under this section shall be made as
provided elsewhere in this chapter.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018; Ord. 24-2020, passed 10-27-2020)
§ 882.082 REFUNDABLE CREDIT FOR QUALIFYING LOSS.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   NONQUALIFIED DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLAN means a compensation plan
described in section 3121(v)(2)(C) of the Internal Revenue Code.
      (2)   A.   Except as provided in division (a)(2)B. of this section,
QUALIFYING LOSS means the excess, if any, of the total amount of compensation
the payment of which is deferred pursuant to a nonqualified deferred
compensation plan over the total amount of income the taxpayer has recognized
for Federal income tax purposes for all taxable years on a cumulative basis as
compensation with respect to the taxpayer's receipt of money and property
attributable to distributions in connection with the nonqualified deferred
compensation plan.
         B.   If, for one or more taxable years, the taxpayer has not paid to
one or more municipal corporations income tax imposed on the entire amount of
compensation the payment of which is deferred pursuant to a nonqualified
deferred compensation plan, then the "qualifying loss" is the product of the
amount resulting from the calculation described in division (a)(2)A. of this
section computed without regard to division (a)(2)B. of this section and a
fraction the numerator of which is the portion of such compensation on which
the taxpayer has paid income tax to one or more municipal corporations and the
denominator of which is the total amount of compensation the payment of which
is deferred pursuant to a nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
         C.   With respect to a nonqualified deferred compensation plan, the
taxpayer sustains a qualifying loss only in the taxable year in which the
taxpayer receives the final distribution of money and property pursuant to that
nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
      (3)   QUALIFYING TAX RATE means the applicable tax rate for the taxable
year for which the taxpayer paid income tax to a municipal corporation with
respect to any portion of the total amount of compensation the payment of which
is deferred pursuant to a nonqualified deferred compensation plan. If different
tax rates applied for different taxable years, then the "qualifying tax rate"
is a weighted average of those different tax rates. The weighted average shall
be based upon the tax paid to the municipal corporation each year with respect
to the nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
   (b)   (1)   Except as provided in division (d) of this section, a refundable
credit shall be allowed against the income tax imposed by a municipal
corporation for each qualifying loss sustained by a taxpayer during the taxable
year. The amount of the credit shall be equal to the product of the qualifying
loss and the qualifying tax rate.
      (2)   A taxpayer shall claim the credit allowed under this section from
each municipal corporation to which the taxpayer paid municipal income tax with
respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation plan in one or more taxable
years.
      (3)   If a taxpayer has paid tax to more than one municipal corporation
with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation plan, the amount of the
credit that a taxpayer may claim from each municipal corporation shall be
calculated on the basis of each municipal corporation's proportionate share of
the total municipal corporation income tax paid by the taxpayer to all
municipal corporations with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation
plan.
      (4)   In no case shall the amount of the credit allowed under this
section exceed the cumulative income tax that a taxpayer has paid to a
municipal corporation for all taxable years with respect to the nonqualified
deferred compensation plan.
   (c)   (1)   For purposes of this section, municipal corporation income tax
that has been withheld with respect to a nonqualified deferred compensation
plan shall be considered to have been paid by the taxpayer with respect to the
nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
      (2)   Any municipal income tax that has been refunded or otherwise
credited for the benefit of the taxpayer with respect to a nonqualified
deferred compensation plan shall not be considered to have been paid to the
municipal corporation by the taxpayer.
   (d)   The credit allowed under this section is allowed only to the extent
the taxpayer's qualifying loss is attributable to:
      (1)   The insolvency or bankruptcy of the employer who had established
the nonqualified deferred compensation plan; or
      (2)   The employee's failure or inability to satisfy all of the
employer's terms and conditions necessary to receive the nonqualified deferred
compensation.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018)
Statutory reference:
   Qualifying loss; refundable credit, see R.C. § 718.021
§ 882.083 CREDIT FOR PERSON WORKING IN JOINT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT OR
ZONE.
   The Village shall grant a credit against its tax on income to a resident of
the Village who works in a joint economic development zone created under R.C. §
715.691 or a joint economic development district created under R.C. § 715.70,
715.71, or 715.72 to the same extent that it grants a credit against its tax on
income to its residents who are employed in another municipal corporation,
pursuant to §
882.081.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018)
Statutory reference:
   Worker in joint economic development zone or district, see R.C. § 718.16
§ 882.084 CREDIT FOR TAX BEYOND STATUTE FOR OBTAINING REFUND.
   (a)   Income tax that has been deposited or paid to the Village, but should
have been deposited or paid to another municipal corporation, is allowable by
the Village as a refund, but is subject to the three-year limitation on refunds
as provided in §
882.096.
   (b)   Income tax that should have been deposited or paid to the Village, but
was deposited or paid to another municipal corporation, shall be subject to
collection and recovery by the Village. To the extent a refund of such tax or
withholding is barred by the limitation on refunds as provided in §
882.096, the Village will allow a non-refundable credit equal to the tax or
withholding paid to the other Village against the income tax the Village claims
is due. If the Village's tax rate is higher, the tax representing the net
difference of the tax rates is also subject to collection by the Village, along
with any penalty and interest accruing during the period of nonpayment.
   (c)   No carryforward of credit will be permitted when the overpayment is
beyond the three-year limitation for refunding of same as provided in §
882.096.
   (d)   Nothing in this section requires a village to allow credit for tax
paid to another municipal corporation if the village has reduced credit for tax
paid to another municipal corporation. Section
882.081 regarding any limitation on credit shall prevail.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018)
Statutory reference:
   Second municipality imposing tax after time period for refund, see R.C. §
718.121
§ 882.09 ANNUAL RETURN
§ 882.091 RETURN AND PAYMENT OF TAX.
   (a)   (1)   An annual return with respect to the income tax levied on
municipal taxable income by the Village shall be completed and filed by every
taxpayer for any taxable year for which the taxpayer is subject to the tax,
regardless of whether or not income tax is due.
      (2)   The Tax Administrator shall accept on behalf of all nonresident
individual taxpayers a return filed by an employer, agent of an employer, or
other payer located in the Village under §
882.051(c) when the nonresident individual taxpayer's sole income subject to
the tax is the qualifying wages reported by the employer, agent of an employer,
or other payer, and no additional tax is due to the Village.
      (3)   All resident individual taxpayers, eighteen years of age and older,
shall file an annual municipal income tax return with the Village, regardless
of income or liability.
   (b)   If an individual is deceased, any return or notice required of that
individual shall be completed and filed by that decedent's executor,
administrator, or other person charged with the property of that decedent.
   (c)   If an individual is unable to complete and file a return or notice
required by the Village in accordance with this chapter, the return or notice
required of that individual shall be completed and filed by the individual's
duly authorized agent, guardian, conservator, fiduciary, or other person
charged with the care of the person or property of that individual. Such duly
authorized agent, guardian, conservator, fiduciary, or other person charged
with the care of the person or property of that individual shall provide, with
the filing of the return, appropriate documentation to support that they are
authorized to file a return or notice on behalf of the taxpayer. This notice
shall include any legally binding authorizations, and contact information
including name, address, and phone number of the duly authorized agent,
guardian, conservator, fiduciary, or other person.
   (d)   Returns or notices required of an estate or a trust shall be completed
and filed by the fiduciary of the estate or trust. Such fiduciary shall
provide, with the filing of the return, appropriate documentation to support
that they are authorized to file a return or notice on behalf of the taxpayer.
This notice shall include any legally binding authorizations, and contact
information including name, address, and phone number of the fiduciary.
   (e)   No municipal corporation shall deny spouses the ability to file a
joint return.
   (f)   (1)   Each return required to be filed under this section shall
contain the signature of the taxpayer or the taxpayer's duly authorized agent
and of the person who prepared the return for the taxpayer, and shall include
the taxpayer's social security number or taxpayer identification number. Each
return shall be verified by a declaration under penalty of perjury.
      (2)   A taxpayer who is an individual is required to include, with each
annual return, amended return, or request for refund required under this
section, copies of only the following documents: all of the taxpayer's Internal
Revenue Service form W-2, "Wage and Tax Statements," including all information
reported on the taxpayer's Federal W-2, as well as taxable wages reported or
withheld for any municipal corporation; the taxpayer's Internal Revenue Service
form 1040 or, in the case of a return requested by a qualified municipal
corporation, Ohio form IT-1040; and, with respect to an amended tax return or
refund request, any other documentation necessary to support the refund request
or the adjustments made in the amended return. An individual taxpayer who files
the annual return required by this section electronically is not required to
provide paper copies of any of the foregoing to the Tax Administrator unless
the Tax Administrator requests such copies after the return has been filed.
      (3)   A taxpayer that is not an individual is required to include, with
each annual net profit return, amended net profit return, or request for refund
required under this section, copies of only the following documents: the
taxpayer's Internal Revenue Service form 1041, form 1065, form 1120, form 1120-
REIT, form 1120F, or form 1120S, and, with respect to an amended tax return or
refund request, any other documentation necessary to support the refund request
or the adjustments made in the amended return.
      (4)   A taxpayer that is not an individual and that files an annual net
profit return electronically through the Ohio Business Gateway or in some other
manner shall either mail the documents required under this division to the Tax
Administrator at the time of filing or, if electronic submission is available,
submit the documents electronically through the Ohio Business Gateway or a
portal provided by the Village. The Department of Taxation shall publish a
method of electronically submitting the documents required under this division
through the Ohio Business Gateway on or before January 1, 2016. The Department
shall transmit all documents submitted electronically under this division to
the appropriate Tax Administrator.
      (5)   After a taxpayer files a tax return, the Tax Administrator shall
request, and the taxpayer shall provide, any information, statements, or
documents required by the Village to determine and verify the taxpayer's
municipal income tax liability. The requirements imposed under division (f) of
this section apply regardless of whether the taxpayer files on a generic form
or on a form prescribed by the Tax Administrator.
      (6)   Any other documentation, including schedules, other municipal
income tax returns, or other supporting documentation necessary to verify
credits, income, losses, or other pertinent factors on the return shall also be
included to avoid delay in processing, or disallowance by the Tax Administrator
of undocumented credits or losses.
   (g)   (1)   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each
individual income tax return required to be filed under this section shall be
completed and filed as required by the Tax Administrator on or before the date
prescribed for the filing of State individual income tax returns under division
(G) of R.C. § 5747.08. The taxpayer shall complete and file the return or
notice on forms prescribed by the Tax Administrator or on generic forms,
together with remittance made payable to the Village or Tax Administrator.
         B.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each annual net
profit income tax return required to be filed under this section by a taxpayer
that is not an individual shall be completed and filed as required by the Tax
Administrator on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month following the
end of the taxpayer's taxable year or period. The taxpayer shall complete and
file the return or notice on forms prescribed by the Tax Administrator or on
generic forms, together with remittance made payable to the Village or Tax
Administrator.
         C.   In the case of individual income tax return required to be filed
by an individual, and net profit income tax return required to be filed by a
taxpayer who is not an individual, no remittance is required if the amount
shown to be due is ten dollars ($10.00) or less.
      (2)   If the Tax Administrator considers it necessary in order to ensure
the payment of the tax imposed by the Village in accordance with this chapter,
the Tax Administrator may require taxpayers to file returns and make payments
otherwise than as provided in this section, including taxpayers not otherwise
required to file annual returns.
      (3)   With respect to taxpayers to whom §
882.092 applies, to the extent that any provision in this division conflicts
with any provision in §
882.092, the provision in §
882.092 prevails.
   (h)   (1)   For taxable years beginning after 2015, the Village shall not
require a taxpayer to remit tax with respect to net profits if the amount due
is ten dollars ($10.00) or less.
      (2)   Any taxpayer not required to remit tax to the Village for a taxable
year pursuant to division (h)(1) of this section shall file with the Village an
annual net profit return under division (f)(3) and (f)(4) of this section.
   (i)   (1)   If any report, claim, statement, or other document required to
be filed, or any payment required to be made, within a prescribed period or on
or before a prescribed date under this chapter is delivered after that period
or that to the Tax Administrator or other municipal official with which the
report, claim, statement, or other document is required to be filed, or to
which the payment is required to be made, the date of the postmark stamped on
the cover in which the report, claim, statement, or other document, or payment
is mailed shall be deemed to be the date of delivery or the date of payment.
THE DATE OF POSTMARK means, in the event there is more than one date on the
cover, the earliest date imprinted on the cover by the postal service.
      (2)   If a payment under this chapter is made by electronic funds
transfer, the payment shall be considered to be made on the date of the
timestamp assigned by the first electronic system receiving that payment.
   (j)   The amounts withheld for the Village by an employer, the agent of an
employer, or other payer as described in §
882.051 shall be allowed to the recipient of the compensation as credits
against payment of the tax imposed on the recipient unless the amounts withheld
were not remitted to the Village and the recipient colluded with the employer,
agent, or other payer in connection with the failure to remit the amounts
withheld.
   (k)   Each return required by the Village to be filed in accordance with
this section shall include a box that the taxpayer may check to authorize
another person, including a tax return preparer who prepared the return, to
communicate with the Tax Administrator about matters pertaining to the return.
The return or instructions accompanying the return shall indicate that by
checking the box the taxpayer authorizes the Tax Administrator to contact the
preparer or other person concerning questions that arise during the examination
or other review of the return and authorizes the preparer or other person only
to provide the Tax Administrator with information that is missing from the
return, to contact the Tax Administrator for information about the examination
or other review of the return or the status of the taxpayer's refund or
payments, and to respond to notices about mathematical errors, offsets, or
return preparation that the taxpayer has received from the Tax Administrator
and has shown to the preparer or other person. Authorization by the taxpayer of
another person to communicate with the Tax Administrator about matters
pertaining to the return does not preclude the Tax Administrator from
contacting the taxpayer regarding such matters.
   (l)   The Tax Administrator of the Village shall accept for filing a generic
form of any income tax return, report, or document required by the Village in
accordance with this chapter, provided that the generic form, once completed
and filed, contains all of the information required by ordinances, resolutions,
or rules adopted by the Village or Tax Administrator, and provided that the
taxpayer or tax return preparer filing the generic form otherwise complies with
the provisions of this chapter and of the Village's ordinance or resolution
governing the filing of returns, reports, or documents.
   (m)   When income tax returns, reports, or other documents require the
signature of a tax return preparer, the Tax Administrator shall accept a
facsimile of such a signature in lieu of a manual signature.
   (n)   (1)   As used in this division, WORKSITE LOCATION has the same meaning
as in §
882.052.
      (2)   A person may notify a tax administrator that the person does not
expect to be a taxpayer with respect to the municipal corporation for a taxable
year if both of the following conditions apply:
         A.   The person was required to file a tax return with the Village for
the immediately preceding taxable year because the person performed services at
a worksite location within the Village, and the person has filed all
appropriate and required returns and remitted all applicable income tax and
withholding payments as provided by this chapter. The Tax Administrator is not
required to accept an affidavit from a taxpayer who has not complied with the
provisions of this chapter.
         B.   The person no longer provides services in the Village, and does
not expect to be subject to the Village's income tax for the taxable year.
      The person shall provide the notice in a signed affidavit that briefly
explains the person's circumstances, including the location of the previous
worksite location and the last date on which the person performed services or
made any sales within the municipal corporation. The affidavit also shall
include the following statement: "The affiant has no plans to perform any
services within the municipal corporation, make any sales in the municipal
corporation, or otherwise become subject to the tax levied by the municipal
corporation during the taxable year. If the affiant does become subject to the
tax levied by the municipal corporation for the taxable year, the affiant
agrees to be considered a taxpayer and to properly register as a taxpayer with
the municipal corporation, if such a registration is required by the municipal
corporation's resolutions, ordinances, or rules." The person shall sign the
affidavit under penalty of perjury.
         C.   If a person submits an affidavit described in division (n)(2) of
this section, the Tax Administrator shall not require the person to file any
tax return for the taxable year unless the Tax Administrator possesses
information that conflicts with the affidavit or if the circumstances described
in the affidavit change, or the taxpayer has engaged in activity which results
in work being performed, services provided, sales made, or other activity that
results in municipal taxable income reportable to the Village in the taxable
year. It shall be the responsibility of the taxpayer to comply with the
provisions of this chapter relating to the reporting and filing of municipal
taxable income on an annual municipal income tax return, even if an affidavit
has been filed with the Tax Administrator for the taxable year. Nothing in
division (n) of this section prohibits the Tax Administrator from performing an
audit of the person.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018)
Statutory reference:
   Annual return; filing; extensions, see R.C. § 718.05
§ 882.092 RETURN AND PAYMENT OF TAX; INDIVIDUALS SERVING IN COMBAT ZONE.
   (a)   Each member of the national guard of any state and each member of a
reserve component of the armed forces of the United States called to active
duty pursuant to an executive order issued by the President of the United
States or an act of the Congress of the United States, and each civilian
serving as support personnel in a combat zone or contingency operation in
support of the armed forces, may apply to the Tax Administrator of the Village
for both an extension of time for filing of the return and an extension of time
for payment of taxes required by the Village in accordance with this chapter
during the period of the member's or civilian's duty service and for 180 days
thereafter. The application shall be filed on or before the 180th day after the
member's or civilian's duty terminates. An applicant shall provide such
evidence as the Tax Administrator considers necessary to demonstrate
eligibility for the extension.
   (b)   (1)   If the Tax Administrator ascertains that an applicant is
qualified for an extension under this section, the Tax Administrator shall
enter into a contract with the applicant for the payment of the tax in
installments that begin on the 181st day after the applicant's active duty or
service terminates. Except as provided in division (b)(3) of this section, the
Tax Administrator may prescribe such contract terms as the Tax Administrator
considers appropriate.
      (2)   If the Tax Administrator ascertains that an applicant is qualified
for an extension under this section, the applicant shall neither be required to
file any return, report, or other tax document nor be required to pay any tax
otherwise due to the Village before the 181st day after the applicant's active
duty or service terminates.
      (3)   Taxes paid pursuant to a contract entered into under division (b)
(1) of this section are not delinquent. The Tax Administrator shall not require
any payments of penalties or interest in connection with those taxes for the
extension period.
   (c)   (1)   Nothing in this division denies to any person described in this
division the application of divisions (a) and (b) of this section.
      (2)   A.   A qualifying taxpayer who is eligible for an extension under
the Internal Revenue Code shall receive both an extension of time in which to
file any return, report, or other tax document and an extension of time in
which to make any payment of taxes required by the Village in accordance with
this chapter. The length of any extension granted under division (c)(2)A. of
this section shall be equal to the length of the corresponding extension that
the taxpayer receives under the Internal Revenue Code. As used in this section,
QUALIFYING TAXPAYER means a member of the national guard or a member of a
reserve component of the armed forces of the United States called to active
duty pursuant to either an executive order issued by the President of the
United States or an act of the Congress of the United States, or a civilian
serving as support personnel in a combat zone or contingency operation in
support of the armed forces.
         B.   Taxes the payment of which is extended in accordance with
division (c)(2)A. of this section are not delinquent during the extension
period. Such taxes become delinquent on the first day after the expiration of
the extension period if the taxes are not paid prior to that date. The Tax
Administrator shall not require any payment of penalties or interest in
connection with those taxes for the extension period. The Tax Administrator
shall not include any period of extension granted under division (c)(2)A. of
this section in calculating the penalty or interest due on any unpaid tax.
   (d)   For each taxable year to which division (a), (b), or (c) of this
section applies to a taxpayer, the provisions of divisions (b)(2) and (b)(3) or
(c) of this section, as applicable, apply to the spouse of that taxpayer if the
filing status of the spouse and the taxpayer is married filing jointly for that
year.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018)
Statutory reference:
   Filing extension for certain armed forces service, see R.C. § 718.052
§ 882.093 USE OF OHIO BUSINESS GATEWAY; TYPES OF FILINGS AUTHORIZED.
   (a)   Any taxpayer subject to municipal income taxation with respect to the
taxpayer's net profit from a business or profession may file any municipal
income tax return or, estimated municipal income tax return, or extension for
filing a municipal income tax return, and may make payment of amounts shown to
be due on such returns, by using the Ohio Business Gateway.
   (b)   Any employer, agent of an employer, or other payer may report the
amount of municipal income tax withheld from qualifying wages, and may make
remittance of such amounts, by using the Ohio Business Gateway.
   (c)   Nothing in this section affects the due dates for filing employer
withholding tax returns or deposit of any required tax.
   (d)   The use of the Ohio Business Gateway by municipal corporations,
taxpayers, or other persons does not affect the legal rights of municipalities
or taxpayers as otherwise permitted by law. The State of Ohio shall not be a
party to the administration of municipal income taxes or to an appeal of a
municipal income tax matter, except as otherwise specifically provided by law.
   (e)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as limiting or removing the
authority of any municipal corporation to administer, audit, and enforce the
provisions of its municipal income tax.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018)
Statutory reference:
   Use of Ohio Business Gateway, see R.C. § 718.051
§ 882.094 EXTENSION OF TIME TO FILE.
   (a)   Any taxpayer that has duly requested an automatic six-month extension
for filing the taxpayer's federal income tax return shall automatically receive
an extension for the filing of a municipal income tax return. The extended due
date of the municipal income tax return for a taxpayer that is an individual
shall be the fifteenth day of the tenth month after the last day of the taxable
year to which the return relates. The extended due date of the municipal income
tax return for a taxpayer that is not an individual shall be the fifteenth day
of the eleventh month after the last day of the taxable year to which the
return relates.
   (b)   Any taxpayer that qualifies for an automatic Federal extension for a
period other than six-months for filing the taxpayer's Federal income tax
return shall automatically receive an extension for the filing of a municipal
income tax return. The extended due date of the municipal income tax return
shall be the same as that of the extended Federal income tax return.
   (c)   A taxpayer that has not requested or received a six-month extension
for filing the taxpayer's Federal income tax return may request that the Tax
Administrator grant the taxpayer a six-month extension of the date for filing
the taxpayer's municipal income tax return. If the request is received by the
Tax Administrator on or before the date the municipal income tax return is due,
the Tax Administrator shall grant the taxpayer's requested extension.
   (d)   An extension of time to file under this chapter is not an extension of
the time to pay any tax due unless the Tax Administrator grants an extension of
that date.
   (e)    If the State Tax Commissioner extends for all taxpayers the date for
filing State income tax returns under division (G) of R.C. § 5747.08, a
taxpayer shall automatically receive an extension for the filing of a municipal
income tax return. The extended due date of the municipal income tax return
shall be the same as the extended due date of the State income tax return.
   (f)   If a taxpayer receives an extension for the filing of a municipal
income tax return under divisions (a), (b), or (c) of this section the tax
administrator shall not make any inquiry or send any notice to the taxpayer
with regard to the return on or before the date the taxpayer files the return
or on or before the extended due date to file the return, whichever comes
first.
      If a tax administrator violates division (f) of this section, the
municipal corporation shall reimburse the taxpayer for any reasonable costs
incurred to respond to such inquiry or notice, up to one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00).
      Division (f) this section does not apply to an extension received under
division (a) of this section if the tax administrator has actual knowledge that
the taxpayer failed to file for a federal extension as required to receive the
extension under division (a) of this section or failed to file for an extension
under division (c) of this section.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018; Ord. 40-2023, passed 12-19-2023)
Statutory reference:
   Annual return; filing; extensions, see R.C. § 718.05
§ 882.095 AMENDED RETURNS.
   (a)   (1)   A taxpayer shall file an amended return with the Tax
Administrator in such form as the Tax Administrator requires if any of the
facts, figures, computations, or attachments required in the taxpayer's annual
return to determine the tax due levied by the Village in accordance with this
chapter must be altered.
      (2)   Within sixty days after the final determination of any Federal or
State tax liability affecting the taxpayer's municipal tax liability, that
taxpayer shall make and file an amended municipal return showing income subject
to the municipal income tax based upon such final determination of Federal or
State tax liability, and pay any additional municipal income tax shown due
thereon or make a claim for refund of any overpayment, unless the tax or
overpayment is ten dollars ($10.00) or less.
      (3)   If a taxpayer intends to file an amended consolidated municipal
income tax return, or to amend its type of return from a separate return to a
consolidated return, based on the taxpayer's consolidated Federal income tax
return, the taxpayer shall notify the Tax Administrator before filing the
amended return.
   (b)   (1)   In the case of an underpayment, the amended return shall be
accompanied by payment of any combined additional tax due together with any
penalty and interest thereon. If the combined tax shown to be due is ten
dollars ($10.00) or less, such amount need not accompany the amended return.
Except as provided under division (b)(2) of this section, the amended return
shall not reopen those facts, figures, computations, or attachments from a
previously filed return that are not affected, either directly or indirectly,
by the adjustment to the taxpayer's Federal or State income tax return unless
the applicable statute of limitations for civil actions or prosecutions under §
882.19 has not expired for a previously filed return.
      (2)   The additional tax to be paid shall not exceed the amount of tax
that would be due if all facts, figures, computations, and attachments were
reopened.
   (c)   (1)   In the case of an overpayment, a request for refund may be filed
under this division within the period prescribed by §
882.19(a)(2) for filing the amended return even if it is filed beyond the
period prescribed in that division if it otherwise conforms to the requirements
of that division. If the amount of the refund is ten dollars ($10.00) or less,
no refund need be paid by the Village to the taxpayer. Except as set forth in
division (c)(2) of this section, a request filed under this division shall
claim refund of overpayments resulting from alterations to only those facts,
figures, computations, or attachments required in the taxpayer's annual return
that are affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the
taxpayer's Federal or State income tax return unless it is also filed within
the time prescribed in §
882.096. Except as set forth in division (c)(2) of this section, the request
shall not reopen those facts, figures, computations, or attachments that are
not affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the
taxpayer's Federal or State income tax return.
      (2)   The amount to be refunded shall not exceed the amount of refund
that would be due if all facts, figures, computations, and attachments were
reopened.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018)
Statutory reference:
   Limitations, see R.C. § 718.12
   Amended returns, see R.C. § 718.41
§ 882.096 REFUNDS
   (a)   Upon receipt of a request for a refund, the Tax Administrator of the
Village, in accordance with this section, shall refund to employers, agents of
employers, other payers, or taxpayers, with respect to any income or
withholding tax levied by the Village:
      (1)   Overpayments of more than ten dollars ($10.00);
      (2)   Amounts paid erroneously if the refund requested exceeds ten
dollars ($10.00).
   (b)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, returns setting
forth a request for refund shall be filed with the Tax Administrator, within
three years after the tax was due or paid, whichever is later. Any
documentation that substantiates the taxpayer's claim for a refund must be
included with the return filing. Failure to remit all documentation, including
schedules, other municipal income tax returns, or other supporting
documentation necessary to verify credits, income, losses or other pertinent
factors on the return will cause delay in processing, and/or disallowance of
undocumented credits or losses.
      (2)   On filing of the refund request, the Tax Administrator shall
determine the amount of refund due and certify such amount to the appropriate
municipal corporation official for payment. Except as provided in division (b)
(3) of this section, the Administrator shall issue an assessment to any
taxpayer whose request for refund is fully or partially denied. The assessment
shall state the amount of the refund that was denied, the reasons for the
denial, and instructions for appealing the assessment.
      (3)   If a Tax Administrator denies in whole or in part a refund request
included within the taxpayer's originally filed annual income tax return, the
Tax Administrator shall notify the taxpayer, in writing, of the amount of the
refund that was denied, the reasons for the denial, and instructions for
requesting an assessment that may be appealed under §
882.18.
   (c)   A request for a refund that is received after the last day for filing
specified in division (b) of this section shall be considered to have been
filed in a timely manner if any of the following situations exist:
      (1)   The request is delivered by the postal service, and the earliest
postal service postmark on the cover in which the request is enclosed is not
later than the last day for filing the request.
      (2)   The request is delivered by the postal service, the only postmark
on the cover in which the request is enclosed was affixed by a private postal
meter, the date of that postmark is not later than the last day for filing the
request, and the request is received within seven days of such last day.
      (3)   The request is delivered by the postal service, no postmark date
was affixed to the cover in which the request is enclosed or the date of the
postmark so affixed is not legible, and the request is received within seven
days of the last day for making the request.
   (d)   Interest shall be allowed and paid on any overpayment by a taxpayer of
any municipal income tax obligation from the date of the overpayment until the
date of the refund of the overpayment, except that if any overpayment is
refunded within ninety days after the final filing date of the annual return or
ninety days after the completed return is filed, whichever is later, no
interest shall be allowed on the refund. For the purpose of computing the
payment of interest on amounts overpaid, no amount of tax for any taxable year
shall be considered to have been paid before the date on which the return on
which the tax is reported is due, without regard to any extension of time for
filing that return. Interest shall be paid at the interest rate described in §
882.10(a)(4).
   (e)   As used in this section, WITHHOLDING TAX has the same meaning as in §
882.10.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018)
Statutory reference:
   Requests for refunds, see R.C. § 718.19
§ 882.10 PENALTY, INTEREST, FEES, AND CHARGES.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   APPLICABLE LAW means this chapter, the resolutions, ordinances,
codes, directives, instructions, and rules adopted by the Village provided such
resolutions, ordinances, codes, directives, instructions, and rules impose or
directly or indirectly address the levy, payment, remittance, or filing
requirements of a municipal income tax.
      (2)   FEDERAL SHORT-TERM RATE means the rate of the average market yield
on outstanding marketable obligations of the United States with remaining
periods to maturity of three years or less, as determined under section 1274 of
the Internal Revenue Code, for July of the current year.
      (3)   INCOME TAX, ESTIMATED INCOME TAX, and WITHHOLDING TAX mean any
income tax, estimated income tax, and withholding tax imposed by a municipal
corporation pursuant to applicable law, including at any time before January 1,
2016.
      (4)   INTEREST RATE AS DESCRIBED IN DIVISION (a) OF THIS SECTION means
the Federal short-term rate, rounded to the nearest whole number percent, plus
five per cent. The rate shall apply for the calendar year next following the
July of the year in which the Federal short-term rate is determined in
accordance with division (a)(2) of this section.
      (5)   RETURN includes any tax return, report, reconciliation, schedule,
and other document required to be filed with a Tax Administrator or municipal
corporation by a taxpayer, employer, any agent of the employer, or any other
payer pursuant to applicable law, including at any time before January 1, 2016.
      (6)   UNPAID ESTIMATED INCOME TAX means estimated income tax due but not
paid by the date the tax is required to be paid under applicable law.
      (7)   UNPAID INCOME TAX means income tax due but not paid by the date the
income tax is required to be paid under applicable law.
      (8)   UNPAID WITHHOLDING TAX means withholding tax due but not paid by
the date the withholding tax is required to be paid under applicable law.
      (9)   WITHHOLDING TAX includes amounts an employer, any agent of an
employer, or any other payer did not withhold in whole or in part from an
employee's qualifying wages, but that, under applicable law, the employer,
agent, or other payer is required to withhold from an employee's qualifying
wages.
   (b)   (1)   This section shall apply to the following:
         A.   Any return required to be filed under applicable law for taxable
years beginning on or after January 1, 2016;
         B.   Income tax, estimated income tax, and withholding tax required to
be paid or remitted to the Village on or after January 1, 2016 for taxable
years beginning on or after January 1, 2016.
      (2)   This section does not apply to returns required to be filed or
payments required to be made before January 1, 2016, regardless of the filing
or payment date. Returns required to be filed or payments required to be made
before January 1, 2016, but filed or paid after that date shall be subject to
the ordinances or rules, as adopted from time to time before January 1, 2016 of
this Village.
   (c)   The Village shall impose on a taxpayer, employer, any agent of the
employer, and any other payer, and will attempt to collect, the interest
amounts and penalties prescribed in this section when the taxpayer, employer,
any agent of the employer, or any other payer for any reason fails, in whole or
in part, to make to the Village timely and full payment or remittance of income
tax, estimated income tax, or withholding tax or to file timely with the
Village any return required to be filed.
      (1)   Interest shall be imposed at the rate defined as "interest rate as
described in division (a) of this section", per annum, on all unpaid income
tax, unpaid estimated income tax, and unpaid withholding tax. This imposition
of interest shall be assessed per month, or fraction of a month.
      (2)   With respect to unpaid income tax and unpaid estimated income tax,
a penalty equal to fifteen percent of the amount not timely paid shall be
imposed.
      (3)   With respect to any unpaid withholding tax, a penalty not exceeding
fifty percent of the amount not timely paid shall be imposed.
      (4)    With respect to returns other than estimated income tax returns,
the Village shall impose a penalty not exceeding twenty-five dollars ($25.00)
for each failure to timely file each return, regardless of the liability shown
thereon, except that the Village shall abate or refund the penalty assessed on
a taxpayer's first failure to timely file a return after the taxpayer files
that return.
   (d)   With respect to income taxes, estimated income taxes, withholding
taxes, and returns, the Village shall not impose, seek to collect, or collect
any penalty, amount of interest, charges or additional fees not described in
this section.
   (e)   With respect to income taxes, estimated income taxes, withholding
taxes, and returns, the Village shall not refund or credit any penalty, amount
of interest, charges, or additional fees that were properly imposed or
collected before January 1, 2016.
   (f)   The Tax Administrator may, in the Tax Administrator's sole discretion,
abate or partially abate penalties or interest imposed under this section when
the Tax Administrator deems such abatement or partial abatement to be
appropriate. Such abatement or partial abatement shall be properly documented
and maintained on the record of the taxpayer who received benefit of such
abatement or partial abatement.
   (g)   The Village may impose on the taxpayer, employer, any agent of the
employer, or any other payer the Village's post-judgment collection costs and
fees, including attorney's fees.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018; Ord. 40-2023, passed 12-19-2023)
Statutory reference:
   Interest and penalties, see R.C. § 718.27
§ 882.11 AUDIT.
   (a)   At or before the commencement of an audit, as defined in §
882.03(c), the Tax Administrator shall provide to the taxpayer a written
description of the roles of the Tax Administrator and of the taxpayer during an
audit and a statement of the taxpayer's rights, including any right to obtain a
refund of an overpayment of tax. At or before the commencement of an audit, the
Tax Administrator shall inform the taxpayer when the audit is considered to
have commenced.
   (b)   Except in cases involving suspected criminal activity, the Tax
Administrator shall conduct an audit of a taxpayer during regular business
hours and after providing reasonable notice to the taxpayer. A taxpayer who is
unable to comply with a proposed time for an audit on the grounds that the
proposed time would cause inconvenience or hardship must offer reasonable
alternative dates for the audit.
   (c)   At all stages of an audit by the Tax Administrator, a taxpayer is
entitled to be assisted or represented by an attorney, accountant, bookkeeper,
or other tax practitioner. The Tax Administrator shall prescribe a form by
which a taxpayer may designate such a person to assist or represent the
taxpayer in the conduct of any proceedings resulting from actions by the Tax
Administrator. If a taxpayer has not submitted
such a form, the Tax Administrator may accept other evidence, as the Tax
Administrator considers appropriate, that a person is the authorized
representative of a taxpayer.
      A taxpayer may refuse to answer any questions asked by the person
conducting an audit until the taxpayer has an opportunity to consult with the
taxpayer's attorney, accountant, bookkeeper, or other tax practitioner. This
division does not authorize the practice of law by a person who is not an
attorney.
   (d)   A taxpayer may record, electronically or otherwise, the audit
examination.
   (e)   The failure of the Tax Administrator to comply with a provision of
this section shall neither excuse a taxpayer from payment of any taxes owed by
the taxpayer nor cure any procedural defect in a taxpayer's case.
   (f)   If the Tax Administrator fails to substantially comply with the
provisions of this section, the Tax Administrator, upon application by the
taxpayer, shall excuse the taxpayer from penalties and interest arising from
the audit.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018)
Statutory reference:
   Audits, see R.C. § 718.36
§ 882.12 ROUNDING.
   A person may round to the nearest whole dollar all amounts the person is
required to enter on any return, report, voucher, or other document required
under this chapter. Any fractional part of a dollar that equals or exceeds
fifty cents ($.50) shall be rounded to the next whole dollar, and any
fractional part of a dollar that is less than fifty cents ($.50) shall be
dropped, rounding down to the nearest whole dollar. If a person chooses to
round amounts entered on a document, the person shall round all amounts entered
on the document.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018)
Statutory reference:
   Rounding of amounts, see R.C. § 718.25
§ 882.13 AUTHORITY AND POWERS OF THE TAX ADMINISTRATOR
§ 882.131 AUTHORITY OF TAX ADMINISTRATOR; ADMINISTRATIVE POWERS OF THE TAX
ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Tax Administrator has the authority to perform all duties and functions
necessary and appropriate to implement the provisions of this chapter,
including without limitation:
   (a)   Exercise all powers whatsoever of an inquisitorial nature as provided
by law, including, the right to inspect books, accounts, records, memorandums,
and Federal and State income tax returns, to examine persons under oath, to
issue orders or subpoenas for the production of books, accounts, papers,
records, documents, and testimony, to take depositions, to apply to a court for
attachment proceedings as for contempt, to approve vouchers for the fees of
officers and witnesses, and to administer oaths; provided that the powers
referred to in this division of this section shall be exercised by the Tax
Administrator only in connection with the performance of the duties
respectively assigned to the Tax Administrator under a municipal corporation
income tax ordinance or resolution adopted in accordance with this chapter;
   (b)   Appoint agents and prescribe their powers and duties;
   (c)   Confer and meet with officers of other municipal corporations and
states and officers of the United States on any matters pertaining to their
respective official duties as provided by law;
   (d)   Exercise the authority provided by law, including orders from
bankruptcy courts, relative to remitting or refunding taxes, including
penalties and interest thereon, illegally or erroneously imposed or collected,
or for any other reason overpaid, and, in addition, the Tax Administrator may
investigate any claim of overpayment and make a written statement of the Tax
Administrator's findings, and, if the Tax Administrator finds that there has
been an overpayment, approve and issue a refund payable to the taxpayer, the
taxpayer's assigns, or legal representative as provided in this chapter;
   (e)   Exercise the authority provided by law relative to consenting to the
compromise and settlement of tax claims;
   (f)   Exercise the authority provided by law relative to the use of
alternative apportionment methods by taxpayers in accordance with §
882.062;
   (g)   Make all tax findings, determinations, computations, assessments and
orders the Tax Administrator is by law authorized and required to make and,
pursuant to time limitations provided by law, on the Tax Administrator's own
motion, review, redetermine, or correct any tax findings, determinations,
computations, assessments or orders the Tax Administrator has made, but the Tax
Administrator shall not review, redetermine, or correct any tax finding,
determination, computation, assessment or order which the Tax Administrator has
made for which an appeal has been filed with the Local Board of Tax Review or
other appropriate tribunal, unless such appeal or application is withdrawn by
the appellant or applicant, is dismissed, or is otherwise final;
   (h)   Destroy any or all returns or other tax documents in the manner
authorized by law;
   (i)   Enter into an agreement with a taxpayer to simplify the withholding
obligations described in §
882.051.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of Tax Administrator, see R.C. § 718.24
§ 882.132 AUTHORITY OF TAX ADMINISTRATOR; COMPROMISE OF CLAIM AND PAYMENT OVER
TIME.
   (a)    As used in this section, CLAIM means a claim for an amount payable to
the Village that arises pursuant to the municipal income tax imposed in
accordance with this chapter.
   (b)   The Tax Administrator may do either of the following if such action is
in the best interests of the Village:
      (1)   Compromise a claim;
      (2)   Extend for a reasonable period the time for payment of a claim by
agreeing to accept monthly or other periodic payments, upon such terms and
conditions as the Tax Administrator may require.
   (c)   The Tax Administrator's rejection of a compromise or payment-over-time
agreement proposed by a person with respect to a claim shall not be appealable.
   (d)   A compromise or payment-over-time agreement with respect to a claim
shall be binding upon and shall inure to the benefit of only the parties to the
compromise or agreement, and shall not extinguish or otherwise affect the
liability of any other person.
   (e)   (1)   A compromise or payment-over-time agreement with respect to a
claim shall be void if the taxpayer defaults under the compromise or agreement
or if the compromise or agreement was obtained by fraud or by misrepresentation
of a material fact. Any amount that was due before the compromise or agreement
and that is unpaid shall remain due, and any penalties or interest that would
have accrued in the absence of the compromise or agreement shall continue to
accrue and be due.
      (2)   The Tax Administrator shall have sole discretion to determine
whether or not penalty, interest, charges or applicable fees will be assessed
through the duration of any compromise or payment-over-time agreement.
   (f)   The Tax Administrator may require that the taxpayer provide detailed
financial documentation and information, in order to determine whether or not a
payment-over-time agreement will be authorized. The taxpayer's failure to
provide the necessary and required information by the Tax Administrator shall
preclude consideration of a payment-over-time agreement.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018)
Statutory reference:
   Administration of claims, see R.C. § 718.28
§ 882.133 AUTHORITY OF TAX ADMINISTRATOR; RIGHT TO EXAMINE.
   (a)   The Tax Administrator, or any authorized agent or employee thereof may
examine the books, papers, records, and Federal and State income tax returns of
any employer, taxpayer, or other person that is subject to, or that the Tax
Administrator believes is subject to, the provisions of this chapter for the
purpose of verifying the accuracy of any return made or, if no return was
filed, to ascertain the tax due under this chapter. Upon written request by the
Tax Administrator or a duly authorized agent or employee thereof, every
employer, taxpayer, or other person subject to this section is required to
furnish the opportunity for the Tax Administrator, authorized agent, or
employee to investigate and examine such books, papers, records, and Federal
and State income tax returns at a reasonable time and place designated in the
request.
   (b)   The records and other documents of any taxpayer, employer, or other
person that is subject to, or that a Tax Administrator believes is subject to,
the provisions of this chapter shall be open to the Tax Administrator's
inspection during business hours and shall be preserved for a period of six
years following the end of the taxable year to which the records or documents
relate, unless the Tax Administrator, in writing, consents to their destruction
within that period, or by order requires that they be kept longer. The Tax
Administrator of a municipal corporation may require any person, by notice
served on that person, to keep such records as the Tax Administrator determines
necessary to show whether or not that person is liable, and the extent of such
liability, for the income tax levied by the Village or for the withholding of
such tax.
   (c)   The Tax Administrator may examine under oath any person that the Tax
Administrator reasonably believes has knowledge concerning any income that was
or would have been returned for taxation or any transaction tending to affect
such income. The Tax Administrator may, for this purpose, compel any such
person to attend a hearing or examination and to produce any books, papers,
records, and Federal and State income tax returns in such person's possession
or control. The person may be assisted or represented by an attorney,
accountant, bookkeeper, or other tax practitioner at any such hearing or
examination. This division does not authorize the practice of law by a person
who is not an attorney.
   (d)   No person issued written notice by the Tax Administrator compelling
attendance at a hearing or examination or the production of books, papers,
records, or Federal and State income tax returns under this section shall fail
to comply.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018)
Statutory reference:
   Accuracy of returns; verification, see R.C. § 718.23
§ 882.134 AUTHORITY OF TAX ADMINISTRATOR; REQUIRING IDENTIFYING INFORMATION.
   (a)   The Tax Administrator may require any person filing a tax document
with the Tax Administrator to provide identifying information, which may
include the person's social security number, Federal employer identification
number, or other identification number requested by the Tax Administrator. A
person required by the Tax Administrator to provide identifying information
that has experienced any change with respect to that information shall notify
the Tax Administrator of the change before, or upon, filing the next tax
document requiring the identifying information.
   (b)   (1)   If the Tax Administrator makes a request for identifying
information and the Tax Administrator does not receive valid identifying
information within thirty days of making the request, nothing in this chapter
prohibits the Tax Administrator from imposing a penalty upon the person to whom
the request was directed pursuant to §
882.10, in addition to any applicable penalty described in §
882.99.
      (2)   If a person required by the Tax Administrator to provide
identifying information does not notify the Tax Administrator of a change with
respect to that information as required under division (a) of this section
within thirty days after filing the next tax document requiring such
identifying information, nothing in this chapter prohibits the Tax
Administrator from imposing a penalty pursuant to §
882.10.
      (3)   The penalties provided for under divisions (b)(1) and (b)(2) of
this section may be billed and imposed in the same manner as the tax or fee
with respect to which the identifying information is sought and are in addition
to any applicable criminal penalties described in §
882.99 for a violation of §
882.15, and any other penalties that may be imposed by the Tax Administrator by
law.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018)
Statutory reference:
   Identification information, see R.C. § 718.26
§ 882.14 CONFIDENTIALITY.
   (a)   Any information gained as a result of returns, investigations,
hearings, or verifications required or authorized by R.C. Chapter 718 or by the
charter or ordinance of the Village is confidential, and no person shall access
or disclose such information except in accordance with a proper judicial order
or in connection with the performance of that person's official duties or the
official business of the Village as authorized by R.C. Chapter 718 or the
charter or ordinance authorizing the levy. The Tax Administrator of the Village
or a designee thereof may furnish copies of returns filed or otherwise received
under this chapter and other related tax information to the Internal Revenue
Service, the State Tax Commissioner, and Tax Administrators of other municipal
corporations.
   (b)   This section does not prohibit the Village from publishing or
disclosing statistics in a form that does not disclose information with respect
to particular taxpayers.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018)
Statutory reference:
   Tax information confidential, see R.C. § 718.13
§ 882.15 FRAUD.
   No person shall knowingly make, present, aid, or assist in the preparation
or presentation of a false or fraudulent report, return, schedule, statement,
claim, or document authorized or required by municipal corporation ordinance or
State law to be filed with the Tax Administrator, or knowingly procure,
counsel, or advise the preparation or presentation of such report, return,
schedule, statement, claim, or document, or knowingly change, alter, or amend,
or knowingly procure, counsel or advise such change, alteration, or amendment
of the records upon which such report, return, schedule, statement, claim, or
document is based with intent to defraud the Village or the Tax Administrator.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018)
Statutory reference:
   Fraud, see R.C. § 718.35
§ 882.16 OPINION OF THE TAX ADMINISTRATOR.
   (a)   An OPINION OF THE TAX ADMINISTRATOR means an opinion issued under this
section with respect to prospective municipal income tax liability. It does not
include ordinary correspondence of the Tax Administrator.
   (b)   A taxpayer may submit a written request for an opinion of the Tax
Administrator as to whether or how certain income, source of income, or a
certain activity or transaction will be taxed. The written response of the Tax
Administrator shall be an "opinion of the Tax Administrator" and shall bind the
Tax Administrator, in accordance with divisions (c), (g), and (h) of this
section, provided all of the following conditions are satisfied:
      (1)   The taxpayer's request fully and accurately describes the specific
facts or circumstances relevant to a determination of the taxability of the
income, source of income, activity, or transaction, and, if an activity or
transaction, all parties involved in the activity or transaction are clearly
identified by name, location, or other pertinent facts.
      (2)   The request relates to a tax imposed by the Village in accordance
with this chapter.
      (3)   The Tax Administrator's response is signed by the Tax Administrator
and designated as an "opinion of the Tax Administrator."
   (c)   An opinion of the Tax Administrator shall remain in effect and shall
protect the taxpayer for whom the opinion was prepared and who reasonably
relies on it from liability for any taxes, penalty, or interest otherwise
chargeable on the activity or transaction specifically held by the Tax
Administrator's opinion to be taxable in a particular manner or not to be
subject to taxation for any taxable years that may be specified in the opinion,
or until the earliest of the following dates:
      (1)   The effective date of a written revocation by the Tax Administrator
sent to the taxpayer by certified mail, return receipt requested. The effective
date of the revocation shall be the taxpayer's date of receipt or one year
after the issuance of the opinion, whichever is later;
      (2)   The effective date of any amendment or enactment of a relevant
section of the Ohio Revised Code, uncodified State law, or the Village's income
tax ordinance that would substantially change the analysis and conclusion of
the opinion of the Tax Administrator;
      (3)   The date on which a court issues an opinion establishing or
changing relevant case law with respect to the Ohio Revised Code, uncodified
State law, or the Village's income tax ordinance;
      (4)   If the opinion of the Tax Administrator was based on the
interpretation of Federal law, the effective date of any change in the relevant
Federal statutes or regulations, or the date on which a court issues an opinion
establishing or changing relevant case law with respect to federal statutes or
regulations;
      (5)   The effective date of any change in the taxpayer's material facts
or circumstances;
      (6)   The effective date of the expiration of the opinion, if specified
in the opinion.
   (d)   (1)   A taxpayer is not relieved of tax liability for any activity or
transaction related to a request for an opinion that contained any
misrepresentation or omission of one or more material facts.
      (2)   If the taxpayer knowingly has misrepresented the pertinent facts or
omitted material facts with intent to defraud the Village in order to obtain a
more favorable opinion, the taxpayer may be in violation of §
882.15.
   (e)   If a Tax Administrator provides written advice under this section, the
opinion shall include a statement that:
      (1)   The tax consequences stated in the opinion may be subject to change
for any of the reasons stated in division (c) of this section;
      (2)   It is the duty of the taxpayer to be aware of such changes.
   (f)   A Tax Administrator may refuse to offer an opinion on any request
received under this section.
   (g)   This section binds a Tax Administrator only with respect to opinions
of the Tax Administrator issued on or after January 1, 2016.
   (h)   An opinion of a Tax Administrator binds that Tax Administrator only
with respect to the taxpayer for whom the opinion was prepared and does not
bind the Tax Administrator of any other municipal corporation.
   (i)   A Tax Administrator shall make available the text of all opinions
issued under this section, except those opinions prepared for a taxpayer who
has requested that the text of the opinion remain confidential. In no event
shall the text of an opinion be made available until the Tax Administrator has
removed all information that identifies the taxpayer and any other parties
involved in the activity or transaction.
   (j)   An opinion of the Tax Administrator issued under this section or a
refusal to offer an opinion under division (f) of this section may not be
appealed.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018)
Statutory reference:
   Opinion of Tax Commissioner; request, see R.C. § 718.38
§ 882.17 ASSESSMENT; APPEAL BASED ON PRESUMPTION OF DELIVERY.
   (a)   (1)   The Tax Administrator shall serve an assessment either by
personal service, by certified mail, or by a delivery service authorized under
R.C. § 5703.056.
      (2)   The Tax Administrator may deliver the assessment through
alternative means as provided in this section, including, but not limited to,
delivery by secure electronic mail. Such alternative delivery method must be
authorized by the person subject to the assessment.
      (3)   Once service of the assessment has been made by the Tax
Administrator or other municipal official, or the designee of either, the
person to whom the assessment is directed may protest the ruling of that
assessment by filing an appeal with the Local Board of Tax Review within sixty
days after the receipt of service. The delivery of an assessment of the Tax
Administrator as prescribed in R.C. § 718.18 is prima facie evidence that
delivery is complete and that the assessment is served.
   (b)   (1)   A person may challenge the presumption of delivery and service
as set forth in this division. A person disputing the presumption of delivery
and service under this section bears the burden of proving by a preponderance
of the evidence that the address to which the assessment was sent was not an
address with which the person was associated at the time the Tax Administrator
originally mailed the assessment by certified mail. For the purposes of this
section, a person is associated with an address at the time the Tax
Administrator originally mailed the assessment if, at that time, the person was
residing, receiving legal documents, or conducting business at the address; or
if, before that time, the person had conducted business at the address and,
when the assessment was mailed, the person's agent or the person's affiliate
was conducting business at the address. For the purposes of this section, a
person's affiliate is any other person that, at the time the assessment was
mailed, owned or controlled at least twenty percent, as determined by voting
rights, of the addressee's business.
      (2)   If a person elects to appeal an assessment on the basis described
in division (b)(1) of this section, and if that assessment is subject to
collection and is not otherwise appealable, the person must do so within sixty
days after the initial contact by the Tax Administrator or other municipal
official, or the designee of either, with the person. Nothing in this division
prevents the Tax Administrator or other official from entering into a
compromise with the person if the person does not actually file such an appeal
with the Local Board of Tax Review.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018)
Statutory reference:
   Service of assessment; presumption, see R.C. § 718.18
§ 882.18 LOCAL BOARD OF TAX REVIEW; APPEAL TO LOCAL BOARD OF TAX REVIEW.
   (a)   (1)   The legislative authority of the Village shall maintain a Local
Board of Tax Review to hear appeals as provided in R.C. Chapter 718.
      (2)   The Local Board of Tax Review shall consist of three members. The
three members of the Local Board of Tax Review must be domiciled in the
Village. Two members shall be appointed by the legislative authority of the
Village, and may not be employees, elected officials, or contractors with the
Village at any time during their term or in the five years immediately
preceding the date of appointment. One member shall be appointed by the top
administrative official of the Village. This member may be an employee of the
Village, but may not be the director of finance or equivalent officer, or the
Tax Administrator or other similar official or an employee directly involved in
municipal tax matters, or any direct subordinate thereof.
      (3)   The term for members of the Local Board of Tax Review appointed by
the legislative authority of the Village shall be two years. There is no limit
on the number of terms that a member may serve should the member be reappointed
by the legislative authority. The board member appointed by the top
administrative official of the Village shall serve at the discretion of the
administrative official.
      (4)   Members of the Board of Tax Review appointed by the legislative
authority may be removed by the legislative authority as set forth in R.C. §
718.11(A)(4).
      (5)   A member of the board who, for any reason, ceases to meet the
qualifications for the position prescribed by this section shall resign
immediately by operation of law.
      (6)   A vacancy in an unexpired term shall be filled in the same manner
as the original appointment within sixty days of when the vacancy was created.
Any member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring prior to the expiration of the
term for which the member's predecessor was appointed shall hold office for the
remainder of such term. No vacancy on the board shall impair the power and
authority of the remaining members to exercise all the powers of the board.
      (7)   If a member is temporarily unable to serve on the board due to a
conflict of interest, illness, absence, or similar reason, the legislative
authority or top administrative official that appointed the member shall
appoint another individual to temporarily serve on the board in the member's
place. This appointment shall be subject to the same requirements and
limitations as are applicable to the appointment of the member temporarily
unable to serve.
   (b)   Whenever a Tax Administrator issues an assessment, the Tax
Administrator shall notify the taxpayer in writing at the same time of the
taxpayer's right to appeal the assessment, the manner in which the taxpayer may
appeal the assessment, and the address to which the appeal should be directed,
and to whom the appeal should be directed.
   (c)   Any person who has been issued an assessment may appeal the assessment
to the board by filing a request with the board. The request shall be in
writing, shall specify the reason or reasons why the assessment should be
deemed incorrect or unlawful, and shall be filed within sixty days after the
taxpayer receives the assessment.
   (d)   The Local Board of Tax Review shall schedule a hearing to be held
within sixty days after receiving an appeal of an assessment under division (c)
of this section, unless the taxpayer requests additional time to prepare or
waives a hearing. If the taxpayer does not waive the hearing, the taxpayer may
appear before the board and/or may be represented by an attorney at law,
certified public accountant, or other representative. The board may allow a
hearing to be continued as jointly agreed to by the parties. In such a case,
the hearing must be completed within 120 days after the first day of the
hearing unless the parties agree otherwise.
   (e)   The board may affirm, reverse, or modify the Tax Administrator's
assessment or any part of that assessment. The board shall issue a final
determination on the appeal within ninety days after the board's final hearing
on the appeal, and send a copy of its final determination by ordinary mail to
all of the parties to the appeal within fifteen days after issuing the final
determination. The taxpayer or the Tax Administrator may appeal the board's
final determination as provided in R.C. § 5717.011.
   (f)   The Local Board of Tax Review created pursuant to this section shall
adopt rules governing its procedures, including a schedule of related costs,
and shall keep a record of its transactions. The rules governing the Local
Board of Tax Review procedures shall be in writing, and may be amended as
needed by the Local Board of Tax Review. Such records are not public records
available for inspection under R.C. § 149.43. For this reason, any
documentation, copies of returns or reports, final determinations, or working
papers for each case must be maintained in a secure location under the control
of the Tax Administrator. No member of the Local Board of Tax Review may remove
such documentation, copies of returns or reports, final determinations, or
working papers from the hearing. Hearings requested by a taxpayer before a
Local Board of Tax Review created pursuant to this section are not meetings of
a public body subject to R.C. § 121.22. For this reason, such hearings shall
not be open to the public, and only those parties to the case may be present
during the hearing.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018)
Statutory reference:
   Local Board of Tax Review, see R.C. § 718.11
§ 882.19 ACTIONS TO RECOVER; STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS.
   (a)   (1)   A.   Civil actions to recover municipal income taxes and
penalties and interest on municipal income taxes shall be brought within the
latter of:
            1.   Three years after the tax was due or the return was filed,
whichever is later; or
            2.   One year after the conclusion of the qualifying deferral
period, if any.
         B.   The time limit described in division (a)(1)A. of this section may
be extended at any time if both the Tax Administrator and the employer, agent
of the employer, other payer, or taxpayer consent in writing to the extension.
Any extension shall also extend for the same period of time the time limit
described in division (c) of this section.
      (2)   As used in this section, QUALIFYING DEFERRAL PERIOD means a period
of time beginning and ending as follows:
         A.   Beginning on the date a person who is aggrieved by an assessment
files with a Local Board of Tax Review the request described in §
882.18. That date shall not be affected by any subsequent decision, finding, or
holding by any administrative body or court that the Local Board of Tax Review
with which the aggrieved person filed the request did not have jurisdiction to
affirm, reverse, or modify the assessment or any part of that assessment.
         B.   Ending the later of the sixtieth day after the date on which the
final determination of the Local Board of Tax Review becomes final or, if any
party appeals from the determination of the Local Board of Tax Review, the
sixtieth day after the date on which the final determination of the Local Board
of Tax Review is either ultimately affirmed in whole or in part or ultimately
reversed and no further appeal of either that affirmation, in whole or in part,
or that reversal is available or taken.
   (b)   Prosecutions for an offense made punishable under a resolution or
ordinance imposing an income tax shall be commenced within three years after
the commission of the offense, provided that in the case of fraud, failure to
file a return, or the omission of twenty-five percent or more of income
required to be reported, prosecutions may be commenced within six years after
the commission of the offense.
   (c)   A claim for a refund of municipal income taxes shall be brought within
the time limitation provided in §
882.096.
   (d)   (1)   Notwithstanding the fact that an appeal is pending, the
petitioner may pay all or a portion of the assessment that is the subject of
the appeal. The acceptance of a payment by the Village does not prejudice any
claim for refund upon final determination of the appeal.
      (2)   If upon final determination of the appeal an error in the
assessment is corrected by the Tax Administrator, upon an appeal so filed or
pursuant to a final determination of the Local Board of Tax Review created
under §
882.18, of the Ohio Board of Tax Appeals, or any court to which the decision of
the Ohio Board of Tax Appeals has been appealed, so that the amount due from
the party assessed under the corrected assessment is less than the amount paid,
there shall be issued to the appellant or to the appellant's assigns or legal
representative a refund in the amount of the overpayment as provided by §
882.096, with interest on that amount as provided by division (d) of this
section.
   (e)   No civil action to recover municipal income tax or related penalties
or interest shall be brought during either of the following time periods:
      (1)   The period during which a taxpayer has a right to appeal the
imposition of that tax or interest or those penalties;
      (2)   The period during which an appeal related to the imposition of that
tax or interest or those penalties is pending.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018)
Statutory reference:
   Statute of limitations, see R.C. § 718.12
§ 882.20 ADOPTION OF RULES.
   (a)   Pursuant to R.C. § 718.30, the Village, pursuant to this chapter,
grants authority to the Tax Administrator to adopt rules to administer the
income tax imposed by the Village.
   (b)   All rules adopted under this section shall be published and posted on
the internet.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018)
Statutory reference:
   Adoption of rules, see R.C. § 718.30
§ 882.21 COLLECTION AFTER TERMINATION OF CHAPTER.
   (a)   This chapter shall continue in full force and effect insofar as the
levy of taxes is concerned until repealed, and insofar as the collection of
taxes levied hereunder and actions and proceedings for collecting any tax so
levied or enforcing any provisions of this chapter are concerned, it shall
continue in full force and effect until all of the taxes levied in the
aforesaid period are fully paid and any and all suits and prosecutions for the
collection of taxes or for the punishment of violations of this chapter have
been fully terminated, subject to the limitations contained in §
882.19.
   (b)   Annual returns due for all or any part of the last effective year of
this chapter shall be due on the date provided in §
882.091 as though the same were continuing.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018)
§ 882.22 SAVINGS CLAUSE.
   If any sentence, clause, section or part of this chapter, or any tax imposed
against, or exemption from tax granted to, any taxpayer or forms of income
specified herein is found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such
unconstitutionality, illegality, or invalidity shall affect only such clause,
sentence, section or part of this chapter so found and shall not affect or
impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or other
parts of this chapter. It is hereby declared to be the intention of the
legislative authority of the Village that this chapter would have been adopted
had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, clause, section or part
thereof not been included in this chapter.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018)
§ 882.23 FILING NET PROFIT TAXES; ELECTION TO BE SUBJECT TO PROVISIONS OF
CHAPTER.
   (a)   A taxpayer may elect to be subject to §§
882.23 to
882.38 in lieu of the provisions set forth in the remainder of this chapter.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, upon the taxpayer's
election, both of the following shall apply:
      (1)   The State Tax Commissioner shall serve as the sole administrator of
the municipal net profit tax for which the taxpayer as defined in §
882.03(qq) is liable for the term of the election;
      (2)   The Commissioner shall administer the tax pursuant to R.C. §§
718.80 to 718.95, §§
882.23 to
882.38, and any applicable provision of R.C. Chapter 5703.
   (b)   (1)   A taxpayer shall make the initial election on or before the
first day of the third month after the beginning of the taxpayer's taxable year
by notifying the Tax Commissioner and the Village, on a form prescribed by the
Tax Commissioner.
      (2)   A.   The election, once made by the taxpayer, applies to the
taxable year in which the election is made and to each subsequent taxable year
until the taxpayer notifies the Tax Commissioner and the Village of its
termination of the election.
         B.   A notification of termination shall be made, on a form prescribed
by the Tax Commissioner, on or before the first day of the third month of any
taxable year.
         C.   Upon a timely and valid termination of the election, the taxpayer
is no longer subject to §§
882.23 to
882.38, and is instead subject to the provisions set forth in the remainder of
this chapter.
   (c)   The Tax Commissioner shall enforce and administer §§
882.23 to
882.38. In addition to any other powers conferred upon the Tax Commissioner by
law, the Tax Commissioner may:
      (1)   Prescribe all forms necessary to administer those sections;
      (2)   Adopt such rules as the Tax Commissioner finds necessary to carry
out those sections;
      (3)   Appoint and employ such personnel as are necessary to carry out the
duties imposed upon the Tax Commissioner by those sections.
   (d)   The Tax Commissioner shall not be considered a tax administrator, as
that term is defined in R.C. § 718.01 and §
882.03(pp).
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018)
§ 882.24 DEFINITIONS.
   If a term used in §§
882.23 to
882.38 that is not otherwise defined in this chapter is used in a comparable
context in both the laws of the United States relating to Federal income tax
and in R.C. Title LVII and the use is not consistent, then the use of the term
in the laws of the United States relating to Federal income tax shall have
control over the use of the term in R.C. Title LVII, unless the term is defined
in R.C. Chapter 5703, in which case the definition in that chapter shall
control. Any reference in this chapter to the Internal Revenue Code includes
other laws of the United States related to Federal income taxes. If a term is
defined in both this section and §
882.03, the definition in this section shall control for all uses of that term
in §§
882.23 to
882.38. As used in §§
882.23 to
882.38 only:
   (a)   MUNICIPAL TAXABLE INCOME. Income apportioned or sitused to the
municipal corporation under §
882.26, as applicable, reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward
available to the person for the municipal corporation.
   (b)   ADJUSTED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME, for a person required to file as a C
corporation, or for a person that has elected to be taxed as a C corporation as
described in division (D)(5) of R.C. § 718.01 and §
882.03, means a C corporation's Federal taxable income before net operating
losses and special deductions as determined under the Internal Revenue Code,
adjusted as follows:
      (1)   Deduct intangible income to the extent included in Federal taxable
income. The deduction shall be allowed regardless of whether the intangible
income relates to assets used in a trade or business or assets held for the
production of income.
      (2)   Add an amount equal to five percent of intangible income deducted
under division (b)(1) of this section, but excluding that portion of intangible
income directly related to the sale, exchange, or other disposition of property
described in section 1221 of the Internal Revenue Code.
      (3)   Add any losses allowed as a deduction in the computation of Federal
taxable income if the losses directly relate to the sale, exchange, or other
disposition of an asset described in section 1221 or 1231 of the Internal
Revenue Code.
      (4)   A.   Except as provided in division (b)(4)B. of this section,
deduct income and gain included in Federal taxable income to the extent the
income and gain directly relate to the sale, exchange, or other disposition of
an asset described in section 1221 or 1231 of the Internal Revenue Code.
         B.   Division (b)(4)A. of this section does not apply to the extent
the income or gain is income or gain described in section 1245 or 1250 of the
Internal Revenue Code.
      (5)   Add taxes on or measured by net income allowed as a deduction in
the computation of Federal taxable income.
      (6)   In the case of a real estate investment trust or regulated
investment company, add all amounts with respect to dividends to, distributions
to, or amounts set aside for or credited to the benefit of investors and
allowed as a deduction in the computation of Federal taxable income.
      (7)   Deduct, to the extent not otherwise deducted or excluded in
computing Federal taxable income, any income derived from a transfer agreement
or from the enterprise transferred under that agreement under R.C. § 4313.02.
      (8)   Deduct exempt income to the extent not otherwise deducted or
excluded in computing adjusted Federal taxable income.
      (9)   Deduct any net profit of a pass-through entity owned directly or
indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer's Federal taxable
income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that net profit in
the group's Federal taxable income in accordance with §
882.29(e)(3)B.
      (10)   Add any loss incurred by a pass-through entity owned directly or
indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer's Federal taxable
income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that loss in the
group's Federal taxable income in accordance with §
882.29(e)(3)B.
      If the taxpayer is not a C corporation, is not a disregarded entity that
has made the election described in §
882.03(ss), and is not a publicly traded partnership that has made the election
described in §
882.03(u)(5)A., the taxpayer shall compute adjusted Federal taxable income
under this section as if the taxpayer were a C corporation, except guaranteed
payments and other similar amounts paid or accrued to a partner, former
partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member shall not be
allowed as a deductible expense unless such payments are in consideration for
the use of capital and treated as payment of interest under section 469 of the
Internal Revenue Code or United States Treasury regulations. Amounts paid or
accrued to a qualified self-employed retirement plan with respect to a partner,
former partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member of
the taxpayer, amounts paid or accrued to or for health insurance for a partner,
former partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member, and
amounts paid or accrued to or for life insurance for a partner, former partner,
shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member shall not be allowed
as a deduction.
      Nothing in division (b) of this section shall be construed as allowing
the taxpayer to add or deduct any amount more than once or shall be construed
as allowing any taxpayer to deduct any amount paid to or accrued for purposes
of Federal self-employment tax.
   (c)   TAXPAYER. Has the same meaning as in §
882.03, except that TAXPAYER does not include natural persons or entities
subject to the tax imposed under R.C. Chapter 5745. TAXPAYER may include
receivers, assignees, or trustees in bankruptcy when such persons are required
to assume the role of a taxpayer.
   (d)   TAX RETURN or RETURN. The notifications and reports required to be
filed pursuant to §§
882.23 to
882.38 for the purpose of reporting municipal income taxes, and includes
declarations of estimated tax.
   (e)   TAXABLE YEAR. The calendar year or the taxpayer's fiscal year ending
during the calendar year, or fractional part thereof, upon which the
calculation of the taxpayer's adjusted Federal taxable income is based pursuant
to this chapter. If a taxpayer's taxable year is changed for Federal income tax
purposes, the taxable year for purposes of §§
882.23 to
882.38 is changed accordingly but may consist of an aggregation of more than
one taxable year for Federal income tax purposes. The Tax Commissioner may
prescribe by rule an appropriate period as the taxable year for a taxpayer that
has had a change of its taxable year for Federal income tax purposes, for a
taxpayer that has two or more short taxable years for Federal income tax
purposes as the result of a change of ownership, or for a new taxpayer that
would otherwise have no taxable year.
   (f)   ASSESSMENT. A notice of underpayment or nonpayment of a tax issued
pursuant to §
882.33.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018)
§ 882.25 APPLICABILITY; TAXABLE SITUS; APPORTIONMENT.
   This section applies to any taxpayer that is engaged in a business or
profession in the Village and that has made the election under §
882.23.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b) of this section, net
profit from a business or profession conducted both within and without the
boundaries of the Village shall be considered as having a taxable situs in the
Village for purposes of municipal income taxation in the same proportion as the
average ratio of the following:
      (1)   The average original cost of the real property and tangible
personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or profession
in the Village during the taxable period to the average original cost of all of
the real and tangible personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the
business or profession during the same period, wherever situated.
         As used in the preceding paragraph, tangible personal or real property
shall include property rented or leased by the taxpayer and the value of such
property shall be determined by multiplying the annual rental thereon by eight;
      (2)   Wages, salaries, and other compensation paid during the taxable
period to individuals employed in the business or profession for services
performed in the Village to wages, salaries, and other compensation paid during
the same period to individuals employed in the business or profession, wherever
the individual's services are performed, excluding compensation from which
taxes are not required to be withheld under §
882.05;
      (3)   Total gross receipts of the business or profession from sales and
rentals made and services performed during the taxable period in the Village to
total gross receipts of the business or profession during the same period from
sales, rentals, and services, wherever made or performed.
   (b)   (1)   If the apportionment factors described in division (a) of this
section do not fairly represent the extent of a taxpayer's business activity in
the Village, the taxpayer may request, or the Tax Commissioner may require,
that the taxpayer use, with respect to all or any portion of the income of the
taxpayer, an alternative apportionment method involving one or more of the
following:
         A.   Separate accounting;
         B.   The exclusion of one or more of the factors;
         C.   The inclusion of one or more additional factors that would
provide for a more fair apportionment of the income of the taxpayer to the
municipal corporation;
         D.   A modification of one or more of the factors.
      (2)   A taxpayer request to use an alternative apportionment method shall
be in writing and shall accompany a tax return, timely filed appeal of an
assessment, or timely filed amended tax return. The taxpayer may use the
requested alternative method unless the Tax Commissioner denies the request in
an assessment issued within the period prescribed by §
882.33(a).
      (3)   The Tax Commissioner may require a taxpayer to use an alternative
apportionment method as described in division (b)(1) of this section only by
issuing an assessment to the taxpayer within the period prescribed by §
882.33(a).
   (c)   As used in division (a)(2) of this section, "wages, salaries, and
other compensation" includes only wages, salaries, or other compensation paid
to an employee for services performed at any of the following locations:
      (1)   A location that is owned, controlled, or used by, rented to, or
under the possession of one of the following:
         A.   The employer;
         B.   A vendor, customer, client, or patient of the employer, or a
related member of such a vendor, customer, client, or patient;
         C.   A vendor, customer, client, or patient of a person described in
division (c)(1)B. of this section, or a related member of such a vendor,
customer, client, or patient.
      (2)   Any location at which a trial, appeal, hearing, investigation,
inquiry, review, court-martial, or similar administrative, judicial, or
legislative matter or proceeding is being conducted, provided
that the compensation is paid for services performed for, or on behalf of, the
employer or that the employee's presence at the location directly or indirectly
benefits the employer;
      (3)   Any other location, if the Tax Commissioner determines that the
employer directed the employee to perform the services at the other location in
lieu of a location described in division (c)(1) or (c)(2) of this section
solely in order to avoid or reduce the employer's municipal income tax
liability. If the Tax Commissioner makes such a determination, the employer may
dispute the determination by establishing, by a preponderance of the evidence,
that the Tax Commissioner's determination was unreasonable.
   (d)   For the purposes of division (a)(3) of this section, receipts from
sales and rentals made and services performed shall be sitused to the Village
as follows:
      (1)   Gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property shall be
sitused to the Village only if, regardless of where title passes, the property
meets either of the following criteria:
         A.   The property is shipped to or delivered within the Village from a
stock of goods located within the Village.
         B.   The property is delivered within the Village from a location
outside the Village, provided the taxpayer is regularly engaged through its own
employees in the solicitation or promotion of sales within the Village and the
sales result from such solicitation or promotion.
      (2)   Gross receipts from the sale of services shall be sitused to the
Village to the extent that such services are performed in the Village.
      (3)   To the extent included in income, gross receipts from the sale of
real property located in the Village shall be sitused to the Village.
      (4)   To the extent included in income, gross receipts from rents and
royalties from real property located in the Village shall be sitused to the
Village.
      (5)   Gross receipts from rents and royalties from tangible personal
property shall be sitused to the Village based upon the extent to which the
tangible personal property is used in the Village.
   (e)   Commissions received by a real estate agent or broker relating to the
sale, purchase, or lease of real estate shall be sitused to the Village in
which the real estate is located. Net profit reported by the real estate agent
or broker shall be allocated to the Village based upon the ratio of the
commissions the agent or broker received from the sale, purchase, or lease of
real estate located in the Village to the commissions received from the sale,
purchase, or lease of real estate everywhere in the taxable year.
   (f)   If, in computing a taxpayer's adjusted Federal taxable income, the
taxpayer deducted any amount with respect to a stock option granted to an
employee, and if the employee is not required to include in the employee's
income any such amount or a portion thereof because it is exempted from
taxation under §
882.03(gg) by the Village or substantially similar provision of the codified
ordinances of another municipal corporation, the taxpayer shall add the amount
that is exempt from taxation to the taxpayer's net profit that was apportioned
to the Village. In no case shall a taxpayer be required to add to its net
profit that was apportioned to the Village any amount other than the amount
upon which the employee would be required to pay tax were the amount related to
the stock option not exempted from taxation.
      This division applies solely for the purpose of making an adjustment to
the amount of a taxpayer's net profit that was apportioned to the Village under
this section.
   (g)   When calculating the ratios described in division (a) of this section
for the purposes of that division or division (b) of this section, the owner of
a disregarded entity shall include in the owner's ratios the property, payroll,
and gross receipts of such disregarded entity.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018)
§ 882.26 INFORMATION PROVIDED TO TAX ADMINISTRATORS; CONFIDENTIALITY.
   (a)   Any information gained as a result of returns, investigations,
hearings, or verifications required or authorized by §§
882.23 to
882.38 is confidential, and no person shall disclose such information, except
for official purposes, in accordance with a proper judicial order, or as
provided in R.C. § 4123.271 or 5703.21. The Tax Commissioner may furnish the
Internal Revenue Service with copies of returns filed. This section does not
prohibit the publication of statistics in a form which does not disclose
information with respect to particular taxpayers.
   (b)   In May and November of each year, the Tax Commissioner shall provide
the Village Tax Administrator with the following information for every taxpayer
that filed tax returns with the Commissioner under §§
882.23 to
882.38 and that had municipal taxable income apportionable to the Village under
this chapter for any prior year:
      (1)   The taxpayer's name, address, and Federal employer identification
number;
      (2)   The taxpayer's apportionment ratio for, and amount of municipal
taxable income apportionable to, the Village pursuant to §
882.25;
      (3)   The amount of any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward utilized
by the taxpayer;
      (4)   Whether the taxpayer requested that any overpayment be carried
forward to a future taxable year;
      (5)   The amount of any credit claimed under R.C. § 718.94.
   (c)   Not later than thirty days after each distribution made to municipal
corporations under R.C. § 718.83, the Tax Commissioner shall provide to the
Village a report stating the name and Federal identification number of every
taxpayer that made estimated payments that are attributable to the Village and
the amount of each such taxpayer's estimated payment.
   (d)   The information described under divisions (b) and (c) of this section
shall be provided to the individual or individuals designated by the Village
Tax Administrator under R.C. § 718.83(D).
   (e)   (1)   The Village expects that the Tax Commissioner will, pursuant to
R.C. § 718.84(E), provide tax returns and other information it receives in the
performance of its administration of the municipal net profits tax for
taxpayers making the election provided in §
882.23. The Tax Administrator shall review these returns and information, as
well as the information received pursuant to divisions (b) and (c) of this
section, and has discretion to refer any taxpayer for audit by the Tax
Commissioner. Such referral shall be made on a form prescribed by the
Commissioner and shall include any information that forms the basis for the
referral.
      (2)   If the Tax Commissioner declines to audit a taxpayer referred by
the Tax Administrator under this section, the Village reserves its right to
pursue any and all remedies, whether at law or in equity, to ensure that the
correct tax liability has been calculated and paid by the taxpayer.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018)
§ 882.27 FILING OF ANNUAL RETURN; REMITTANCE; DISPOSITION OF FUNDS.
   (a)   (1)   For each taxable year, every taxpayer shall file an annual
return. Such return, along with the amount of tax shown to be due on the return
less the amount paid for the taxable year under §
882.31, shall be submitted to the Tax Commissioner, on a form and in the manner
prescribed by the Commissioner, on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth
month following the end of the taxpayer's taxable year.
      (2)   If a taxpayer has multiple taxable years ending within one calendar
year, the taxpayer shall aggregate the facts and figures necessary to compute
the tax due under this chapter, in accordance with §§
882.24,
882.25, and, if applicable,
882.29 onto its annual return.
      (3)   The remittance shall be made payable to the Treasurer of State and
in the form prescribed by the Tax Commissioner. If the amount payable with the
tax return is ten dollars ($10.00) or less, no remittance is required.
   (b)   (1)   Each return required to be filed under this section shall
contain the signature of the taxpayer or the taxpayer's duly authorized agent
and of the person who prepared the return for the taxpayer, and shall include
the taxpayer's identification number. Each return shall be verified by a
declaration under penalty of perjury.
      (2)   A.   The Tax Commissioner may require a taxpayer to include, with
each annual tax return, amended return, or request for refund filed with the
Commissioner under §§
882.23 to
882.38, copies of any relevant documents or other information.
         B.   A taxpayer that files an annual tax return electronically through
the Ohio Business Gateway or in another manner as prescribed by the Tax
Commissioner shall either submit the documents required under this division
electronically as prescribed at the time of filing or, if electronic submission
is not available, mail the documents to the Tax Commissioner. The Department of
Taxation shall publish a method of electronically submitting the documents
required under this division on or before January 1, 2019.
      (3)   After a taxpayer files a tax return, the Tax Commissioner may
request, and the taxpayer shall provide, any information, statements, or
documents required to determine and verify the taxpayer's municipal income tax.
   (d)   (1)   A.   Any taxpayer that has duly requested an automatic extension
for filing the taxpayer's Federal income tax return shall automatically receive
an extension for the filing of a tax return with the Commissioner under this
section. The extended due date of the return shall be the fifteenth day of the
tenth month after the last day of the taxable year to which the return relates.
         B.   A taxpayer that has not requested or received a six-month
extension for filing the taxpayer's Federal income tax return may request that
the Commissioner grant the taxpayer a six-month extension of the date for
filing the taxpayer's municipal income tax return. If the Commissioner receives
the request on or before the date the municipal income tax return is due, the
Commissioner shall grant the taxpayer's extension request.
         C.   An extension of time to file under division (d)(1) of this
section is not an extension of the time to pay any tax due unless the Tax
Commissioner grants an extension of that date.
      (2)   If the Commissioner considers it necessary in order to ensure
payment of a tax imposed in accordance with §
882.01, the Commissioner may require taxpayers to file returns and make
payments otherwise than as provided in this section, including taxpayers not
otherwise required to file annual returns.
   (e)   Each return required to be filed in accordance with this section shall
include a box that the taxpayer may check to authorize another person,
including a tax return preparer who prepared the return, to communicate with
the Tax Commissioner about matters pertaining to the return. The return or
instructions accompanying the return shall indicate that by checking the box
the taxpayer authorizes the Commissioner to contact the preparer or other
person concerning questions that arise during the examination or other review
of the return and authorizes the preparer or other person only to provide the
Commissioner with information that is missing from the return, to contact the
Commissioner for information about the examination or other review of the
return or the status of the taxpayer's refund or payments, and to respond to
notices about mathematical errors, offsets, or return preparation that the
taxpayer has received from the Commissioner and has shown to the preparer or
other person.
   (f)   When income tax returns or other documents require the signature of a
tax return preparer, the Tax Commissioner shall accept a facsimile or
electronic version of such a signature in lieu of a manual signature.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018)
§ 882.28 ELECTRONIC FILING.
   (a)   All taxpayers that have made the election allowed under §
882.24 shall file any tax return or extension for filing a tax return, and
shall make payment of amounts shown to be due on such returns, electronically,
either through the Ohio Business Gateway or in another manner as prescribed by
the Tax Commissioner.
   (b)   A taxpayer may apply to the Commissioner, on a form prescribed by the
Commissioner, to be excused from the requirement to file returns and make
payments electronically. For good cause shown, the Commissioner may excuse the
applicant from the requirement and permit the applicant to file the returns or
make the payments by nonelectronic means.
   (c)   The Tax Commissioner may adopt rules establishing the following:
      (1)   The format of documents to be used by taxpayers to file returns and
make payments by electronic means;
      (2)   The information taxpayers must submit when filing tax returns by
electronic means.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018)
§ 882.29 CONSOLIDATED RETURNS.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   AFFILIATED GROUP OF CORPORATIONS means an affiliated group as
defined in section 1504 of the Internal Revenue Code, except that, if such a
group includes at least one incumbent local exchange carrier that is primarily
engaged in the business of providing local exchange telephone service in this
State, the affiliated group shall not include any incumbent local exchange
carrier that would otherwise be included in the group.
      (2)   CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL INCOME TAX RETURN means a consolidated return
filed for Federal income tax purposes pursuant to section 1501 of the Internal
Revenue Code.
      (3)   CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME means the consolidated taxable
income of an affiliated group of corporations, as computed for the purposes of
filing a consolidated Federal income tax return, before consideration of net
operating losses or special deductions. CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME
does not include income or loss of an incumbent local exchange carrier that is
excluded from the affiliated group under division (a)(1) of this section.
      (4)   INCUMBENT LOCAL EXCHANGE CARRIER has the same meaning as in R.C. §
4927.01.
      (5)   LOCAL EXCHANGE TELEPHONE SERVICE has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5727.01.
   (b)   (1)   A taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of
corporations may elect to file a consolidated tax return for a taxable year if
at least one member of the affiliated group of corporations is subject to
municipal income tax in that taxable year and if the affiliated group of
corporations filed a consolidated Federal income tax return with respect to
that taxable year. The election is binding for a five-year period beginning
with the first taxable year of the initial election unless a change in the
reporting method is required under Federal law. The election continues to be
binding for each subsequent five-year period unless the taxpayer elects to
discontinue filing consolidated tax returns under division (b)(2) of this
section or a taxpayer receives permission from the Tax Commissioner. The Tax
Commissioner shall approve such a request for good cause shown.
      (2)   An election to discontinue filing consolidated tax returns under
this section must be made on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month of
the year following the last year of a five-year consolidated tax return
election period in effect under division (b)(1) of this section. The election
to discontinue filing a consolidated tax return is binding for a five-year
period beginning with the first taxable year of the election.
      (3)   An election made under division (b)(1) or (b)(2) of this section is
binding on all members of the affiliated group of corporations subject to a
municipal income tax.
      (4)   When a taxpayer makes the election allowed under §
882.23, a valid election made by the taxpayer under division (b)(1) or (b)(2)
of this section is binding upon the Tax Commissioner for the remainder of the
five-year period.
      (5)   When an election made under §
882.063(b)(1) is terminated, a valid election made under this section is
binding upon the Tax Administrator for the remainder of the five-year period.
   (c)   A taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations
that filed a consolidated Federal income tax return for a taxable year shall
file a consolidated tax return for that taxable year if the Tax Commissioner
determines, by a preponderance of the evidence, that intercompany transactions
have not been conducted at arm's length and that there has been a distortive
shifting of income or expenses with regard to allocation of net profits to a
municipal corporation. A taxpayer that is required to file a consolidated tax
return for a taxable year shall file a consolidated tax return for all
subsequent taxable years unless the taxpayer requests and receives written
permission from the Commissioner to file a separate return or a taxpayer has
experienced a change in circumstances.
   (d)   A taxpayer shall prepare a consolidated tax return in the same manner
as is required under the United States Department of Treasury regulations that
prescribe procedures for the preparation of the consolidated Federal income tax
return required to be filed by the common parent of the affiliated group of
which the taxpayer is a member.
   (e)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (e)(2), (e)(3), and
(e)(4) of this section, corporations that file a consolidated tax return shall
compute adjusted Federal taxable income, as defined in §
882.025, by substituting "consolidated Federal taxable income" for "Federal
taxable income" wherever "Federal taxable income" appears in that division and
by substituting "an affiliated group of corporation's" for "a C corporation's"
wherever "a C corporation's" appears in that division.
      (2)   No corporation filing a consolidated tax return shall make any
adjustment otherwise required under §
882.24(b) to the extent that the item of income or deduction otherwise subject
to the adjustment has been eliminated or consolidated in the computation of
consolidated Federal taxable income.
      (3)   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having at least
eighty percent of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled,
directly or indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in
that affiliated group's consolidated Federal taxable income for a taxable year,
the corporation filing a consolidated tax return shall do one of the following
with respect to that pass-through entity's net profit or loss for that taxable
year:
         A.   Exclude the pass-through entity's net profit or loss from the
consolidated Federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purpose of making the computations required in §
882.25, exclude the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-through
entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit sitused to a
municipal corporation. If the entity's net profit or loss is so excluded, the
entity shall be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on the basis of the
entity's net profits that would otherwise be included in the consolidated
Federal taxable income of the affiliated group.
         B.   Include the pass-through entity's net profit or loss in the
consolidated Federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purpose of making the computations required in §
882.25, include the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-through
entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit sitused to a
municipal corporation. If the entity's net profit or loss is so included, the
entity shall not be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on the basis of
the entity's net profits that are included in the consolidated Federal taxable
income of the affiliated group.
      (4)   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having less than
eighty percent of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled,
directly or indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in
that affiliated group's consolidated Federal taxable income for a taxable year,
all of the following shall apply:
         A.   The corporation filing the consolidated tax return shall exclude
the pass-through entity's net profit or loss from the consolidated Federal
taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the purposes of making the
computations required in §
882.25, exclude the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-through
entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit sitused to a
municipal corporation;
         B.   The pass-through entity shall be subject to municipal income
taxation as a separate taxpayer in accordance with §§
882.23 to
882.38 on the basis of the entity's net profits that would otherwise be
included in the consolidated Federal taxable income of the affiliated group.
   (f)   Corporations filing a consolidated tax return shall make the
computations required under §
882.25 by substituting "consolidated Federal taxable income attributable to"
for "net profit from" wherever "net profit from" appears in that section and by
substituting "affiliated group of corporations" for "taxpayer" wherever
"taxpayer" appears in that section.
   (g)   Each corporation filing a consolidated tax return is jointly and
severally liable for any tax, interest, penalties, fines, charges, or other
amounts applicable under §§
882.23 to
882.38 or R.C. Chapter 5703 to the corporation, an affiliated group of which
the corporation is a member for any portion of the taxable year, or any one or
more members of such an affiliated group.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018)
§ 882.30 FAILURE TO PAY TAX.
   If a taxpayer that has made the election allowed under §
882.23 fails to pay any tax as required under §§
882.23 to
882.38, or any portion of that tax, on or before the date prescribed for its
payment, interest shall be assessed, collected, and paid, in the same manner as
the tax, upon such unpaid amount at the rate per annum prescribed by R.C. §
5703.47 from the date prescribed for its payment until it is paid or until the
date an assessment is issued under §
882.33, whichever occurs first.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018)
§ 882.31 DECLARATION OF ESTIMATED TAXES.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   COMBINED TAX LIABILITY means the total amount of a taxpayer's
income tax liabilities to all municipal corporations in this State for a
taxable year.
      (2)   ESTIMATED TAXES means the amount that the taxpayer reasonably
estimates to be the taxpayer's combined tax liability for the current taxable
year.
   (b)   (1)   Except as provided in division (b)(4) of this section, every
taxpayer shall make a declaration of estimated taxes for the current taxable
year, on the form prescribed by the Tax Commissioner, if the amount payable as
estimated taxes is at least two hundred dollars ($200.00).
      (2)   Except as provided in division (b)(4) of this section, a taxpayer
having a taxable year of less than twelve months shall make a declaration under
rules prescribed by the Commissioner.
      (3)   The declaration of estimated taxes shall be filed on or before the
fifteenth day of the fourth month after the beginning of the taxable year or on
or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the taxpayer becomes
subject to tax for the first time.
      (4)   The Tax Commissioner may waive the requirement for filing a
declaration of estimated taxes for any class of taxpayers after finding that
the waiver is reasonable and proper in view of administrative costs and other
factors.
   (c)   Each taxpayer shall file the declaration of estimated taxes with, and
remit estimated taxes to, the Tax Commissioner at the times and in the amounts
prescribed in division (c)(1) of this section. Remitted taxes shall be made
payable to the Treasurer of State.
      (1)   The required portion of the combined tax liability for the taxable
year that shall be paid through estimated taxes shall be as follows:
         A.   On or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the
beginning of the taxable year, twenty-two and one-half percent of the combined
tax liability for the taxable year;
         B.   On or before the fifteenth day of the sixth month after the
beginning of the taxable year,
forty-five percent of the combined tax liability for the taxable year;
         C.   On or before the fifteenth day of the ninth month after the
beginning of the taxable year, sixty-seven and one-half percent of the combined
tax liability for the taxable year;
         D.   On or before the fifteenth day of the twelfth month of the
taxable year, ninety percent of the combined tax liability for the taxable
year.
      (2)   If the taxpayer determines that its declaration of estimated taxes
will not accurately reflect the taxpayer's tax liability for the taxable year,
the taxpayer shall increase or decrease, as appropriate, its subsequent
payments in equal installments to result in a more accurate payment of
estimated taxes.
      (3)   A.   Each taxpayer shall report on the declaration of estimated
taxes the portion of the remittance that the taxpayer estimates that it owes to
each municipal corporation for the taxable year.
         B.   Upon receiving a payment of estimated taxes under this section,
the Commissioner shall immediately forward the payment to the Treasurer of
State. The Treasurer shall credit the payment in the same manner as in division
(B) of R.C. § 718.85.
   (d)   (1)   In the case of any underpayment of estimated taxes, there shall
be added to the taxes an amount determined at the rate per annum prescribed by
R.C. § 5703.47 upon the amount of underpayment for the period of underpayment,
unless the underpayment is due to reasonable cause as described in division (e)
of this section. The amount of the underpayment shall be determined as follows:
         A.   For the first payment of estimated taxes each year, twenty-two
and one-half percent of the combined tax liability, less the amount of taxes
paid by the date prescribed for that payment;
         B.   For the second payment of estimated taxes each year, forty-five
percent of the combined tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the
date prescribed for that payment;
         C.   For the third payment of estimated taxes each year, sixty-seven
and one-half percent of the combined tax liability, less the amount of taxes
paid by the date prescribed for that payment;
         D.   For the fourth payment of estimated taxes each year, ninety
percent of the combined tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the
date prescribed for that payment.
      (2)   The period of the underpayment shall run from the day the estimated
payment was required to be made to the date on which the payment is made. For
purposes of this section, a payment of estimated taxes on or before any payment
date shall be considered a payment of any previous underpayment only to the
extent the payment of estimated taxes exceeds the amount of the payment
presently due.
      (3)   All amounts collected under this section shall be considered as
taxes collected under §§
882.23 to 882.39 and shall be credited and distributed to municipal
corporations in accordance with R.C. § 718.83.
   (e)   An underpayment of any portion of a combined tax liability shall be
due to reasonable cause and the penalty imposed by this section shall not be
added to the taxes for the taxable year if any of the following apply:
      (1)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least ninety
percent of the combined tax liability for the current taxable year, determined
by annualizing the income received during the year up to the end of the month
immediately preceding the month in which the payment is due.
      (2)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least 100
percent of the tax liability shown on the return of the taxpayer for the
preceding taxable year, provided that the immediately preceding taxable year
reflected a period of twelve months and the taxpayer filed a municipal income
tax return for that year.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018)
§ 882.32 ADDITIONAL PENALTIES.
   (a)   In addition to any other penalty imposed by §§
882.23 to
882.38 or R.C. Chapter 5703, the following penalties shall apply:
      (1)   If a taxpayer required to file a tax return under §§
882.23 to
882.38 fails to make and file the return within the time prescribed, including
any extensions of time granted by the Tax Commissioner, the Commissioner may
impose a penalty not exceeding twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per month or
fraction of a month, for each month or fraction of a month elapsing between the
due date, including extensions of the due date, and the date on which the
return is filed. The aggregate penalty, per instance, under this division shall
not exceed one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
      (2)   If a person required to file a tax return electronically under §§
882.23 to
882.38 fails to do so, the Commissioner may impose a penalty not to exceed the
following:
         A.   For each of the first two failures, five percent of the amount
required to be reported on the return;
         B.   For the third and any subsequent failure, ten percent of the
amount required to be reported on the return.
      (3)   If a taxpayer that has made the election allowed under §
882.23 fails to timely pay an amount of tax required to be paid under this
chapter, the Commissioner may impose a penalty equal to fifteen percent of the
amount not timely paid.
      (4)   If a taxpayer files what purports to be a tax return required by §§
882.23 to
882.38 that does not contain information upon which the substantial correctness
of the return may be judged or
contains information that on its face indicates that the return is
substantially incorrect, and the filing of the return in that manner is due to
a position that is frivolous or a desire that is apparent from the return to
delay or impede the administration of §§
882.23 to
882.38, a penalty of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) may be imposed.
      (5)   If a taxpayer makes a fraudulent attempt to evade the reporting or
payment of the tax required to be shown on any return required under §§
882.23 to
882.38, a penalty may be imposed not exceeding the greater of one thousand
dollars ($1,000) or 100 percent of the tax required to be shown on the return.
      (6)   If any person makes a false or fraudulent claim for a refund under
§
882.34, a penalty may be imposed not exceeding the greater of one thousand
dollars ($1,000) or 100 percent of the claim. Any penalty imposed under this
division, any refund issued on the claim, and interest on any refund from the
date of the refund, may be assessed under §
882.33 without regard to any time limitation for the assessment imposed by
division (a) of that section.
   (b)   For purposes of this section, the tax required to be shown on a tax
return shall be reduced by the amount of any part of the tax paid on or before
the date, including any extensions of the date, prescribed for filing the
return.
   (c)   Each penalty imposed under this section shall be in addition to any
other penalty imposed under this section. All or part of any penalty imposed
under this section may be abated by the Tax Commissioner. The Commissioner may
adopt rules governing the imposition and abatement of such penalties.
   (d)   All amounts collected under this section shall be considered as taxes
collected under §§
882.23 to
882.38 and shall be credited and distributed to municipal corporations in the
same proportion as the underlying tax liability is required to be distributed
to such municipal corporations under R.C. § 718.83.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018)
§ 882.33 ASSESSMENTS AGAINST TAXPAYER.
   (a)   If any taxpayer required to file a return under §§
882.23 to
882.38 fails to file the return within the time prescribed, files an incorrect
return, or fails to remit the full amount of the tax due for the period covered
by the return, the Tax Commissioner may make an assessment against the taxpayer
for any deficiency for the period for which the return or tax is due, based
upon any information in the Commissioner's possession.
      The Tax Commissioner shall not make or issue an assessment against a
taxpayer more than three years after the later of the date the return subject
to assessment was required to be filed or the date the return was filed. Such
time limit may be extended if both the taxpayer and the Commissioner consent in
writing to the extension. Any such extension shall extend the three-year time
limit in §
882.34 for the same period of time. There shall be no bar or limit to an
assessment against a taxpayer that fails to file a return subject to assessment
as required by §§
882.23 to
882.38, or that files a fraudulent return. The Commissioner shall give the
taxpayer assessed written notice of the assessment as provided in R.C. §
5703.37. With the notice, the Commissioner shall provide instructions on how to
petition for reassessment and request a hearing on the petition.
   (b)   Unless the taxpayer assessed files with the Tax Commissioner within
sixty days after service of the notice of assessment, either personally or by
certified mail, a written petition for reassessment signed by the authorized
agent of the taxpayer assessed having knowledge of the facts, the assessment
becomes final, and the amount of the assessment is due and payable from the
taxpayer to the Treasurer of State. The petition shall indicate the taxpayer's
objections, but additional objections may be raised in writing if received by
the Commissioner prior to the date shown on the final determination. If the
petition has been properly filed, the Commissioner shall proceed under R.C. §
5703.60.
   (c)   After an assessment becomes final, if any portion of the assessment
remains unpaid, including accrued interest, a certified copy of the Tax
Commissioner's entry making the assessment final may be filed in the office of
the clerk of the court of common pleas in the county in which the taxpayer has
an office or place of business in this State, the county in which the
taxpayer's statutory agent is located, or Franklin County.
      Immediately upon the filing of the entry, the clerk shall enter a
judgment against the taxpayer assessed in the amount shown on the entry. The
judgment may be filed by the clerk in a loose-leaf book entitled "special
judgments for municipal income taxes," and shall have the same effect as other
judgments. Execution shall issue upon the judgment upon the request of the Tax
Commissioner, and all laws applicable to sales on execution shall apply to
sales made under the judgment.
      If the assessment is not paid in its entirety within sixty days after the
day the assessment was issued, the portion of the assessment consisting of tax
due shall bear interest at the rate per annum prescribed by R.C. § 5703.47 from
the day the Commissioner issues the assessment until the assessment is paid or
until it is certified to the attorney general for collection under R.C. §
131.02, whichever comes first. If the unpaid portion of the assessment is
certified to the attorney general for collection, the entire unpaid portion of
the assessment shall bear interest at the rate per annum prescribed by R.C. §
5703.47 from the date of certification until the date it is paid in its
entirety. Interest shall be paid in the same manner as the tax and may be
collected by issuing an assessment under this section.
   (d)   All money collected under this section shall be credited to the
municipal income tax fund and distributed to the municipal corporation to which
the money is owed based on the assessment issued under this section.
   (e)   If the Tax Commissioner believes that collection of the tax will be
jeopardized unless proceedings to collect or secure collection of the tax are
instituted without delay, the Commissioner may issue a jeopardy assessment
against the taxpayer liable for the tax. Immediately upon the issuance of the
jeopardy assessment, the Commissioner shall file an entry with the clerk of the
court of common pleas in the manner prescribed by division (c) of this section.
Notice of the jeopardy assessment shall be served on the taxpayer assessed or
the taxpayer's legal representative in the manner provided in R.C. § 5703.37
within five days of the filing of the entry with the clerk. The total amount
assessed is immediately due and payable, unless the taxpayer assessed files a
petition for reassessment in accordance with division (b) of this section and
provides security in a form satisfactory to the Commissioner and in an amount
sufficient to satisfy the unpaid balance of the assessment. Full or partial
payment of the assessment does not prejudice the Commissioner's consideration
of the petition for reassessment.
   (f)   Notwithstanding the fact that a petition for reassessment is pending,
the taxpayer may pay all or a portion of the assessment that is the subject of
the petition. The acceptance of a payment by the Treasurer of State does not
prejudice any claim for refund upon final determination of the petition.
      If upon final determination of the petition an error in the assessment is
corrected by the Tax Commissioner, upon petition so filed or pursuant to a
decision of the Board of Tax Appeals or any court to which the determination or
decision has been appealed, so that the amount due from the taxpayer under the
corrected assessment is less than the portion paid, there shall be issued to
the taxpayer, its assigns, or legal representative a refund in the amount of
the overpayment as provided by §
882.34, with interest on that amount as provided by that section.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018)
§ 882.34 REFUND APPLICATIONS.
   (a)   An application to refund to a taxpayer the amount of taxes paid on any
illegal, erroneous, or excessive payment of tax under §§
882.23 to
882.38, including assessments, shall be filed with the Tax Commissioner within
three years after the date of the illegal, erroneous, or excessive payment of
the tax, or within any additional period allowed by division (a) of this
section. The application shall be filed in the form prescribed by the Tax
Commissioner.
   (b)   (1)   On the filing of a refund application, the Tax Commissioner
shall determine the amount of refund to which the applicant is entitled. The
amount determined shall be based on the amount overpaid per return or
assessment. If the amount is greater than ten dollars ($10.00) and not less
than that claimed, the Commissioner shall certify that amount to the Director
of Budget and Management and the Treasurer of State for payment from the tax
refund fund created in R.C. § 5703.052. If the amount is greater than ten
dollars ($10.00) but less than that claimed, the Commissioner shall proceed in
accordance with R.C. § 5703.70.
      (2)   Upon issuance of a refund under this section, the Commissioner
shall notify each municipal corporation of the amount refunded to the taxpayer
attributable to that municipal corporation, which shall be deducted from the
municipal corporation's next distribution under R.C. § 718.83.
   (c)   Any portion of a refund determined under division (b) of this section
that is not issued within ninety days after such determination shall bear
interest at the rate per annum prescribed by R.C. § 5703.47 from the ninety-
first day after such determination until the day the refund is paid or
credited. On an illegal or erroneous assessment, interest shall be paid at that
rate from the date of payment on the illegal or erroneous assessment until the
day the refund is paid or credited.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018)
§ 882.35 AMENDED RETURNS.
   (a)   If any of the facts, figures, computations, or attachments required in
an annual return filed by a taxpayer that has made the election allowed under §
882.23 and used to determine the tax due under §§
882.23 to
882.38 must be altered as the result of an adjustment to the taxpayer's Federal
income tax return, whether initiated by the taxpayer or the Internal Revenue
Service, and such alteration affects the taxpayer's tax liability under those
sections, the taxpayer shall file an amended return with the Tax Commissioner
in such form as the Commissioner requires. The amended return shall be filed
not later than sixty days after the adjustment is agreed upon or finally
determined for Federal income tax purposes or after any Federal income tax
deficiency or refund, or the abatement or credit resulting therefrom, has been
assessed or paid, whichever occurs first. If a taxpayer intends to file an
amended consolidated municipal income tax return, or to amend its type of
return from a separate return to a consolidated return, based on the taxpayer's
consolidated Federal income tax return, the taxpayer shall notify the
Commissioner before filing the amended return.
   (b)   In the case of an underpayment, the amended return shall be
accompanied by payment of any combined additional tax due together with any
penalty and interest thereon. An amended return required by this section is a
return subject to assessment under §
882.33 for the purpose of assessing any additional tax due under this section,
together with any applicable penalty and interest. The amended return shall not
reopen those facts, figures, computations, or attachments from a previously
filed return no longer subject to assessment that are not affected, either
directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the taxpayer's Federal tax return.
   (c)   In the case of an overpayment, an application for refund may be filed
under this division within the sixty-day period prescribed for filing the
amended return, even if that period extends beyond the period prescribed in §
882.34, if the application otherwise conforms to the requirements of that
section. An application filed under this division shall claim refund of
overpayments resulting from alterations to only those facts, figures,
computations, or attachments required in the taxpayer's annual return that are
affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the taxpayer's
Federal income tax return unless it is also filed within the time prescribed in
§
882.34. The application shall not reopen those facts, figures, computations, or
attachments that are not affected, either directly or indirectly, by the
adjustment to the taxpayer's Federal income tax return.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018)
§ 882.36 EXAMINATION OF RECORDS AND OTHER DOCUMENTS AND PERSONS.
   (a)   The Tax Commissioner, or any authorized agent or employee thereof, may
examine the books, papers, records, and Federal and State income tax returns of
any taxpayer or other person that is subject to §§
882.23 to
882.38 for the purpose of verifying the accuracy of any return made or, if no
return was filed, to ascertain the tax due as required under those sections.
Upon written request by the Commissioner or a duly authorized agent or employee
thereof, every taxpayer or other person subject to this section is required to
furnish the opportunity for the Commissioner, authorized agent, or employee to
investigate and examine such books, papers, records, and Federal and State
income tax returns at a reasonable time and place designated in the request.
   (b)   The records and other documents of any taxpayer or other person that
is subject to §§
882.23 to
882.38 shall be open to the Tax Commissioner's inspection during business hours
and shall be preserved for a period of six years following the end of the
taxable year to which the records or documents relate, unless the Commissioner,
in writing, consents to their destruction within that period, or by order
requires that they be kept longer. The Commissioner may require any person, by
notice served on that person, to keep such records as the Commissioner
determines necessary to show whether or not that person is liable, and the
extent of such liability, for the income tax levied by a municipal corporation.
   (c)   The Tax Commissioner may examine under oath any person that the
Commissioner reasonably believes has knowledge concerning any income that was
or would have been returned for taxation or any transaction tending to affect
such income. The Commissioner may, for this purpose, compel any such person to
attend a hearing or examination and to produce any books, papers, records, and
Federal income tax returns in such person's possession or control. The person
may be assisted or represented by an attorney, accountant, bookkeeper, or other
tax practitioner at any such hearing or examination. This division does not
authorize the practice of law by a person who is not an attorney.
   (d)   No person issued written notice by the Tax Commissioner compelling
attendance at a hearing or examination or the production of books, papers,
records, or Federal income tax returns under this section shall fail to comply.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018)
§ 882.37 CREDITS.
   (a)   A credit, granted by resolution or ordinance of the Village pursuant
to §
882.064 or
882.065, shall be available to a taxpayer that has made the election allowed
under §
882.23, against the municipal corporation's tax on income. A municipal
corporation shall submit the following information to the Tax Commissioner on
or before the later of January 31, 2018, or the thirty-first day of January of
the first year in which the taxpayer is eligible to receive the credit:
      (1)   A copy of the agreement entered into by the Village and taxpayer
under §
882.064 or
882.065;
      (2)   A copy of the ordinance or resolution authorizing the agreement
entered into between the Village and the taxpayer.
   (b)   (1)   Each taxpayer that claims a credit shall submit, with the
taxpayer's tax return, documentation issued by the Village granting the credit
that confirms the eligibility of the taxpayer for the credit, the amount of the
credit for which the taxpayer is eligible, and the tax year to which the credit
is to be applied.
      (2)   Such documentation shall be provided in the form prescribed by the
Tax Commissioner.
      (3)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize the Tax
Commissioner to enter into an agreement with a taxpayer to grant a credit, to
determine if a taxpayer meets the conditions of a tax credit agreement entered
into by the Village and taxpayer under §
882.064 or
882.065, or to modify the terms or conditions of any such existing agreement.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018)
§ 882.38 RECKLESS VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES.
   (a)   Except as provided in division (b) of this section, whoever recklessly
violates §
882.27(a) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be
subject to a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000) or
imprisonment for a term of up to six months, or both.
   (b)   Each instance of access or disclosure in violation of §
882.27(a) constitutes a separate offense.
   (c)   These specific penalties shall not be construed to prevent the Village
from prosecuting any and all other offenses that may apply.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018)
§ 882.99 VIOLATIONS; PENALTY.
   (a)   Except as provided in division (b) of this section, whoever violates §
882.051,
882.14(a), or
882.15 by failing to remit municipal income taxes deducted and withheld from an
employee, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be
subject to a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000) or
imprisonment for a term of up to six months, or both. In addition, the
violation is punishable by dismissal from office or discharge from employment,
or both.
   (b)   Any person who discloses information received from the Internal
Revenue Service in violation of section 7213(a), 7213A, or 7431 of the Internal
Revenue Code shall be guilty of a felony of the fifth degree and shall be
subject to a fine of not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000) plus the
costs of prosecution, or imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years, or
both. In addition, the violation is punishable by dismissal from office or
discharge from employment, or both.
   (c)   Each instance of access or disclosure in violation of §
882.14(a) constitutes a separate offense.
   (d)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which violation no
penalty is otherwise provided, is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree
on a first offense; and is subject to a fine of not more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000) or imprisonment for a term of up to six months. By way of an
illustrative enumeration, violations of this chapter shall include but not be
limited to the following acts, conduct, and/or omissions:
      (1)   Fail, neglect or refuse to make any return or declaration required
by this chapter;
      (2)   Knowingly make any incomplete return;
      (3)   Willfully fail, neglect, or refuse to pay the tax, penalties, and
interest, or any combination thereof, imposed by this chapter;
      (4)   Cause to not be remitted the Village income tax withheld from
qualifying wages of employees to the Village municipal corporation as required
by §
882.051;
      (5)   Neglect or refuse to withhold or remit municipal income tax from
employees;
      (6)   Refuse to permit the Tax Administrator or any duly authorized agent
or employee to examine his or her books, records, papers, Federal and State
income tax returns, or any documentation relating to the income or net profits
of a taxpayer;
      (7)   Fail to appear before the Tax Administrator and to produce his or
her books, records, papers, Federal and State income tax returns, or any
documentation relating to the income or net profits of a taxpayer upon order or
subpoena of the Tax Administrator;
      (8)   Refuse to disclose to the Tax Administrator any information with
respect to such person's income or net profits, or in the case of a person
responsible for maintaining information relating to his or her employers'
income or net profits, such person's employer's income or net profits;
      (9)   Fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any order or
subpoena of the Tax Administrator;
      (10)   To avoid imposition or collection of municipal income tax,
willfully give to an employer or prospective employer false information as to
his or her true name, correct social security number and residence address, or
willfully fail to promptly notify an employer or a prospective employer of any
change in residence address and date thereof;
      (11)   Fail, as an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer, to
maintain proper records of employees residence addresses, total qualifying
wages paid and municipal tax withheld, or to knowingly give the Tax
Administrator false information;
      (12)   Willfully fail, neglect, or refuse to make any payment of
estimated municipal income tax for any taxable year or any part of any taxable
year in accordance with this chapter;
      (13)   Attempt to do anything whatsoever to avoid the payment of the
whole or any part of the tax, penalties or interest imposed by this chapter.
      (14)   For purposes of this section, any violation that does not specify
a culpable mental state or intent, shall be one of strict liability and no
culpable mental state or intent shall be required for a person to be guilty of
that violation;
      (15)   For purposes of this section, the term "person" shall, in addition
to the meaning prescribed in §
882.03, include in the case of a corporation, association, pass-through entity
or unincorporated business entity not having any resident owner or officer
within the Village, any employee or agent of such corporation, association,
pass-through entity or unincorporated business entity who has control or
supervision over or is charged with the responsibility of filing the municipal
income tax returns and making the payments of the municipal income tax as
required by this chapter.
(Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-27-2018)
Statutory reference:
   Violations; penalties, see R.C. § 718.99
CHAPTER 884: MOTOR VEHICLE LICENSE TAX
884.01      Levy of tax; use of revenues.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Licensing of motor vehicles - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4503
   Local motor vehicle license tax - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4504
   Municipal levy - see Ohio R.C. 4504.06 et seq.
   Tax/Payroll Clerk - see ADM.
237.10
   Tax Commissioner - see ADM.
237.11
   Display of license plates; registration; obstructions - see TRAF.
436.09
   Use of illegal license plates - see TRAF.
436.10
§ 884.01 LEVY OF TAX; USE OF REVENUES.
   (a)   Under authority of Ohio R.C. 4504.171, there is hereby levied in and
for the Village a five dollar ($5.00) motor vehicle license tax.
   (b)   The revenue derived from the tax levied in subsection (a) hereof shall
be used for the purposes set forth in Ohio R.C. 4504.171 to supplement the
costs and expenses associated with the maintenance of public roadways within
the Village. Pending use, such revenues shall be deposited into the Motor
Vehicle License Tax Fund of the Village.
(Ord. 24, passed 5-14-1991)
PART TEN: UTILITIES AND PUBLIC SERVICES CODE
TITLE TWO - Street and Sidewalk Areas
         
Chap. 1020.   Streets.
         
Chap. 1022.   Sidewalks.
         
Chap. 1024.   Driveways, Curbs and Gutters.
         
Chap. 1026.   Trees.
         
Chap. 1028.   Assessments.
         
Chap. 1030.   Excavations.
TITLE FOUR - Utilities
         
Chap. 1040.   Sewers.
         
Chap. 1042.   Water.
         
Chap. 1044.   Gas.
         
Chap. 1046.   Electricity.
         
Chap. 1048.   Small Cell Facilities and Wireless Support Structures.
TITLE SIX - Other Public Services
         
Chap. 1060.   Garbage and Rubbish Collection and Disposal.
         
Chap. 1062.   Parks and Recreation Areas.
         
Chap. 1064.   Woodlawn Community Swimming Pool.
         
Chap. 1066.   Municipal Building.
TITLE TWO: STREET AND SIDEWALK AREAS
CHAPTER 1020: STREETS
   
1020.01   Maintenance of State highways.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Power to establish and care for streets - see Ohio R.C. 715.19, 717.01,
723.01
   Openings by the municipality - see Ohio R.C. 723.02
   Change of name, vacating and narrowing - see Ohio R.C. 723.04 et seq.
   Sidewalks - see Ohio R.C. 729.01 et seq.; S.U. & P.S. Ch. 1022
   Service Director - see ADM. 246.01
   Injurious materials on streets - see TRAF.
412.01
   Driving upon streets closed for repair - see TRAF.
432.24
   Street improvements in subdivisions - see P. & Z.
1246.03(b)(1),
1250.04(a)
   Street grades and curves - see P. & Z.
1248.08;
Title 4, Appx. B
   Acceptance of streets - see P. & Z.
1250.08
§ 1020.01 MAINTENANCE OF STATE HIGHWAYS.
   The consent of the Village is hereby given to the Department of
Transportation of the State for such Department to maintain the traveled
portions of, to centerline paint, and to plow snow and place abrasives for ice
control on, State highways in accordance with the standard practices of such
Department.
(Ord. 14-1976, passed 4-13-1976)
CHAPTER 1022: SIDEWALKS
1022.01   Sidewalks required.
1022.02   Conditions for issuance of building permits.
1022.03   Construction standards.
1022.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Sidewalks and gutters - see Ohio R.C. 729.01 et seq.
   Notice to construct or repair - see Ohio R.C. 729.03
   Construction or repair at owner’s expense - see Ohio R.C. 729.04 et seq.
   Driving upon sidewalks - see TRAF.
432.22
   Bicycles upon sidewalks - see TRAF.
474.06
   Maintenance of sidewalks - see GEN. OFF.
660.05
   Sidewalk obstructions; damaging or injuring - see GEN. OFF.
660.10
   Streets - see S.U. & P.S.
Ch. 1020
   Sidewalk improvements in subdivisions - see P. & Z.
1250.04(a)(3)
§ 1022.01 SIDEWALKS REQUIRED.
   No residential or commercial building shall be constructed after the
effective date of this chapter (Ordinance 5-1965, passed July 13, 1965) unless
a sidewalk, extending the complete width of the lot upon which such building is
constructed, is constructed simultaneously with the erection of such building.
(Ord. 5-1965, passed 7-13-1965)
§ 1022.02 CONDITIONS FOR ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMITS.
   No building permit shall be issued for residential or commercial
construction until the location and grade of any sidewalk required by this
chapter have been established by ordinance of Council.
(Ord. 5-1965, passed 7-13-1965)
§ 1022.03 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   All sidewalks required by this chapter shall be constructed of one to five
mix concrete and shall be four feet in width and five inches thick, except
where crossed by a driveway, in which case the thickness thereof shall be seven
inches.
(Ord. 5-1965, passed 7-13-1965)
§ 1022.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or
continues.
CHAPTER 1024: DRIVEWAYS, CURBS AND GUTTERS
1024.01   Permit required.
1024.02   Permit application.
1024.03   Driveway construction standard; plans.
1024.04   Driveway entrances.
1024.05   Grading of driveways.
1024.06   Grading of culverts and ditches.
1024.07   Installation of culverts.
1024.08   Gutter covers and bridges; obstructions.
1024.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Sidewalks and gutters - see Ohio R.C. 729.01 et seq.; S.U. & P.S.
Ch. 1022
   Notice to construct or repair - see Ohio R.C. 729.03
   Construction or repair at owner’s expense - see Ohio R.C. 729.04 et seq.
   Right-of-way at private driveways - see TRAF.
432.20
   Driving upon curbs - see TRAF.
432.22
   Streets - see S.U. & P.S.
Ch. 1020
   Ditches, channels and swales - see Pt. 12,
Title 4, Appx. D
§ 1024.01 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (a)   No person shall commence construction or reconstruction of a paved or
improved driveway which connects any private property to any public roadway, or
repair or construct any driveway or sidewalk located within a right-of-way,
without first obtaining a permit therefor from the Building Commissioner/
Inspector.
   (b)   No person shall alter, repair, replace, cut or cross over a curb
without first obtaining a permit therefor from the Building Commissioner/
Inspector.
(Ord. 8-1964, passed 8-25-1964)
§ 1024.02 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   No building permit shall be issued unless the application for such permit
contains detailed plans and specifications of all driveways, sidewalks or other
connections with public roadways or streets.
(Ord. 8-1964, passed 8-25-1964)
§ 1024.03 DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION STANDARD; PLANS.
   The construction or reconstruction of a driveway from the paved roadway to
any private property shall be adequate to carry the loads to which such
driveway is subjected. Detailed plans, in duplicate, of the proposed
construction or reconstruction will be required, showing lot lines, street curb
lines, street inlets and utility structures which may be affected; drainage and
sewer lines; and such other information as may be necessary; all of which will
be subject to approval by the Building Commissioner/Inspector and the Village
Engineer.
(Ord. 8-1964, passed 8-25-1964)
§ 1024.04 DRIVEWAY ENTRANCES.
   Driveway entrances shall not exceed 35 feet in width or be less than 12 feet
in width as measured at the curb line. Multiple driveway entrances shall be
permitted, where necessary, with the approval of the Building Commissioner/
Inspector and Village Engineer.
(Ord. 8-1964, passed 8-25-1964)
§ 1024.05 GRADING OF DRIVEWAYS.
   No driveway shall be constructed within the Village after the effective date
of this section (Ordinance 6-1965, passed June 8, 1965), unless the grade of
such driveway, at its intersection with the street right-of-way line, is a
minimum of eight inches above the grade of the centerline of the existing road
as paved at the time of construction of such driveway.
(Ord. 6-1965, passed 6-8-1965)
§ 1024.06 GRADING OF CULVERTS AND DITCHES.
   No person shall fill in, cover, regrade or alter the course or grade of any
roadside ditch or culvert, or otherwise change the grade of a ditch or other
portion of a dedicated street or right-of-way within the Village, without first
obtaining permission therefor from the Building Commissioner/Inspector.
(Ord. 6-1965, passed 6-8-1965)
§ 1024.07 INSTALLATION OF CULVERTS.
   No person shall install any culvert in any roadside ditch located within any
portion of a dedicated street or right-of-way within the Village without first
obtaining permission therefor from the Building Commissioner/Inspector.
(Ord. 6-1965, passed 6-8-1965)
§ 1024.08 GUTTER COVERS AND BRIDGES; OBSTRUCTIONS.
   (a)   No owner of any premises abutting on any improved street in the
Village, in front of which are located gutters for drainage, shall install
pipes or other methods of relieving water under his or her driveway without
complying with the requirements of this section.
   (b)   No person shall fail to remove existing gutter covers or bridges in
front of premises owned or controlled by such person, which gutter covers or
bridges are broken or stopped up with refuse, or construct or cause to be
constructed a gutter cover or bridge across the gutter of any improved street
in the Village unless the same is approved by the Service Director.
   (c)   No person shall obstruct any gutter so as to impede the passage of
water flowing in such gutter in any alley, street or other thoroughfare in the
Village.
   (d)   Pipes or bridges made over gutters shall have openings of at least 12
inches in diameter.
(Ord. 12-1948, passed 5-11-1948)
§ 1024.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or
continues.
CHAPTER 1026: TREES
Editor’s note:
   This chapter regulates trees in public rights-of-way. For regulations
pertaining to trees on private property, see
Chapter 668 of the General Offenses Code.
1026.01   Tree Board; membership and terms.
1026.02   Terms of office; vacancies.
1026.03   Compensation.
1026.04   Powers and duties.
1026.05   Authority of Municipal Manager.
1026.06   Removal of trees by Village.
1026.07   Planting or removal; permit required; conditions for denial.
1026.08   Master Street Tree Plan.
1026.09   Street tree plans for new developments.
1026.10   Trees and shrubs near utility lines.
1026.11   Distance of trees from street corners and fire hydrants.
1026.12   Pruning; obstructions.
1026.13   Removal of dangerous or diseased trees on private property.
1026.14   Removal of stumps.
1026.15   Malicious destruction or injury.
1026.16   Topping of public trees.
1026.17   Reviewing developments subject to discretionary review by the
Village.
1026.18   Appeals of decisions of the Municipal Manager.
1026.19   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Power to regulate shade trees and shrubbery - see Ohio R.C. 715.20
   Assessments for tree planting or maintenance - see Ohio R.C. 727.011
   Weeds - see Ohio R.C. 731.51 et seq.; 971.33 et seq.; GEN. OFF. Ch. 668 Ch.
668
   Driving on tree lawns - see TRAF.
432.22
   Injuring vines, bushes, trees or crops - see GEN. OFF.
642.06
   Destruction or removal of vegetation in parks - see S.U. & P.S.
1062.04
   Vegetation in subdivisions - see P. & Z.
1250.04(e);
Title 4, Appx. F
§ 1026.01 ESTABLISHMENT OF TREE BOARD, COMPOSITION, CHAIRPERSON.
   (a)   The Village Tree Board (in this chapter “Board”) shall consist of five
voting members appointed by the Mayor. In addition, the Mayor and one member of
Council shall be non-voting members of the Board and shall serve in an advisory
role.
   (b)   Prior to January 31 of each year, the Board shall meet and elect a
voting member to serve as Chairperson of the Board. The Chairperson shall have
the authority to call and conduct meetings of the Board and to receive all
permit applications, correspondence and other materials on behalf of the Board.
(Ord. 21-2013, passed 12-18-2013; Ord. 33-2021, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 1026.02 TERMS OF OFFICE; VACANCIES.
   The voting members of the Board shall serve for terms of two years each or
until their successors are appointed. If a vacancy occurs during the term of
any voting member, his or her successor shall be appointed for the unexpired
portion of the term by the Mayor. The members from Council and the Mayor shall
serve on the Board during the continuance of the respective elective offices.
(Ord. 21-2013, passed 12-18-2013; Ord. 33-2021, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 1026.03 COMPENSATION.
   The members of the Board shall serve without compensation or remuneration,
but shall be entitled to reimbursement for necessary expenditures in carrying
out the functions of the Board.
(Ord. 21-2013, passed 12-18-2013; Ord. 33-2021, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 1026.04 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (a)   The Board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and
regulations and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the members
shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. All plans, findings, advice,
reports and recommendations made by the Board shall be in writing and designate
by name those members of the Board approving or concurring therein. Members who
do not so approve or concur therein may, as a part of such report, state their
reasons therefor.
   (b)   The Board shall be responsible for developing and administering a
comprehensive tree management program for the Village and shall have the power
to study, investigate, plan, advise, report and recommend annually to Council
or the Mayor any action, program, plan or legislation which the Board finds or
determines to be necessary or advisable for the care, preservation, trimming,
planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees or shrubs in public ways,
streets, alleys, parks or other property owned by the Village.
   (c)   The Board when requested by Council or the Mayor, shall consider,
investigate, make findings and recommend upon any special matter or questions
coming within the scope of its work.
   (d)   The Board shall have the authority and jurisdiction for regulating the
planting and maintenance and removal of public trees or shrubs on streets and
street right-of-ways and any other Village- owned property to ensure safety or
preserve the aesthetics of such public sites, in accordance with Woodlawn's
permit system and in conformity with any ordinances specifying plans and
locations of plantings.
   (e)   The Board may conduct hearings on permit applications for the purpose
of gathering data and comments pertaining to tree planting plans. Notice of
pending permit applications and hearings on such applications shall be posted
in a manner similar to that for Village legislation.
(Ord. 21-2013, passed 12-18-2013; Ord. 33-2021, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 1026.05 AUTHORITY OF MUNICIPAL MANAGER.
   The Municipal Manager shall be responsible for carrying out the planting,
care and protection of all street trees and street plants. The Municipal
Manager shall issue permits pursuant to this section.
(Ord. 21-2013, passed 12-18-2013; Ord. 33-2021, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 1026.06 REMOVAL OF TREES BY VILLAGE.
   Trees or shrubs planted upon a public way, curb strip, street, alley,
Municipal Park or other public right-of-way may be removed by the Village or
its agents, as necessary, with the approval of the Board to protect the public
health, safety, welfare and aesthetics of Woodlawn. The Board may cause the
removal of any such tree or shrub by using municipal employees or private
contractors under contract with the Village. Other entities such as public
utilities shall, prior to trimming or removing any trees, obtain permission to
do so from the Board, provided however, that in the event of a public emergency
declared by the Mayor or the Mayor's designee, such approval shall not be
necessary. Any entity properly authorized to work in the public right-of-way
shall be responsible for ensuring that trees shall be properly wrapped and
placed on a feeding and watering schedule for a responsible period before,
during and after grading, construction, or any other type of work that could
disturb the root systems or other parts of trees on public property.
(Ord. 21-2013, passed 12-18-2013; Ord. 33-2021, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 1026.07 PLANTING OR REMOVAL: PERMIT REQUIRED; CONDITIONS FOR DENIAL.
   (a)   No person shall plant or remove any tree or shrub upon a public way,
curb strip, street, alley, Municipal Park or other public right-of-way without
first obtaining a permit therefore, in writing, specifying the size, type,
species and location of the tree or shrub to be so planted or removed.
   (b)   The Board may deny a permit to any person who proposes to plant any
tree or shrub upon a public way, curb strip, street, alley, Municipal Park or
other public right-of-way of a size, type or species found by the Board to be
undesirable for the location proposed, or may deny a permit to any person who
proposes to plant any tree or shrub upon a public way, curb strip, street,
alley, Municipal Park or other public right-of-way at a location found by the
Board to be of a size or type unsuitable for the planting of trees or shrubs.
(Ord. 21-2013, passed 12-18-2013; Ord. 33-2021, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 1026.08 MASTER STREET TREE PLAN.
   (a)   The Board may formulate a Master Street Tree Plan. The Master Street
Tree Plan shall specify the species of tree to be planted on each of the
streets or other public sites of Woodlawn. From and after the effective date of
the Master Street Tree Plan, or amendments thereof, all planting shall conform
thereto.
   (b)   The Board shall consider all existing and future utility and
environmental factors when recommending a specific species for each of the
streets and other public sites of Woodlawn.
   (c)   The Board may amend or add to the Master Street Tree Plan at any time
that circumstances make it advisable.
(Ord. 21-2013, passed 12-18-2013; Ord. 33-2021, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 1026.09 STREET TREE PLANS FOR NEW DEVELOPMENTS.
   Any new street developed by a private developer and dedicated to Woodlawn
shall have a street tree plan approved by the Board. Alternatively, the
developer may permit the Board to develop the street tree plan.
(Ord. 21-2013, passed 12-18-2013; Ord. 33-2021, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 1026.10 TREES AND SHRUBS NEAR UTILITY LINES.
   A list of approved trees and ornamental shrubs which may be planted near
overhead utility lines along a street right-of-way shall be established by the
Board.
(Ord. 21-2013, passed 12-18-2013; Ord. 33-2021, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 1026.11 DISTANCE OF TREES FROM STREET CORNERS AND FIRE HYDRANTS.
   No street tree shall be planted closer than 15 feet from any street corner,
measured from the point of the nearest intersecting curb or curb line. No
street tree shall be planted closer than ten feet from any fire hydrant.
(Ord. 21-2013, passed 12-18-2013; Ord. 33-2021, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 1026.12 PRUNING; OBSTRUCTIONS.
   The owner of any tree or shrub overhanging any street or right-of-way in
Woodlawn shall prune the branches thereof so that such branches shall not
obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear
space of eight feet above the surface of the sidewalk and 14 feet over the
paved portion of the streets. Such owner shall remove all dead, diseased or
dangerous trees or shrubs, broken or decayed limbs, which constitute a menace
to the safety of the public. The Village may prune any tree or shrub on private
property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street
from a street light or with the visibility of any traffic control device or
sign.
(Ord. 21-2013, passed 12-18-2013; Ord. 33-2021, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 1026.13 REMOVAL OF DANGEROUS OR DISEASED TREES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (a)   Trees on private property that are dead, diseased or otherwise in a
bad condition and constitute a hazard to life and property, or that harbor
insects or diseases which constitute a potential threat to other trees in the
Village or in the region, shall be removed by the owner of the property upon
written notice by the Village code enforcement officer. Failure to comply with
such notice shall cause such trees to be removed by the Village and the costs
collected from the property owner. In the event said person(s) do not reimburse
the Village within 30 days of property notification via certified mail, such
amount will be certified to the County Auditor to be assessed against the
property owner and collected in the same manner as other taxes.
   (b)   Appeals to the Board may be taken by any person aggrieved by any
decision of the code enforcement officer within 30 days after the issuance of a
notice issued under § 1026.13(a), provided that the appeal is based on one of
the following grounds:
      (1)   The orders issued by the code enforcement officer is erroneous; or
      (2)   The strict enforcement of the order imposes an undue hardship on
the complainant, and a modified order is feasible, whereby the hardship can be
relieved without defeating the purpose and intent of this chapter.
(Ord. 21-2013, passed 12-18-2013; Ord. 33-2021, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 1026.14 REMOVAL OF STUMPS.
   All stumps of public street trees shall be removed below the surface of the
ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the
ground.
(Ord. 21-2013, passed 12-18-2013; Ord. 33-2021, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 1026.15 MALICIOUS DESTRUCTION OR INJURY.
   No person shall maliciously destroy, injure or cut down a shade tree or
ornamental shrubbery on public property.
(Ord. 21-2013, passed 12-18-2013; Ord. 33-2021, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 1026.16 TOPPING OF PUBLIC TREES.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any persons, firm or
Village department to top any street tree, park tree or other tree on public
property. TOPPING is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs
larger than three inches in diameter within a tree's crown to such a degree so
as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the trees.
   (b)   The Board may, where trees on public property have been severely
damaged by storms, or other causes, or certain trees are located under utility
wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical,
permit the topping of trees.
(Ord. 21-2013, passed 12-18-2013; Ord. 33-2021, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 1026.17 REVIEWING DEVELOPMENTS SUBJECT TO DISCRETIONARY REVIEW BY THE
VILLAGE.
   (a)   (1)   Except on residential properties of 6,000 square feet or less,
where the Village has discretionary development review of a proposed
development, either because of planned unit development, conditional use or
variance zoning review, the use of development contracts, or otherwise, the
Village shall require a property owner to provide a tree plan prior to approval
by the Village. That plan shall contain a complete survey plat of all trees
located on the development site with calipers in excess of two inches,
identifying each by species, size and location. Stands of trees may be
identified by designating a stand of trees on the survey plat and approximating
the number of each species and size of trees within the stand. The survey shall
also identify the trees to be removed and the trees to be retained as a part of
the development. Where trees are to be removed as a result of the development,
the developer shall provide a plan identifying what replacement of trees is to
take place on the site including the location, species and size of the
replacement trees. At a minimum, for every one tree removed, two shall be
planted of comparable size and value of the one removed, or in the case of
extraordinary circumstances, as otherwise agreed to by the Tree Board.
      (2)   The tree plan and supporting data shall be reviewed by the
Municipal Manager who may consult with the Board and who shall consider any
guidelines that have been established by the Board. The Municipal Manager may
approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the tree plan and so advise the
Building Inspector, Zoning Inspector, Planning Commission, Board of Zoning
Appeals or Village Council, whichever is appropriate, depending upon the nature
of the zoning or development review underway. Tree approval by the Municipal
Manager does not authorize any building or development activity or constitute
zoning approval and the developer must still comply with any requirements for
and obtain a building permit or zoning approval.
   (b)   No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued pursuant to the Woodlawn
Code of Ordinances, unless inspection of the site by the Village Code
Enforcement Officer or other officer who may be from time to time empowered to
issue certificates of occupancy has determined compliance with the requirements
of the tree approval.
   (c)   Under appropriate circumstances, the Village may require the posting
of surety to ensure compliance with the conditions of a tree approval. If the
required tree approval conditions have not been met within the life of the
surety and provided the Municipal Manager or his or her designee have not
granted a written extension, the Village shall use the surety to ensure that
those conditions are met.
   (d)   All tree plan approvals shall be conditioned upon the maintenance of
the trees and require replacement where such trees fail to survive.
Replacements shall be required within 30 days of notice by the Municipal
Manager, except that during the winter season, at the request of the property
owner, the Municipal Manager may grant a longer period of time for the
replacement of trees.
(Ord. 21-2013, passed 12-18-2013; Ord. 33-2021, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 1026.18 APPEALS OF DECISIONS OF THE MUNICIPAL MANAGER.
   Decisions of the Municipal Manager relating to tree plans and compliance
with tree plans may be appealed to the Board.
   (a)   Whenever the Municipal Manager determines that there is a violation of
a tree plan or the maintenance of trees pursuant to such tree plans, the
Municipal Manager shall give notice of such violation to the person responsible
therefor and order compliance. Such notice and order shall:
      (1)   Be put in writing on an appropriate form;
      (2)   Include a list of violations, refer to the section of the Codified
Ordinances that has been violated and order remedial action which, if taken,
will affect compliance with the Code;
      (3)   Specify a reasonable time for performance and compliance;
      (4)   Advise the owner, operator or occupant of the right to appeal the
order; and
      (5)   Be served upon the owner or occupant or his or her agent, in
person, provide that such notice and order shall be deemed to be properly
served upon such owner, occupant or agent if a copy thereof is sent by
certified mail to his or her last known address and a copy is posted in a
conspicuous place in or on the property affected.
   (b)   Any person affected by any notice of violation and order to comply or
revocation or denial of a tree plan may request and be granted a hearing on the
matter before the Board provided that such person files in the Office of the
Municipal Manager, a written petition requesting such hearing and setting forth
the name, address and phone number of the petitioner and a brief statement of
the grounds for such appeal or for the mitigation of any item appearing on any
order issued by the Municipal Manager relating to tree plans. The petition
shall be filed within ten days after the date of the notice of order or the
denial of approval of a tree plan. Upon receipt of such a petition, the Board
shall set a time and place for a hearing before the Board and shall give the
petition written notice thereof. A hearing shall commence within a reasonable
time, not to exceed 15 days after a petition has been filed. At such a hearing,
the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show cause why
any item appearing on such notice and order should be modified or withdrawn.
The failure of the petitioner or his or her representative to appear and state
his or her case at such hearing shall have the same effect if no petition were
filed.
   (c)   After a hearing, the Board shall sustain, modify or withdraw any item
appearing on the notice or order, by a majority vote, depending upon its
findings as to whether or not the ordinances of the Village relating to trees
have been complied with. The petitioner and the Municipal Manager shall be
notified in writing of such findings.
   (d)   The proceedings at such hearing including the findings and decisions
of the Board and reasons therefor, shall be summarized and reduced to writing
and entered as a matter of public record in the records of the Village and
maintained in the office of the Municipal Manager. Such records shall include a
copy of every notice and order issued in connection with the matter.
(Ord. 21-2013, passed 12-18-2013; Ord. 33-2021, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 1026.19 PENALTY.
   Violations of this chapter shall constitute a fourth degree misdemeanor,
punishable by a fine up to $250 or a sentence of up to 30 days incarceration.
Nothing therein shall prevent the Village from taking such other lawful actions
as may be necessary to prevent or remedy any violations. Individuals found
guilty of destroying trees in violation of this chapter shall also be required
to pay for the damage or replacement of the trees. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed each day during which a violation or noncompliance occurs or
continues.
(Ord. 21-2013, passed 12-18-2013; Ord. 33-2021, passed 10-26-2021)
CHAPTER 1028: ASSESSMENTS
1028.01   Apportionment of assessments.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Assessments generally - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 727
   Sidewalk assessments - see Ohio R.C. 729.01 et seq.
   Sewer assessments - see Ohio R.C. 729.11 et seq.
   Streets - see S.U. & P.S.
Ch. 1020
   Sidewalks - see S.U. & P.S.
Ch. 1022
   Sewers - see S.U. & P.S.
Ch. 1040
   Water - see S.U. & P.S.
Ch. 1042
§ 1028.01 APPORTIONMENT OF ASSESSMENTS.
   The County Auditor is hereby authorized, on behalf of the Village, to
apportion various assessments against real estate in the Village, when such
apportionment is necessary due to cut-ups, transfers or transactions involving
such real estate. Such apportionment shall be made by the Auditor on the same
basis as the original assessment was made.
(Res. 5, passed 1-14-1964)
CHAPTER 1030: EXCAVATIONS
1030.01   Permit required.
1030.02   Permit application and issuance; surety.
1030.03   Opening and restoration of pavement.
1030.04   Permit fee; deposit.
1030.05   Barricades.
1030.06   Warning lights.
1030.07   Removal of deposits of earth material.
1030.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Openings by the municipality - see Ohio R.C. 723.02
   Surface treatment - see Ohio R.C. 723.23, 723.31
   Excavation liability- see Ohio R.C. 723.49 et seq.
   Digging, excavating and piling earth on streets - see Ohio R.C. 5589.10
   Driving on streets closed for repair - see TRAF.
432.24
   Barricades and warning lights - see GEN. OFF.
660.09
   Excavation permits - see B. & H.
1444.01, 1460.03
   Excavations in private property - see B. & H.
Ch. 1460
   Excavations in subdivisions - see Pt. 12,
Title 4, Appx. C
§ 1030.01 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person, other than the Service Director, the Building Commissioner/
Inspector or their authorized agents, shall make an opening in a street, alley,
sidewalk or other public way in the Village without first obtaining a permit
therefor.
§ 1030.02 PERMIT APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE; SURETY.
   Each permit required under this chapter shall be confined to a single
project and shall be issued by the Village or its representative. An
application for such a permit shall be made on the prescribed form. The permit
shall be issued only after a cash security deposit or surety bond, in the
amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), has been posted with the Village,
the return of which is conditioned upon the prompt and satisfactory refilling
of excavations and the restoration of all surfaces disturbed.
§ 1030.03 OPENING AND RESTORATION OF PAVEMENT.
   (a)   The opening and restoration of pavement or any other surface shall be
performed to the satisfaction of the Service Director or his or her authorized
agent.
   (b)   Upon the failure or refusal of the permittee to satisfactorily fill
the excavation, restore the surface and remove all excess materials within the
time specified in the permit required by §
1030.01, or, where not specified therein, within a reasonable time after
commencement of the work, the Village may proceed without notice to make such
fill and restoration and the deposit referred to in §
1030.02 shall be deemed forfeited. Thereupon, such deposit shall be paid into
the General Fund of the Village. If the amount of such services performed by
the Village exceeds the amount of such deposit, the Service Director or his or
her authorized agent shall proceed to collect the remainder due from such
permittee. The permittee shall be held responsible for the condition of the
restoration for one year from the date of completion.
§ 1030.04 PERMIT FEE; DEPOSIT.
   (a)   The fee for the issuance of the permit required by §
1030.01 is twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and is not refundable.
   (b)   The permit fee and the security deposit or surety bond may be waived
at the discretion of the Service Director or his or her agent.
§ 1030.05 BARRICADES.
   Any person who is engaged in or employing others to engage in the excavating
or opening of any street, sidewalk, alley or other public way shall have such
excavation or opening fully barricaded at all times to prevent injury to
persons or animals.
§ 1030.06 WARNING LIGHTS.
   Any person who is engaged in or employing others to engage in excavating or
otherwise obstructing any street, sidewalk, alley or other public way, or a
portion thereof, shall, for use at all times during the night, install and
maintain at least two illuminated red or amber lamps which shall be securely
and conspicuously posted on, at or near each end of such excavation or
obstruction. If the space involved exceeds fifty feet in extent, then at least
one additional lamp shall be installed for each additional fifty feet or
portion thereof excavated or obstructed.
§ 1030.07 REMOVAL OF DEPOSITS OF EARTH MATERIAL.
   No person shall fail to remove any earth material which has been deposited
or dropped upon a public street, right-of-way, easement or other public
property in connection with the making of any excavation or the digging,
grading or removal of any earth material. To avoid a violation of this section,
such removal shall be accomplished within the normal construction working hours
of the same day such earth material was so deposited or dropped, or such
removal shall be accomplished immediately if, in the opinion of the Service
Director or his or her authorized agent, such earth material constitutes a
traffic hazard. This section applies only to the owner of the property upon
which such work is being performed, to the person acting as the general
contractor having supervision over such work and to any person actually
performing such work.
§ 1030.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or
continues.
TITLE FOUR: UTILITIES
CHAPTER 1040: SEWERS
Editor’s note:
   Public sewage disposal and sewerage regulation in the Village are under the
jurisdiction of the Metropolitan Sewer District of Greater Cincinnati, Hamilton
County, Ohio. Copies of the Rules and Regulations of the Metropolitan Sewer
District may be obtained, at cost, from the Board of County Commissioners.
   Private sewage disposal systems in the Village are regulated by the County
Board of Health. Copies of County Board regulations may be obtained, at cost,
from the Board.
   There are no sections in Chapter 1040. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross references and any future legislation.
   Ordinance 33-2010, authorizing and directing the Mayor to terminate the
Village's membership in the Hamilton County Storm Water District, was passed
December 28, 2010
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Compulsory sewer connections - see Ohio R.C. 729.06
   Sewerage rates - see Ohio R.C. 729.49, 729.52
   Management and control of sewerage system - see Ohio R.C. 729.50
   Regulations to control house sewers and connections - see Ohio R.C. 729.51
   Untreated sewage - see Ohio R.C. 3701.59
   Interference with sewage flow - see Ohio R.C. 4933.24
   Tampering with and theft of utilities - see GEN. OFF.
642.26
   Storm water in sanitary sewers - see GEN. OFF.
660.14
   Sewers in subdivisions - see P. & Z.
1246.03(b)(2),
1250.04(b)
   Utility easements in subdivisions - see P. & Z.
1248.06(g)
   Protection and relocation of sewers during excavations - see B. & H. 1460.11
CHAPTER 1042: WATER
Editor’s note:
   Water is provided to the Village and its inhabitants by the Cincinnati Water
Works.
   There are no sections in Chapter 1042. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross references and any future legislation.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Power to provide and regulate water system - see Ohio R.C. 715.08, 717.01,
743.01
   Water pollution - see Ohio R.C. 715.08, 743.25; GEN. OFF.
660.04
   Compulsory water connections - see Ohio R.C. 729.06, 743.23
   Management and control of waterworks - see Ohio R.C. 735.28 et seq., 743.26
et seq.
   Weekly deposit of waterworks money collected - see Ohio R.C. 743.06
   Tampering with water hydrants, pipes or meters; unauthorized connections -
see Ohio R.C. 4933.22
   Tampering with and theft of utilities - see GEN. OFF.
642.26
   Watercourses in subdivisions - see P. & Z.
1246.02(e)(5)
   Utility easements in subdivisions - see P. & Z.
1248.06(g)
   Water in subdivisions - see P. & Z.
1250.04(d); Pt. 12,
Title 4, Appx. A
CHAPTER 1044: GAS
Editor’s note: 
   The Village contracts with the Cincinnati Gas and Electric Company for
natural gas service. Copies of the latest relevant legislation may be obtained,
at cost, from the Clerk of Council.
   There are no sections in Chapter 1044. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross references and any future legislation. 
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Sale of natural gas to Village - see Ohio R.C. 743.35
   Gas or electric companies may manufacture and supply both electricity and
gas - see Ohio R.C. 4933.02
   Gas company may extend mains beyond Village - see Ohio R.C. 4933.05
   Gas meters - see Ohio R.C. 4933.08 et seq. 
   Tampering with and theft of utilities - see GEN. OFF.
642.26 
   Utility easements in subdivisions - see P. & Z.
1248.06(g)
CHAPTER 1046: ELECTRICITY
Editor’s note: 
   The Village contracts with the Cincinnati Gas and Electric Company for
electricity. Copies of the latest relevant legislation may be obtained, at
cost, from the Clerk of Council.
   There are no sections in Chapter 1046. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross references and any future legislation.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Legislative authority may erect or purchase electric works - see Ohio R.C.
743.27
   Gas or electric companies may manufacture and supply both electricity and
gas - see Ohio R.C. 4933.02
   Contracts with municipal corporation for light - see Ohio R.C. 4933.04
   Powers of electric light and power companies - see Ohio R.C. 4933.13
   Appropriation of property by electric companies - see Ohio R.C. 4933.15
   Tampering with and theft of utilities - see GEN. OFF.
642.26
   Utility easements in subdivisions - see P. & Z.
1248.06(g)
   National Electrical Code - see B. & H.
Ch. 1424
   Electric fences - see B. & H.
1462.02
CHAPTER 1048: SMALL CELL FACILITIES AND WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURES
Section
1048.01   Purpose and intent.
1048.02   Definitions.
1048.03   Applicability.
1048.04   Procedures.
1048.05   Design standards.
1048.06   Fees.
1048.99   Penalties.
§ 1048.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (a)   The purpose of this chapter is to establish general procedures and
standards for the siting, construction, placement, collocation, modification,
operation, and removal of small cell facilities and/or wireless support
structures within the Village of Woodlawn municipal boundaries.
   (b)   The goals of this chapter are to:
      (1)   Provide standards for the siting, construction, placement,
collocation, modification, operation, and removal of small cell facilities and
wireless support structures within the Village.
      (2)   Establish criteria for making application to promote fair and
efficient processing of applications.
      (3)   Ensure that small cell facilities and wireless support structures
conform to all applicable health and safety regulations.
      (4)   Preserve the character of the Village's neighborhoods and historic
districts by limiting the overall number of facilities within the Village's
right-of-way.
      (5)   Protect public improvements from being disrupted after completion,
i.e. streetscaping, sidewalks and ramps and other public improvement projects.
      (6)   Reduce visual clutter and preserve and enhance the aesthetic
environment of the Village.
      (7)   Ensure the safety of motorists, pedestrians, and other users of the
Village's rights-of-way by limiting the placement and overall number of
facilities within close proximity to roadways, sidewalks, or other such ways of
travel.
      (8)   Establish a fair and reasonable method to recover costs incurred in
administering this chapter.
(Ord. 16-2018, passed 7-31-2018)
§ 1048.02 DEFINITIONS.
   Within this chapter, words with specific defined meanings are as follows:
   (a)   ABANDONED. Any small cell facilities or wireless support structures
that are unused for a period of 365 days without the operator otherwise
notifying the Village and receiving the Village's approval.
   (b)   AGENT. A person that provides the Village written authorization to
work on behalf of a public utility.
   (c)   ANTENNA. Communications equipment that transmits or receives radio
frequency signals in the provision of wireless service.
   (d)   APPLICANT. Any person that submits an application to the Village to
site, construct, place, collocate, modify, operate, and/or remove a small cell
facility or wireless support structure in the Village.
   (e)   COLLOCATION, COLLOCATE. To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate,
or replace wireless facilities on a wireless support structure or utility pole.
   (f)   CABLE OPERATOR, CABLE SERVICE, FRANCHISE. These words have the same
meanings as in the "Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984," 98 Stat. 2779, 47
U.S.C.A. 522.
   (g)   DECORATIVE POLE. A pole, arch, or structure other than a street light
pole placed in the right-of-way specifically designed and placed for aesthetic
purposes and on which no appurtenances or attachments have been placed except
for any of the following:
      (1)   Electric lighting;
      (2)   Specially designed informational or directional signage;
      (3)   Temporary holiday or special event attachments;
      (4)   Banners on poles authorized by the Village.
   (h)   ENCLOSURE. A cabinet for equipment intended to conceal its contents,
prevent electrical shock to users, and protect the contents from the
environment.
   (i)   EQUIPMENT. Electrical and/or mechanical devices or components.
   (j)   HISTORIC DISTRICT. A building, property, or site, or group of
buildings, properties, or sites that are either of the following:
      (1)   Listed in the National Register of Historic Places or formally
determined eligible for listing by the keeper of the National Register, the
individual who has been delegated the authority by the federal agency to list
properties and determine their eligibility for the National Register, in
accordance with section VI.D.1.a.i-v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement
codified at 47 C.F.R. part 1, Appendix C; or
      (2)   A registered historic district as defined in R.C. § 149.311.
   (k)   OHIO MANUAL OF UNIFORM TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES, OMUTCD. The uniform
system of traffic control devices promulgated by the Department of
Transportation pursuant to R.C. § 4511.09.
   (l)   OCCUPY, USE. With respect to a right-of-way, to place a tangible thing
in a right-of-way for any purpose, including, but not limited to, constructing,
repairing, positioning, maintaining, or operating lines, poles, pipes,
conduits, ducts, equipment, or other structures, appurtenances, or facilities
necessary for the delivery of public utility services or any services provided
by a cable operator.
   (m)   PERMITTEE. A person issued a permit.
   (n)   PERSON. Any natural person, corporation, or partnership and also
includes any governmental entity.
   (o)   PUBLIC UTILITY. A wireless service provider as defined in division (A)
(20) of R.C. § 4927.01 or any company described in R.C. § 4905.03 except in
divisions (B) and (I) of that section, which company also is a public utility
as defined in R.C. § 4905.02; and includes any electric supplier as defined in
R.C. § 4933.81.
   (p)   PUBLIC WAY FEE. A fee levied to recover the costs incurred by the
Village and
associated with the occupancy or use of a right- of-way.
   (q)   RIGHT-OF-WAY, PUBLIC WAY. The surface of, and the space within,
through, on, across, above, or below, any public street, public road, public
highway, public freeway, public lane, public path, public alley, public court,
public sidewalk, public boulevard, public parkway, public drive, public
easement, and any other land dedicated or otherwise designated for a compatible
public use, which, on or after July 2, 2002, is owned or controlled by a
municipal corporation. RIGHT-OF-WAY excludes a private easement.
   (r)   SMALL CELL FACILITY. A wireless facility that meets both of the
following requirements:
      (1)   Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of not more than six
cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements,
the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an enclosure of
not more than six cubic feet in volume.
      (2)   All other wireless equipment associated with the facility is
cumulatively not more than 28 cubic feet in volume. The calculation of
equipment volume shall not include electric meters, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation boxes, grounding equipment, power transfer
switches, cut-off switches, and vertical cable runs for the connection of power
and other services.
   (s)   SMALL CELL FACILITY OPERATOR, OPERATOR. A wireless service provider,
or its designated agent, or cable operator, or its designated agent, that
operates a small cell facility and provides wireless service as defined in
division (T) of R.C. § 4939.01. For the purpose of this chapter, OPERATOR
includes a wireless service provider or cable operator that provides
information services as defined in the "Telecommunications Act of 1996," 110
Stat. 59, 47 U.S.C. 153(20), and services that are fixed in nature or use
unlicensed spectrum.
   (t)   SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE. Substantial change means the same as defined by
the FCC in 47 C.F.R. § 1.40001 (b)(7), as may be amended, and as applicable to
facilities in the public right-of-way, which defines that term as a collocation
or modification that:
      (1)   Increases the overall height more than ten percent or ten feet
(whichever is greater);
      (2)   Increases the width more than six feet from the edge of the
wireless support structure;
      (3)   Involves the placement of any new enclosures on the ground when
there are no existing ground-mounted enclosures;
      (4)   Involves the placement of any new ground-mounted enclosures that
are ten percent larger in height or volume than any existing ground-mounted
enclosures;
      (5)   Involves excavation or deployment of equipment outside the area in
proximity to the installation and other wireless communications equipment
already deployed on the ground;
      (6)   Would defeat the existing concealment elements of the wireless
support structure as determined by the Municipal Manager; or
      (7)   Violates a prior condition of approval, provided however that the
collocation need not comply with any prior condition of approval related to
height, width, enclosures or excavation that is inconsistent with the
thresholds for a substantial change.
Note: For clarity, the definition in this chapter includes only the definition
of a substantial change as it applies to installations in the public right-of-
way. The failure to meet any one or more of the applicable thresholds means
that a substantial change would occur. The thresholds for height increases are
cumulative limits. For sites with horizontally separated deployments, the
cumulative limit is measured from the originally-permitted wireless support
structure without regard to any increases in size due to wireless facilities
not included in the original design. For sites with vertically separated
deployments, the cumulative limit is measured from the permitted site
dimensions as they existed on February 22, 2012.
   (u)   UTILITY EASEMENT. An easement dedicated for the use of a Public
Utilities Council of Ohio regulated utility.
   (v)   UTILITY POLE. A structure that is designed for, or used for the
purpose of, carrying lines, cables, or wires for electric distribution or
telecommunications service. The term excludes street signs and decorative
poles.
   (w)   WIRELESS FACILITY. Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless
communications between user equipment and a communications network, including
all of the following:
      (1)   Equipment associated with wireless communications;
      (2)   Radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular
and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of
technological configuration.
      (3)   The term includes small cell facilities.
      (4)   The term does not include any of the following:
         A.   The structure or improvements on, under, or within which the
equipment is collocated;
         B.   Coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is between wireless support
structures or utility poles or that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or
directly associated with a particular antenna.
   (x)   WIRELESS SERVICE. Any services using licensed or unlicensed wireless
spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided to the public using
wireless facilities.
   (y)   WIRELESS SERVICE PROVIDER. A person who provides wireless service as
defined in division (A)(20) of R.C. § 4927.01.
   (z)   WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE. A pole, such as a monopole, either guyed
or self-supporting, street light pole, traffic signal pole, a 15 foot or taller
sign pole, or utility pole capable of supporting wireless small cell
facilities. As used in R.C. § 4939.031 and this chapter, WIRELESS SUPPORT
STRUCTURE excludes all of the following:
      (1)   A utility pole or other facility owned or operated by a municipal
electric utility;
      (2)   A utility pole or other facility used to supply traction power to
public transit systems, including railways, trams, streetcars, and trolley-
buses.
   (aa)   WORK PERMIT, PERMIT. A permit issued by the Village that must be
obtained in order to perform any work in, on, above, within, over, below,
under, or through any part of the right-of-way, including, but not limited to,
the act or process of digging, boring, tunneling, trenching, excavating,
obstructing, or installing, as well as the act of opening and cutting into the
surface of any paved or improved surface that is part of the right-of- way.
Also, a permit issued by the Village that must be obtained in order to occupy
the Village's right-of-way.
(Ord. 16-2018, passed 7-31-2018)
§ 1048.03 APPLICABILITY.
   No small cell facility operator may collocate or remove a small cell
facility or construct, maintain, modify, operate, replace, or remove wireless
support structures in, along, across, upon, and/or under the right-of-way
except in conformance with all provisions of this chapter and any other
applicable requirements of the Village.
(Ord. 16-2018, passed 7-31-2018)
§ 1048.04 PROCEDURES.
   (a)   Permit required. Unless otherwise exempted, it shall be unlawful for
any person to collocate or remove a small cell facility or construct, maintain,
modify, operate, replace, or remove wireless support structures in, along,
across, upon, and/or under the right- of-way unless a permit has been issued by
the Municipal Manager or his/her designee.
   (b)   Application requirements. This section specifies the necessary
requirements for a complete permit application. A complete application shall
consist of the following:
      (1)   Application fee. The applicant must provide the applicable permit
application fee in the amount currently required by the Village and listed in
the Fee Schedule set forth in §
1048.07.
      (2)   RF compliance affidavit. Applicants must submit a sworn affidavit
prepared and signed by an RF engineer with knowledge about the proposed project
that affirms the proposed project will be compliant with all applicable
governmental regulations in connection with human exposure to radiofrequency
emissions. The affidavit must include:
         A.   All frequencies on which the equipment will operate;
         B.   How many channels will be used on each frequency;
         C.   The effective radiated power ("ERP");
         D.   Output level in measured watts; and
         E.   The height above ground for the lowest point on the lowest
transmitter.
         The required disclosures above must be included for all transmitters
on the support structure, which includes without limitation existing collocated
antennas and antennas used for wireless backhaul (such as microwave dish
antenna or U/E relay).
      (3)   Regulatory authorization. To the extent that the applicant claims
any regulatory authorization or other right to use the public right-of-way, the
applicant must provide a true and correct copy of the certificate, license,
notice to proceed or other regulatory authorization that supports the
applicant's claim.
      (4)   Owner's authorization. Applicants must submit evidence sufficient
to show that either:
         A.   The applicant owns the proposed support structure; or
         B.   The applicant has obtained the owner's authorization to file the
application.
      (5)   Site plans and structural calculations. The applicant must submit
fully dimensioned site plans, elevation drawings and structural calculations
prepared, sealed, stamped and signed by a professional engineer licensed and
registered by the State of Ohio. Drawings must depict any existing wireless
facilities with all existing wireless communications equipment and other
improvements, the proposed facility with all proposed wireless communications
equipment and other improvements and the legal boundaries of the leased or
owned area surrounding the proposed facility and any associated access or
utility easements.
      (6)   Equipment and enclosure specifications. The applicant shall provide
dimensioned elevations, cut sheets, material samples or other construction
documents necessary to evaluate for compliance with this chapter.
   (c)   Application type.
      (1)   Each application to collocate or remove a small cell facility or
construct, maintain, modify, operate, replace, or remove wireless support
structures in, along, across, upon, and/or under the right-of-way shall be
classified as one of three types. The three types of applications are:
         A.   Small cell minor. An application that involves removal or
replacement of small cell facilities and any associated equipment on an
existing wireless support structure; and such removal or replacement does not
constitute a substantial change.
         B.   Small cell substantial. An application that:
            1.   Involves the installation of a new small cell facility on a
wireless support structure; or
            2.   Involves the removal or replacement of a small cell facility
on an existing wireless support structure and such removal or replacement
constitutes a substantial change.
         C.   Wireless support structure. An application for a proposal to
construct, modify or replace a wireless support structure in the right-of-way.
      (2)   Applications seeking to collocate a small cell facility to a
wireless support structure owned by the Village and located within the Village
right-of-way shall also be required to obtain an attachment certificate and
shall be subject to an attachment fee in an amount set forth in the Fee
Schedule.
   (d)   Decisions.
      (1)   The Municipal Manager shall review the application for conformance
with the standards of this chapter and shall either:
         A.   Approve, approve with conditions, or deny a small cell minor
application; or
         B.   Grant or deny consent for small cell substantial and wireless
structure applications.
      (2)   If a request is denied, the reasons for denial shall be provided in
writing to the applicant.
      (3)   The Village reserves the right to deny an application if any one of
the following conditions exist:
         A.   The application does not comply with a provision of this chapter
or other ordinance of the Village;
         B.   The applicant is not authorized to conduct business in the State
of Ohio;
         C.   The applicant is not current in its obligation to pay to the
Village fees or taxes imposed by this chapter;
         D.   The design or location is deemed unsafe or non-compliant in
regards to transportation and engineering standards for construction within the
right-of- way;
         E.   The design is counter to the health, safety, and welfare of the
Village;
         F.   The design or location is in conflict with current or proposed
accessibility standards;
         G.   The design does not meet standards related to electrical,
structural, safety or construction best practices;
         H.   The proposed design is in conflict with existing infrastructure,
facilities, and/or utilities.
      (4)   Except as allowed in division (d)(5) of this section, applications
shall be reviewed and a decision rendered within the following time periods:
         A.   Small cell minor. Small cell minor applications shall be rendered
within 60 days of the date of filing.
         B.   Small cell substantial. Small cell substantial applications shall
be rendered within 90 days of the date of filing.
         C.   Wireless support structure. Wireless support structure
applications shall be rendered within 120 days of the date of filing.
      (5)   The time period required in division (c) of this section may be
tolled only:
         A.   By mutual agreement between the applicant and the Village;
         B.   If the application is determined to be incomplete; or
         C.   The number of applications exceeds the Village's capacity to
process them in a timely manner. If such number of applications exceeds
capacity, then the following tolling time periods may be instituted:
            1.   The time period may initially be tolled for up to 15 days when
the number of applications received within any consecutive 30-day period
exceeds 15 applications;
            2.   For every additional 15 applications that the Village receives
above the 15 applications stated in division (d)(5)A. of this section the time
period may be tolled an additional 15 days; and
            3.   For every additional 30 applications that the Village receives
above the 15 applications stated in division (d)(5)A. of this section the time
period may be tolled an additional 15 days.
            4.   However, in no instance shall the time tolled exceed 90
consecutive days.
      (6)   To toll the time period for incompleteness, the Village shall
provide the applicant notice within 30 days of the date of filing. Such notice
shall include a listing of the missing documents and/or information. The time
period resumes once the applicant submits a response. If an application is
still incomplete, the Village shall notify the applicant within ten days of the
response.
      (7)   In the case of a consolidated application, each small cell facility
or wireless support structure proposed to be constructed, modified, collocated,
or replaced shall constitute a separate application.
      (8)   If multiple applications are received by the Village to install two
or more wireless support structures that would violate the spacing requirements
of §
1048.05(b)(2)B., Design and Siting Requirements, or to collocate two or more
small cell facilities on the same wireless support structure, the Village shall
process and render a decision in the order they are received.
      (9)   In the event that an application is received by the Village to
install a wireless support structure or small cell facility in a location in
common with another application for a facility in the right-of-way, preference
shall be granted in the following order of service provided:
         A.   Municipal infrastructure
         B.   Water
         C.   Electricity
         D.   Gas
         E.   Landline telephone
         F.   Wireless service
   (e)   Amendments. Amendments to an application in process which are not part
of a response to a notice of incompleteness or a correction notice shall be
treated as a new application.
   (f)   Issuance of permit and certificates.
      (1)   When an application is approved or granted consent, a permit shall
be issued to the applicant authorizing the following:
         A.   Small cell work permit. A permit to perform the approved removal,
replacement, or maintenance work, subject to any conditions;
         B.   Small cell collocation permit. A permit to perform the approved
removal, replacement, or installation, and grant occupancy within the Village
right-of- way, subject to any conditions;
         C.   Wireless support structure permit. A permit to construct, modify
or replace a wireless support structure in the right-of-way.
      (2)   An applicant seeking collocation of a small cell facility to a
wireless support structure owned by the Village and located within the Village
right-of-way shall be issued an attachment certificate authorizing such
attachment, subject to any conditions.
   (g)   Scope of approval.
      (1)   No permit or certificate authorized by this chapter shall be
transferrable.
      (2)   No permit or certificate authorized by this chapter shall convey
title, equitable or legal, in the right-of-way.
   (h)   Duration of approval.
      (1)   The work authorized by the permit issued must be completed within
180 days from the date of issuance, unless otherwise conditioned as part of the
approval.
      (2)   An attachment certificate is valid for ten years from the date of
issuance and may be renewed by the applicant in successive five year terms. Any
request for renewal is subject to approval by the Municipal Manager and may be
denied for cause.
      (3)   In the event that any court of competent jurisdiction invalidates
any portion of Federal law which mandates approval of any permit, such permit
shall automatically expire one year from the date of the judicial order.
      (4)   In the event that any court of competent jurisdiction invalidates
any portion of State law which mandates approval of any permit shall
automatically expire 60 days from the date of the judicial order and any
structure shall be removed in accordance with §
1048.05(a)(13) General Standards unless otherwise authorized.
   (i)   Revocation. The following are grounds for revocation or denial of
approval:
      (1)   The intentional provision of misleading information by the
applicant (the provision of information is considered "intentional" where the
applicant was aware of the inaccuracies or could have discovered the
inaccuracies with reasonable diligence);
      (2)   The failure to comply with any condition of approval, order, or
other applicable law, rule, or regulation;
      (3)   The site, structure or operation is otherwise not in compliance
with any other provision(s) of applicable law;
      (4)   The subject site or use is otherwise not in compliance due to
incomplete work or projects, or is not in compliance due to unperformed work as
part of an open permit.
   (j)   Appeals.
      (1)   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall act as the Board of Appeals for
items concerning this chapter and shall hear and decide upon appeals where it
is alleged there is an error in any written decision made by the Municipal
Manager in the enforcement of this Code.
      (2)   A complete written appeal shall be filed by the appellant within 20
days of the written decision of the Municipal Manager or the appeal shall
become void. The appeal shall be filed with the Board of Zoning Appeals. The
written appeal shall:
         A.   Cite specific provisions of this chapter that are alleged to have
been interpreted in error or the specific action being appealed and the grounds
on which the appeal is being made;
         B.   Include application fee payable to the Village as stated in the
Fee Schedule;
         C.   Include such other information as may be required to render a
reasonable decision.
      (3)   An aggrieved party, the Municipal Manager, or the Municipal
Manager's designee, may appeal the Board of Appeals decision in accordance with
R.C. Chapter 2506.
(Ord. 16-2018, passed 7-31-2018)
§ 1048.05 DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (a)   General. The Village desires to promote orderly small cell facility
and wireless support structure installations using the smallest and least
intrusive means available to provide services to the community. All such
installations in the public right-of-way shall comply with all applicable
provisions in this section. All applications shall be subject to the following
conditions:
      (1)   Compliance with all applicable laws. Permittee shall at all times
maintain compliance with all applicable Federal, State and local laws,
regulations, ordinances, or other rules.
      (2)   Right to inspect. The Village or its designee may inspect a small
cell facility or wireless support structure within the right-of-way upon
reasonable notice to the permittee. The permittee shall cooperate with all
inspections. The Village reserves the right to support, repair, disable, or
remove any elements of the small cell facility or wireless support structure in
emergencies or when the small cell facility or wireless support structure
threatens imminent harm to persons or property.
      (3)   Contact information. Permittee shall at all times maintain accurate
contact information for all parties responsible for the small cell facility or
wireless support structure, which shall include a phone number, street mailing
address, and email address for at least one natural person. Permittee shall
provide an emergency contact number that will allow the Village to reach a
representative of the permittee afterhours in the event of an emergency. All
such contact information for responsible parties shall be provided to the
Public Works Director.
      (4)   Indemnities. The permittee and, if applicable, the non-government
owner of a small cell facility or wireless support structure shall defend,
indemnify, and hold harmless the Village and its agents, officers, officials,
and employees from:
         A.   Any and all negligent or wrongful acts or omissions, damages,
liabilities, injuries, losses, costs, and expenses arising out of any claims,
demands, lawsuits, writs of mandamus, or other actions or proceedings brought
against the Village to challenge, attack, seek to modify, set aside, void, or
annul the Village's approval of the applicable permit or certificate; and
         B.   Any and all negligent or wrongful acts or omissions, damages,
liabilities, injuries, losses, costs, and expenses and any claims, demands,
lawsuits, or other actions or proceedings of any kind, whether for personal
injury, death, or property damage, arising out of or in connection with the
activities or performance of the permittee or its agents, employees, licensees,
contractors, subcontractors, or independent contractors.
         C.   In the event the Village becomes aware of any such actions or
claims, the Village shall promptly notify the permittee and shall reasonably
cooperate in the defense. It is expressly agreed that the Village shall have
the right to approve, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld, the
legal counsel providing the Village's defense, and the permittee (as
applicable) shall reimburse Village for any costs and expenses directly and
necessarily incurred by the Village in the course of the defense.
      (5)   Interference with Village communication services. In the event that
the Village has reason to believe that permittee's operations are causing
interference with the Village's radio communications operations, then the
permittee shall, at its cost, immediately cooperate with the Village to either
rule out permittee as the interference source or eliminate the interference.
Cooperation with the Village may include, but shall not be limited to,
temporarily switching the equipment on and off for testing.
      (6)   Adverse impact. Permittee shall undertake all reasonable efforts to
avoid undue adverse impacts to adjacent properties and/or uses that may arise
from the construction, operation, maintenance, modification, or removal of the
small cell facility or wireless support structure.
      (7)   Maintenance. The site and the small cell facility or wireless
support structure, including but not limited to all landscaping, fencing, and
related equipment, must be maintained in a neat and clean manner and in
accordance with all approved plans and conditions of approval.
      (8)   Good condition. Small cell facilities and wireless support
structures shall at all times employ best practices and maintain in use only
the best available technology and methods for preventing failures and accidents
so that the same shall not menace or endanger the life or property of any
person.
      (9)   Graffiti and vandalism. Permittee shall remove any graffiti at
permittee's sole expense.
      (10)   Exposure to RF radiation. All small cell facilities must comply
with all standards and regulations of the FCC and any other State or Federal
government agency with the authority to regulate RF exposure standards.
      (11)   Utility lines. Service lines must be undergrounded whenever
feasible to avoid additional overhead lines and as governed by the Village’s
requirements for underground or buried utility areas.
      (12)   Relocation for public improvements. Permittee shall remove and
relocate the permitted small cell facility and/or wireless support structure at
permittee's sole expense to accommodate construction of a public improvement
project by the Village.
      (13)   Removal if discontinued. In the event that the use of a small cell
facility is discontinued, the owner shall provide written notice to the Village
of its intent to discontinue use and the date when the use shall be
discontinued. If a small cell facility is not removed within 90 days of
discontinued use, the Village may remove it at the owner's expense irrespective
of the notice requirement under this section.
      (14)   Abandoned. In the event that the use of a small cell facility is
abandoned, the Village may remove it at the owner's expense.
      (15)   Site restoration.
         A.   Upon completion of any work, the contractor shall restore the
street and/or alley pavement as required;
         B.   Upon completion of any work, the contractor shall restore all
concrete walks, driveway aprons, and other concrete as required;
         C.   Upon completion of any work, the contractor shall restore all
tree lawns and/or sod strips with topsoil and sod.
      (16)   General construction. All work and designs shall comply with the
following general standards for construction of the Village's right-of-way:
         A.   Village of Woodlawn or Hamilton County Standard Construction
Drawings;
         B.   Village of Woodlawn or Hamilton County Construction and Material
Specifications;
         C.   Ohio Department of Transportation (ODOT) Location and Design
Manual;
         D.   ODOT Standard Drawings;
         E.   ODOT Construction and Material Specifications;
         F.   Ohio Manual of Traffic Control Devices;
         G.   NACTO Urban Street Design Guidelines;
         H.   American Association of State Highway Transportation Officials
(AASHTO) A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets;
         I.   AASHTO Roadside Design Guide;
         J.   AASHTO Guide for the Planning, Design, and Operation of
Pedestrian Facilities;
         K.   AASHTO Guide for Development of Bicycle Facilities;
         L.   United States Access Board (USAB) Proposed Guidelines for
Pedestrians in the Public Right-of-Way;
         M.   USAB American with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines;
         N.   National Fire Protection Association 70 National Electric Code;
and
         O.   All other applicable local, State, and Federal codes and
regulations.
      (17)   Taxes and assessments. To the extent taxes or other assessments
are imposed by taxing authorities on the use of Village property as a result of
an applicant's use or occupation of the right-of-way, the applicant shall be
responsible for payment of such taxes, payable annually unless otherwise
required by the taxing authority.
      (18)   Interference. Small cell wireless and wireless support structures
shall be constructed and maintained in such a manner that will not interfere
with the use of other property.
      (19)   Financial condition. All owners must procure and provide to the
Village a bond, or must provide proof of an equivalent financial mechanism, to
ensure compliance with all provisions of this chapter. Such bond or financial
mechanism must specifically cover the cost of removal of the item placed in the
right- of-way.
      (20)   Setbacks for visibility and access. Any new small cell facility or
wireless support structure and other improvements associated with a new small
cell facility or wireless support structure or an existing small cell facility
or wireless support structure must be setback from intersections, alleys and
driveways and placed in locations where it will not obstruct motorists'
sightlines or pedestrian access.
      (21)   Obstructions. Any new small cell facility or wireless support
structure and other improvements associated with a new small cell facility or
wireless support structure or an existing small cell facility or wireless
support structure shall not obstruct any:
         A.   Worker access to any above-ground or underground infrastructure
for traffic control, streetlight or public transportation, including without
limitation any curb control sign, parking meter, vehicular traffic sign or
signal, pedestrian traffic sign or signal, barricade reflectors;
         B.   Access to any public transportation vehicles, shelters, street
furniture, public sidewalks or other right-of-way improvements;
         C.   Worker access to above ground or underground infrastructure owned
or operated by any public or private utility agency;
         D.   Fire hydrant access;
         E.   Access to any doors, gates, sidewalk doors, passage doors, stoops
or other ingress and egress points to any building appurtenant to the right-of-
way; or
         F.   Access to any fire escape.
      (22)   Historic or architecturally significant structures. Any new
utility installation and other improvements associated with a new utility
installation or an existing utility installation may not be placed directly in
front of any historic or architecturally significant structures unless no other
location is available and if placed shall comply with any design or concealment
measures in an historic district.
      (23)   No placement of any small cell facility or wireless support
structure shall necessitate tree trimming, cause removal of, or otherwise
damage any tree located within the Village's right-of-way or a designated
utility easement. Such small cell facility or wireless support structure shall
not be located
within the eventual mature dripline or tree crown of any existing tree located
within the Village's right-of-way or a designated utility easement.
   (b)   Design and siting requirements.
      (1)   General requirements.
         A.   Wireless support structures shall align with other poles to
achieve a uniform inline appearance.
         B.   Wireless support structures shall be setback from the edge of
pavement according to applicable safety and construction standards as set forth
in §
1048.05(a)(16)- General.
         C.   All small cell facilities and wireless support structures and any
related items shall be installed and maintained plumb and level and shall
maintain an orderly and neat appearance.
         D.   All equipment and enclosures shall be attached, anchored and/or
strapped tightly to poles using corrosion resistant steel hardware.
         E.   Wireless support structures shall support no more than two small
cell facilities.
         F.   Ambient noise suppression measures or placement of the equipment
in locations less likely to impact adjacent properties shall be required to
ensure compliance with all applicable noise regulations.
         G.   Unless otherwise required for compliance with FAA or FCC
regulations, the small cell facility or wireless support structure shall not
include any permanently installed lights. Any lights associated with the
equipment shall be appropriately shielded from public view. This shall not be
interpreted to prohibit streetlights or the placement of luminaires by the
Village.
      (2)   Location.
         A.   In accordance with R.C. § 4939.0314(D), Authority of a Municipal
Corporation, the Village shall reserve the right to propose an alternate
location to the proposed location of a new wireless support structure, provided
the alternate location is within 100 feet or a distance equal to the width of
the right-of- way in or on which the new wireless support structure is
proposed, whichever is greater. The Village also finds that certain locations
and collocation configurations are preferred. A preferred location and
collocation configuration should be utilized whenever possible and should only
be surpassed if in the determination of the Municipal Manager, clear and
convincing evidence supports such a decision. Cost alone should not be grounds
for such a determination. The order of preference is as follows:
            1.   First, small cell facilities should be collocated on an
existing pole or wireless support structure within an alley. If no such pole or
wireless support structure is available, then proceed to the next preference;
            2.   Second, small cell facilities should be collocated on an
existing pole or wireless support structure within a utility easement, If no
such pole or wireless support structure is available, then proceed to the next
preference;
            3.   Third, small cell facilities should be collocated on a new
wireless support structure within a utility easement. If no such location is
available, then proceed to the next preference;
            4.   Fourth, small cell facilities should be collocated on a new
wireless support structure within an alley. If no such location is available,
then proceed to the next preference;
            5.   Fifth, small cell facilities should be collocated on a
wireless support structure currently supporting a small cell facility located
within the Village right-of- way. If no such wireless support structure is
available, then proceed to the next preference;
            6.   Sixth, small cell facilities should be collocated on an
existing pole located within the Village right-of-way. If no such existing pole
is available, then proceed to the next preference;
            7.   Seventh, small cell facilities should be collocated on a new
wireless support structure located within a utility easement. If no such
location is available, then proceed to the next preference;
            8.   Eighth, small cell facilities should be collocated on a new
wireless support structure located within the Village right-of-way.
         B.   Any new wireless support structure shall be located at least 750
feet from any existing small cell facility.
      (3)   Wireless facilities design.
         A.   Wireless support structures shall be subject to the following
design standards:
            1.   Wireless support structure and any collocated antennas shall
be limited to 40 feet in height.
            2.   Wireless support structures shall be capable of supporting at
least two small cell facility operators.
            3.   New wireless support structures shall have the following
design elements:
               a.    Material - aluminum poles;
               b.    Color - black anodized;
               c.    Diameter - not greater than 12 inches;
               d.    Style - smooth round tapered profile; may be fluted in
certain areas if it better matches existing streetscape design;
               e.   Base - trapezoidal pedestal base on a reinforced concrete
footing/foundation pier not to exceed six inches above grade if feasible;
               f.    Exception - if the neighborhood context would be better
served by a pole of a different material, color, style, or base as determined
by the Municipal Manager, then such design elements may be substituted with an
alternate design element. Such determination shall be based on the following
factors:
                  i.    The design features of nearby poles serving in a
similar capacity;
                  ii.    The design features of the existing or proposed
streetscape, district, or site;
                  iii.    The historical context of a district or specific
site;
                  iv.    A desire to camouflage or conceal the pole from view.
         B.   Small cell facilities shall be subject to the following design
standards:
            1.   The Village reserves the right to require the following:
               a.    Antenna and all associated equipment shall be concealed to
the extent deemed necessary by the Municipal Manager in response to the
aesthetic context of the small cell facility. Some possible configurations
include but shall not be limited to the following:
                  i.    Antenna(s) associated with the first fitting on a
wireless support structure shall be top-mounted and concealed within a radome
that matches the color of the pole on which it is mounted and also conceals the
cable connections, antenna mount and other hardware. The Municipal Manager may
approve a side-mounted antenna with the initial fitting if, or approve an
alternate color, if in the Municipal Manager's discretion, the side-mounted
antenna or alternate color would be more appropriate given the built
environment, neighborhood character, overall site appearance and would promote
the purposes of this chapter.
                  ii.    GPS antennas be placed within the radome or directly
above the radome not to exceed six inches.
            2.   Each antenna and all associated equipment shall not exceed six
cubic feet in volume.
            3.   All portions of a small cell facility other than an antenna
and as identified by the R.C. § 4939.01(P)(2), shall not exceed 21 cubic feet
in volume per facility.
            4.   Small cell facilities mounted to a wireless support structure
shall be completely concealed within a common enclosure capable of containing
at least two small cell facilities. Such common enclosures shall:
               a.   Not exceed 21 cubic feet in volume;
               b.   Not exceed 90 inches in height, 20 inches in width, or 20
inches in depth;
               c.   Not extend more than 24 inches away from the pole on which
it is mounted;
               d.    Shall be centered on the vertical axis of the pole to
which it is mounted;
               e.   Be mounted at a distance of at least ten feet measured from
grade to the bottom of the enclosure;
               f.   Be mounted on the side of the pole opposite the side from
which the nearest traffic lane's direction of travel approaches the pole. The
Municipal Manager may approve an alternate mounting orientation, if in the
Municipal Manager's discretion, the alternate mounting orientation would be
more appropriate given the built environment, neighborhood character, overall
site appearance and would promote the purposes of this chapter.
            5.   Such common enclosures shall have the following design
elements:
               a.    Material - The enclosure material shall be metal, a
composite, or an equivalent.
               b.    Material as determined by the Municipal Manager.
               c.    Color - The enclosure shall match the color of the pole on
which it is mounted unless the surrounding context of the small cell facility
is better suited to another color, as determined by the Municipal Manager.
               d.    Style - The enclosure shall match the style, or lack
thereof, of the pole on which it is mounted unless the surrounding context of
the small cell facility is better suited to another style, as determined by the
Municipal Manager.
               e.    Coordinated design elements - common enclosures when
located within 3,000 feet of an existing common enclosure shall match the
design elements of the existing common enclosure unless the surrounding context
of the small cell facility is better suited to an alternate design.
            6.   All ground mounted equipment shall be placed in an underground
vault. No above grade ground mounted equipment in service of a small cell
facility is permitted unless a waiver is requested and the following conditions
can be satisfied as determined by the Municipal Manager;
               a.   The applicant has submitted clear and convincing evidence
that the equipment cannot feasibly be pole-mounted, placed in an underground
vault, or hidden within or integrated into an existing streetscape element
(i.e. bus stop shelter), increased costs alone shall not be a consideration. If
a ground mounted enclosure is approved, the Municipal Manager shall reserve the
right to require any of the following conditions:
                  i.    Concealed enclosure. All equipment shall be completely
concealed within a metal, composite, or equivalent material enclosure as
determined by the Municipal Manager.
                  ii.    Smallest size. The enclosure shall be no larger than
necessary based on the smallest available size of the proposed equipment as
determined by the Municipal Manager.
                  iii.    Camouflage. Camouflaging elements may be required.
Such elements may include, but shall not be limited to strategic placement in
less visible or obtrusive locations, placement within an existing streetscape
element, landscape screening, and strategic painting or coating to camouflage
such enclosure or equipment.
                  iv.    The maximum height of any such enclosure shall be 36
inches.
            7.   The vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other
services on all small cell facilities collocated on new wireless support
structure installations shall be concealed within the wireless support
structure. The vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other
services on all small cell facilities collocated on existing wireless support
structure installations shall be concealed within the wireless support
structure, unless it is determined not possible by the Municipal Manager. The
vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services on all small
cell facilities collocated on utility poles shall be mounted to the surface of
the pole within conduit.
            8.   Electric meters, telecommunications demarcation boxes,
grounding equipment, power transfer switches, and cut-off switches shall be
mounted on the same side of the pole as the small cell facilities common
enclosure and shall match the color of the small cell wireless facilities and
the color of the pole on which it is mounted. The Municipal Manager may approve
an alternate mounting orientation or color, if in the Municipal Manager's
discretion, the alternate mounting orientation or alternate color would be more
appropriate given the built environment, neighborhood character, or overall
site appearance and would promote the purposes of this chapter.
   (c)   Reservation of right-of-way. The Village reserves the right to reserve
space for future public safety or transportation uses in the right-of-way or on
a wireless support structure or pole owned or operated by the Village in a
documented and approved plan in place at the time an application is filed. A
reservation of space shall not preclude placement of a pole or collocation of a
small cell facility. If replacement of the Village's pole or wireless support
structure is necessary to accommodate the collocation of the small cell
facility and the future use, the small cell facility operator shall pay for the
replacement of the pole or wireless support structure, and the replaced pole or
wireless support structure must accommodate the future use.
   (d)   Independent power and communications sources required. Small cell
facilities located on Village-owned wireless support structures may not use the
same power or communication source providing power and/or communication for the
existing facility original to the purposes of the support structure. The
independent power source must be contained within a separate conduit inside the
support structure. The applicant shall coordinate, establish, maintain and pay
for all power and communication connections with utilities.
   (e)   Undergrounding. Wireless support structures shall be subject to
compliance with the Village's requirements for underground or buried utility
areas unless a waiver has been granted under Design Standards §
1048.05(b)(3)B.6. as stated herein.
   (f)   Nonconformity. A nonconforming small cell facility and/or wireless
support structure shall immediately lose its nonconforming designation and must
be brought into compliance with all of the provisions of this chapter, and all
other applicable Village laws and ordinances or be removed if any of the
following conditions are present:
      (1)   The nonconforming small cell facility and/or wireless support
structure or a part of the nonconforming small cell facility and/or wireless
support structure is altered, modified, relocated, replaced, or changed in any
manner whatsoever;
      (2)   The nonconforming small cell facility and/or wireless support
structure is damaged or deteriorated and requires any process of
reconstruction, repair, maintenance, or restoration, and the cost of said
reconstruction, repair, maintenance, or restoration exceeds fifty percent of
the small cell facility and/or wireless support structure's replacement cost;
      (3)   The nonconforming small cell facility and/or wireless support
structure is abandoned.
   (g)   Conflict with other provisions. In the event that any other applicable
law or code requires any more restrictive requirements, the most restrictive
requirement shall control.
   (h)   Severability. The provisions of any part of this chapter are
severable. If any provision or subsection, or the application of any provision
or subsection to any person or circumstances, is held invalid, the remaining
provisions, subsection, and applications of such ordinance to other persons or
circumstances shall not be made invalid as well. It is declared to be the
intent of this section that the remaining provisions would have been adopted
had such invalid provisions not been included in this chapter when originally
adopted by Village Council.
(Ord. 16-2018, passed 7-31-2018)
§ 1048.06 FEES.
 
ITEM                                              FEE
Small cell work permit application fee            $250
Small cell collocation permit application fee     $250
Wireless support structure permit application fee $250
Attachment to municipal pole (annual charge)      $200
Waiver/appeal application fee                     $250
 
(Ord. 16-2016, passed 7-31-2018)
§ 1048.99 PENALTIES.
   (a)   Any person in violation of any of the terms of this chapter, or who,
being the owner or agent of the owner of any lot, tract, or parcel of land,
shall suffer or permit another to erect, construct, reconstruct, alter, repair,
convert, attach, or maintain any such facility, shall be deemed to have
violated the provisions hereof and commits a misdemeanor of the first degree
with each day during the period such violation continues constituting a
separate offense.
   (b)   If any utility installation is erected, constructed, reconstructed,
altered, repaired, converted, attached, or maintained in violation of this
chapter or of any regulations made pursuant hereto, the proper officer of the
Village, in addition to other remedies, may institute in the name of the
Village any appropriate action or proceeding, whether by legal process or
otherwise, to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance, attachment, or use, to restrain,
correct, or abate such violation, to prevent the use of such utility
installation, and/or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business, or use in
or about such utility installation.
   (c)   The Municipal Manager is authorized to make requests and to issue
orders regarding utility installations in the right-of-way for the purpose of
public safety and compliance with this chapter. The Municipal Manager is also
authorized to conduct visual and external inspections of utility installations
in the right-of- way at any time and shall make efforts to coordinate with the
provider responsible for a utility installation for any internal inspection of
the relevant equipment.
(Ord. 16-2018, passed 7-31-2018)
TITLE SIX: OTHER PUBLIC SERVICES
CHAPTER 1060: GARBAGE AND RUBBISH COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
Editor’s note:  
   Resolution 8-1993, passed April 13, 1993, approved the Solid Waste
Management Plan of the Hamilton County Solid Waste Management District. Copies
of this resolution and of such Plan may be obtained, at cost, from the Clerk of
Council.
1060.01   Waste defined.
1060.02   Residential waste; containers; time of placing waste at curb.
1060.03   Commercial waste; containers.
1060.04   Accumulation, storage or dumping; periodic inspections; notice of
violation.
1060.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Collection and disposal of garbage - see Ohio R.C. 715.43, 717.01
   Employment of scavengers - see Ohio R.C. 3707.39
   Disposal and transportation upon public ways - see Ohio R.C. 3767.20 et seq.
   Vehicle loads dropping, sifting, leaking - see TRAF.
440.06
   Littering and waste disposal - see GEN. OFF.
660.03
   Filthy accumulations - see GEN. OFF.
660.04
   Garbage and rubbish in parks - see S.U. & P.S.
1062.04
§ 1060.01 WASTE DEFINED.
   As used in this chapter, “waste” means trash, rubbish, garbage, wastepaper,
fruit parings, ashes, any other refuse or discarded matter or anything else of
an unsightly or unsanitary nature. However, “waste” does not include discarded
furniture, rugs, appliances, vehicles, bicycles, yard waste (such as grass
clippings or leaves), nor does waste include recognized by-products of any
business or industry having commercial value and regularly handled in the
ordinary course of business, unless such by- products are a nuisance or menace
to public health.
(Ord. 5-1991, passed 2-26-1991)
§ 1060.02 RESIDENTIAL WASTE; CONTAINERS; TIME OF PLACING WASTE AT CURB.
   (a)   Every householder shall provide himself or herself with proper
containers for waste, sufficient in number to store the accumulation of waste
between the dates of regular waste collection. No garbage or waste shall be
allowed to remain exposed in any building or on any premises a longer time than
is necessary to receive and deposit the same in proper waste containers. No
person shall place waste at a curb site for collection thereof sooner than 5:00
p.m. on the day before the collection of such waste.
   (b)   Items not classified as waste, such as discarded furniture, rugs,
appliances, vehicles or bicycles, will not be picked up in regular garbage
pick-up service provided by the Village. Regular garbage pick-up is defined as
weekly residential pick- up of waste items. Residents shall be responsible for
disposing of such items themselves or may make arrangements in advance with the
Administration of the Village to have such items picked up by the Village
Service Department. In this event, there shall be a charge made by the Village
to the resident for the pre-arranged pick-up. The charge for the pick-up shall
be fixed by the Village Administrator in accordance with a schedule of charges
for such services, as the Village Administrator from time to time determines. A
schedule of current charges shall be available to the public for inspection.
(Ord. 5-1991, passed 2-26-1991)
§ 1060.03 COMMERCIAL WASTE; CONTAINERS.
   Commercial combustible and noncombustible waste shall be hauled to a public
dump, landfill or incinerator at the expense of the person, firm or corporation
producing the same. Such commercial waste shall not be allowed to accumulate on
any premises and it shall be the duty of each commercial establishment
occupying any premises to provide or maintain a substantial fireproof can, box
or container for the storage of rubbish and waste. All such containers shall be
stored as far from the street or other public way as possible and as great a
distance from neighboring premises as is practical. Each rubbish and waste
container shall be so constructed as to prevent its contents from being
scattered by the wind, from being susceptible to catching fire and from being
dropped when the container is moved.
(Ord. 45-1976, passed 11-23-1976)
§ 1060.04 ACCUMULATION, STORAGE OR DUMPING; PERIODIC INSPECTIONS; NOTICES OF
VIOLATION.
   No person, firm or corporation shall allow the accumulation, storage or
dumping on any premises in the Village of any waste, except in containers as
provided in this chapter. The Chief of Police shall make a periodic inspection
of premises in the Village and shall notify personally or by certified mail the
owner or person in charge of any premises which are in violation of this
section to cease such violation within 20 days. No such owner or person in
charge of such premises shall fail to comply with such order.
(Ord. 45-1976, passed 11-23-1976)
§ 1060.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or
continues.
(Ord. 45-1976, passed 11-23-1976)
CHAPTER 1062: PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
1062.01   Application of chapter.
1062.02   Parks and recreation areas defined.
1062.021   Park hours.
1062.03   Motor vehicles in park and recreation areas.
1062.04   Prohibited practices.
1062.05   Permits required for park activities; conduct of spectators.
1062.06   Memberships.
1062.07   Rental of Woodlawn parks and recreation facilities.
1062.08   Fees.
1062.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Land appropriation for parks - see Ohio R.C. 715.21, 719.01
   Playgrounds, recreation centers, swimming pools - see Ohio R.C. 755.12 et
seq.
   Power to regulate vehicle speed in parks - see Ohio R.C. 4511.07(E)
   Recreation Advisory Board - see ADM.
220.01(b) (Rule 5),
Ch. 276
   Recreation Department - see ADM. Ch.
248
   Woodlawn Community Swimming Pool - see S.U. & P.S.
Ch. 1064
§ 1062.01 APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.
   This chapter shall govern the use of all Woodlawn parks and recreation
areas.
(Ord. 18-1974, passed 7-23-1974; Am. Ord. 27-2007, passed 9-25-2007)
§ 1062.02 PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS DEFINED.
   As used in this chapter, PARK AND RECREATION AREAS means any tract of land
or community center, ball fields, shelters, pool complex, or any other such
facility that may be constructed by, owned, operated or used by Woodlawn
primarily for recreational purposes for the benefit of the residents of
Woodlawn, together with any adjacent land owned, operated or controlled by the
Village, whether or not such land is developed or undeveloped.
(Ord. 18-1974, passed 7-23-1974; Am. Ord. 27-2007, passed 9-25-2007)
§ 1062.021 PARK HOURS.
   Parks shall be open from dawn to dusk, or as may otherwise be posted. If an
approved scheduled event is in progress, only those in attendance at the
approved event shall be permitted within the parks after dusk.
(Ord. 27-2007, passed 9-25-2007)
§ 1062.03 MOTOR VEHICLES IN PARK AND RECREATION AREAS.
   The use of motor vehicles in parks and recreation areas shall be subject to
the following conditions:
   (a)   The speed limit shall be twenty miles per hour through all public park
and recreation areas.
   (b)   No person shall repair, wash, wax or do any type of work on a motor
vehicle on park or recreation property.
   (c)   The parking of motor vehicles is restricted to park and recreation
facility users only, and to areas designated for such parking only. Parking
shall be prohibited during hours when park and recreation facilities are
closed, unless an approved scheduled event is in progress. Vehicles parked in
violation of this rule are subject to towing at the owner’s expense.
   (d)   No motor vehicle or motor assisted vehicle, other than service
maintenance vehicles or public safety vehicles, shall be operated in a park
area not specifically designated or designed for vehicular use.
   (e)   Motorcycle hill climbing or riding on turf or sidewalks is prohibited.
   (f)   Unlicensed motor scooters, go-carts or other such vehicles not subject
to motor vehicle licensing by the State are prohibited in public parks.
(Ord. 18-1974, passed 7-23-1974; Am. Ord. 27-2007, passed 9-25-2007)
§ 1062.04 PROHIBITED PRACTICES.
   (a)   No alcoholic beverages are permitted to be served in public parks
unless prior approval has been granted by the Municipal Manager. The
organization or individual requesting permission must submit the request in
writing to the Municipal Manager a minimum of 14 days prior to the date
requested. The Municipal Manager's approval of said request shall be based on
certain criteria that has been approved by Village Council and as may be
amended from time to time by Village Council.
(Adopting Ordinance)
   (b)   Use of illegal drugs, the sale, purchase, transfer, use or possession
of illegal drugs, or prescription drugs obtained illegally is prohibited. The
Woodlawn parks constitute a drug-free zone and violators will be prosecuted
accordingly.
   (c)   No open fires are permitted in public parks except in grills provided
in picnic areas.
   (d)   No person shall litter or throw trash in parks and recreation
facilities. Such waste shall be placed in proper containers.
   (e)   Bicycles are not permitted on baseball diamonds or tennis courts and
shall be parked in bicycle racks where provided in public parks.
   (f)   Malicious destruction and/or removal of vegetation, equipment and
property in parks and recreation areas are prohibited.
   (g)   No glass containers are permitted within the parks.
   (h)   Camping is prohibited.
   (i)   No solicitation of any kind is permitted in parks and recreation
areas.
   (j)   No pets shall be permitted to move freely through the parks or
recreation facilities of Woodlawn. Pets must remain on a leash that is no
longer than six feet in length and must be kept under physical control at all
times and not be a nuisance ro a danger to other park users. Pet owners are
required to remove all pet fecal deposits from park and/or recreational grounds
and place the waste in a suitable receptacle.
   (k)   Firearms and the discharging of firearms in parks are prohibited,
except by a licensed professional exhibitor, pursuant to an agreement with
Woodlawn.
   (l)   Hunting is prohibited.
   (m)   Unreasonable noises, profane, obscene or offensive coarse utterances,
gestures or displays, or communication of any unwarranted and grossly abusive
language to any person is prohibited.
   (n)   Alterations to existing equipment or installation of equipment are
prohibited.
   (o)   Operations of hot air balloons, other aircraft, model rockets, etc.
are prohibited.
   (p)   Gambling of any kind is prohibited.
(Ord. 18-1974, passed 7-23-1974; Am. Ord. 27-2007, passed 9-25-2007; Am. Ord.
07-2009, passed 4-28-2009)
§ 1062.05 PERMITS REQUIRED FOR PARK ACTIVITIES; CONDUCT OF SPECTATORS.
   (a)   All activities in parks and recreation facilities shall be scheduled
and approved by the Recreation Director and a permit therefor shall be
required.
   (b)   All spectators of activities in the park areas shall keep out of
playing areas during scheduled games or other activities. No spectator shall
stand behind a backstop while a baseball game is in progress.
(Ord. 18-1974, passed 7-23-1974; Am. Ord. 27-2007, passed 9-25-2007)
§ 1062.06 MEMBERSHIPS.
   Use of the Woodlawn Community Center and the Woodlawn Swimming Pool Complex
is for members only or on a daily rate basis or for special occasion as
established by Council and amended from time to time. Memberships will be made
available at Woodlawn resident rates for Woodlawn residents and Woodlawn
Business employees and at non-resident rates for individuals from outside
Woodlawn. Such memberships shall be issued by Woodlawn only upon the payment of
a fee for said membership as established by Council, and amended from time to
time.
(Ord. 27-2007, passed 9-25-2007)
§ 1062.07 RENTAL OF WOODLAWN PARKS AND RECREATION FACILITIES.
   (a)   The parks and recreation facilities owned by Woodlawn shall be
available for rental according to such policies and fees established by Council
from time to time.
   (b)   Reservations of such facilities shall be made through and approved by
the Director of Parks, Recreation and Community Service.
   (c)   The rental of parks and recreation facilities to groups not residing
in the Village shall not take precedence over any activity in the parks or
recreation areas being conducted by Village residents or by the Village of
Woodlawn.
(Ord. 27-2007, passed 9-25-2007)
§ 1062.08 FEES.
   The parks and recreational facilities may be leased to groups or individuals
by the Village of Woodlawn. The rental costs for these facilities shall be
established by Council and amended from time to time.
(Ord. 27-2007, passed 9-25-2007)
§ 1062.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00). Any person violating §
1062.04(b) shall also be guilty of criminal trespass under Ohio R.C. 2811.21, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(Ord. 12-1974, passed 4-23-1974; Am. Ord. 18-1974, passed 7-23-1974; Am. Ord.
27-2007, passed 9-25-2007)
CHAPTER 1064: WOODLAWN COMMUNITY SWIMMING POOL
1064.01   Conduct at pool; miscellaneous rules and regulations.
1064.02   Pool reservations.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Land appropriation for parks - see Ohio R.C. 715.21, 719.01
   Playgrounds, recreation centers, swimming pools - see Ohio R.C. 755.12 et
seq.
   Recreation Commission - see ADM. Ch. 277 Ch.
277
   Recreation Department - see ADM. Ch. 248 Ch.
248
   Parks and recreation areas - see S.U. & P.S.
Ch. 1062
   Swimming pool permit fees - see B. & H.
1444.05(g)
§ 1064.01 CONDUCT AT POOL; MISCELLANEOUS RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (a)   No person in or around the Woodlawn Community Swimming Pool shall:
      (1)   Run on cement;
      (2)   Scream excessively;
      (3)   Wrestle;
      (4)   Act as though he or she is drowning;
      (5)   Hang or climb on the diving boards or fence;
      (6)   Be on a diving board that is already occupied;
      (7)   Dive from any part of the diving board except the front;
      (8)   Dive until the diving area is clear;
      (9)   Fail to swim immediately from the diving area after he or she
dives;
      (10)   Sit or stand on any pool ladder;
      (11)   Perform back dives from the side of the pool;
      (12)   Dive in the shallow end;
      (13)   Enter the water unless a lifeguard is on duty;
      (14)   Sit in the lifeguard’s chair unless he or she is the lifeguard;
      (15)   Take a towel into the water;
      (16)   Chew gum in the water; or
      (17)   Use profanity.
   (b)   The wading pool is for children under the age of six years. Adults or
guardians may accompany youngsters in the wading pool.
   (c)   All food, beverages and smoking shall be confined to the concession
area.
   (d)   Everyone is expected to take a good soap shower before entering the
pool.
   (e)   For ten minutes on the hour, there will be a break, designated by
whistle blasts.
   (f)   Everyone entering the pool shall have a swimsuit.
   (g)   Forms of artificial support, such as floats, are not permitted in the
main pool.
   (h)   No intoxicating beverages or drugs are permitted. Those displaying an
intoxicated manner will be asked to leave.
   (i)   Persons with ill health are expected to abide by doctors’ orders.
Anyone with open sores may be asked to leave if it is felt that the sores are
harmful to others.
   (j)   Lost and found articles shall be disposed of on a weekly basis.
   (k)   Lifeguards shall be obeyed at all times.
   (l)   Violators of pool rules are subject to penalty times and/or daily
dismissal.
(Ord. 26-1979, passed 10-9-1979)
§ 1064.02 POOL RESERVATIONS.
   (a)   The Woodlawn Community Swimming Pool may be reserved from 8:00 a.m. to
11:00 p.m. Monday through Friday.
   (b)   Anyone wishing to enter the pool area at such time must be associated
with the group or organization that reserved the pool at that time.
   (c)   A member of the organization that reserved the pool shall be appointed
to ensure that only members from such organization enter the pool during the
reserved time.
   (d)   The fee for the reservation of the pool must be paid in full at least
one day prior to the desired day of utilization.
   (e)   The reserved date shall be rescheduled in the event of inclement
weather.
   (f)   Catered food is permitted, but the concession area will not be open
during hours when the pool is reserved.
   (g)   The general pool behavior rules and regulations, as set forth in §
1064.01, shall apply to all persons using the pool during any pool reservation.
(Ord. 28-1979, passed 10-9-1979)
CHAPTER 1066: MUNICIPAL BUILDING
1066.01   Guidelines for building use.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Possession of Municipal property - see GEN. OFF.
642.23
   Parks and recreation areas - see S.U. & P.S.
Ch. 1062
   Woodlawn Community Swimming Pool - see S.U. & P.S.
Ch. 1064
§ 1066.01 GUIDELINES FOR BUILDING USE.
   The guidelines set forth in Exhibit “A” attached to original Ordinance 22-
1980, passed March 25, 1980, are hereby made a part of this section as if fully
rewritten herein and are hereby established as the guidelines for the use of
the meeting rooms and classrooms in the Municipal Building of the Village, a
copy of which is on file in the Village Clerk’s office and is available for
public inspection and copying at cost.
(Ord. 22-1980, passed 3-25-1980)
PART TWELVE: PLANNING AND ZONING CODE
TITLE TWO - Planning
         
Chap. 1220.   Planning Commission.
TITLE FOUR - Subdivision Regulations
         
Chap. 1240.   General Provisions and Definitions.
         
Chap. 1242.   Administration, Enforcement and Penalty.
         
Chap. 1244.   Procedure for Subdividing.
         
Chap. 1246.   Specifications for Plans and Plats.
         
Chap. 1248.   Design Standards and Requirements.
         
Chap. 1250.   Improvements.
         
Appendix A -   Plan Approval Procedure
         
Appendix B -   Street Grade and Curve Standards
         
Appendix C -   Engineering Rules and Regulations; Backfill Requirements
         
Appendix D - Ditches, Channels and Swales
         
Appendix E -   Standard Construction Drawings
         
Appendix F -   Street Tree List
TITLE SIX - Zoning
         
Chap. 1252.   General Provisions.
         
Chap. 1253.   Definitions.
         
Chap. 1254.   Administration and Enforcement.
         
Chap. 1256.   Board of Zoning Appeals.
         
Chap. 1258.   Districts Generally and Zoning Map.
         
Chap. 1262.   R-S Single-Family Low-Density Residence District.
         
Chap. 1264.   R-2 Single-Family Low-Density Residence District.
         
Chap. 1266.   R-3 Single-Family Medium-Density Residence District.
         
Chap. 1268.   R-M Multi-Family Residence District.
         
Chap. 1269.   R-4 Single-Family Variable Density Residential District.
         
Chap. 1270   O-S Open Space District.
         
Chap. 1272   C-C Civic Center District.
         
Chap. 1274.   D-1 Downtown Business District.
         
Chap. 1276.   I-P Industrial Park District.
         
Chap. 1280.   GMC Glendale Milford Road Corridor Overlay District.
         
Chap. 1282.   SP-OL Springfield Pike Corridor Overlay District.
         
Chap. 1288.   Planned Unit Developments.
         Chap. 1290.   Mixed-Use Developments.
         
Chap. 1292.   Signs and Outdoor Advertising.
         
Chap. 1294.   Off-Street Parking and Loading.
         
Chap. 1295.   Screening and Landscaping.
         
Chap. 1296.   Provisions Relating to All Districts.
         
Chap. 1297.   Cellular or Wireless Communication Systems.
         
Chap. 1298.   Nonconformities.
         
Chap. 1299.   Violation, Remedies and Fees.
TITLE TWO: PLANNING
CHAPTER 1220: PLANNING COMMISSION
1220.01   Establishment.
1220.02   Composition; terms of office; compensation.
1220.03   Powers and duties.
1220.04   Meetings.
1220.05   Voting.
1220.06   Staff.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Planning Commission generally - see CHTR. Sec.
5.02
   Powers and duties - see Ohio R.C. 713.02
   Planning Commission shall be Platting Commission - see Ohio R.C. 713.03
   Control as to buildings - see Ohio R.C. 713.04
   Employment of architects and engineers - see Ohio R.C. 713.05
   Enforcement of Subdivision Regulations - see P. & Z.
1242.01
   Approval of final plats - see P. & Z.
1246.04(d)(4)
§ 1220.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is hereby established in and for the Village a Planning Commission.
(Ord. 16-1946, passed 12-19-1946)
§ 1220.02 COMPOSITION; TERMS OF OFFICE; COMPENSATION.
   The Planning Commission shall consist of five members, consisting of the
Mayor; one member of Council, to be selected by Council for the remainder of
his or her term as a member of Council; and three citizens of the Village, to
be appointed by the Mayor for terms of six years each, except that the term of
one of the members of the first Commission shall be for four years and one for
two years. Of the three citizen members, one shall be appointed Chairperson by
the Mayor. All members of the Planning Commission shall serve without
compensation.
(Ord. 16-1946, passed 12-19-1946; Am. Ord. 27-1987, passed 9-8-1987)
§ 1220.03 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (a)   The Planning Commission shall have all powers and perform such duties
as are conferred by the laws of the Village and the State.
(Ord. 16-1946, passed 12-19-1946)
   (b)   The Planning Commission shall advise Council, the Board of Zoning
Appeals and the Building Commissioner/Inspector on any matter involving zoning,
land use and planning that requires extensive investigation. The Commission
shall make recommendations regarding the feasibility of proposed new uses,
roads, community improvements, special types of developments, health care
systems and zoning matters.
   (c)   In addition to the duties outlined in division (b) hereof, the
Commission shall:
      (1)   Keep the official land use map of the Village up to date;
      (2)   Periodically confer with the Zoning Inspector to see that the
Zoning Code is being complied with;
      (3)   Periodically review the Zoning Code to keep it up to date with
local and national trends. This includes reviewing decisions of the Board of
Zoning Appeals;
      (4)   Render opinions as to the feasibility of projects in the Village
involving matters such as new and remodeled structures, mixed-use developments,
planned unit developments, clustered developments, zero lot line projects, new
subdivisions, infrastructure and group homes. This includes stating conditions
of acceptance and general guidelines;
      (5)   Propose projects in the Village that will improve its residents’
health, safety or welfare. This includes housing rehabilitation; road
construction, alteration or relocation; new developments, such as those listed
in division (c)(4) hereof; business developments, including rehabs; and
administrative changes.
   The Commission’s function does not include running the programs described in
this division, only proposing and evaluating them to comply with the
aforementioned guidelines.
(Ord. 27-1987, passed 9-8-1987)
§ 1220.04 MEETINGS.
   Meetings of the Planning Commission shall require a minimum of three members
to achieve a quorum. They will be held at the call of the Mayor or the
Chairperson of the Commission, and at such times as the Commission shall
determine.
   At least one week of notice shall be given for meetings not regularly
scheduled.
(Ord. 27-1987, passed 9-8-1987)
§ 1220.05 VOTING.
   A simple majority vote of the members present is required for approval of
matters brought before the Planning Commission. All members must vote yea or
nay unless there is a conflict of interest involved. A separate motion is
required to abstain from voting. This motion must be approved by a majority of
the members present.
(Ord. 27-1987, passed 9-8-1987)
§ 1220.06 STAFF.
   The Planning Commission may use Village officials and consultants to do any
necessary research.
(Ord. 27-1987, passed 9-8-1987)
TITLE FOUR: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1240: GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
1240.01   Short title.
1240.02   Scope.
1240.03   Jurisdiction.
1240.04   Compliance with Zoning Code.
1240.05   Separability.
1240.06   Definitions.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Plat and subdivision defined - see Ohio R.C. 711.001
   Fee of designated public land to vest when plat recorded - see Ohio R.C.
711.01, 711.07
   Cornerstones and permanent markers - see Ohio R.C. 711.03, 711.14
   Plat acknowledgment and recording - see Ohio R.C. 711.06
   Municipal corporations may adopt rules and regulations - see Ohio R.C.
711.101
   Subdivision proposals in flood hazard areas - see B. & H. 1466.15(d)
§ 1240.01 SHORT TITLE.
   This Title Four of Part Twelve - the Planning and Zoning Code shall be known
and may be cited and referred to as the “Woodlawn, Ohio Subdivision Rules and
Regulations” or just the “Subdivision Regulations.”
(Ord. 22-1979, passed 9-11-1979)
§ 1240.02 SCOPE.
   In their interpretation and application, these Subdivision Regulations shall
be held to be minimum requirements. Where these Subdivision Regulations impose
a greater restriction than is imposed or required by other local provisions or
by other rules, regulations or ordinances, these Subdivision Regulations shall
control.
(Ord. 22-1979, passed 9-11-1979)
§ 1240.03 JURISDICTION.
   These Subdivision Regulations shall apply to all subdivisions hereafter
platted within the incorporated territory by the Village. Preliminary plans
approved by the Planning Commission prior to the adoption of these Subdivision
Regulations (Ordinance 22-1979, passed September 11, 1979) shall be treated as
stated in §
1244.04(e).
(Ord. 22-1979, passed 9-11-1979)
§ 1240.04 COMPLIANCE WITH ZONING CODE.
   Proposed subdivisions shall meet requirements set forth in the Zoning Code
of the Village as well as the provisions of these Subdivision Regulations.
(Ord. 22-1979, passed 9-11-1979)
§ 1240.05 SEPARABILITY.
   If any chapter, section, division, division, sentence or phrase of these
Subdivision Regulations is declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or
invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of these Subdivision
Regulations as a whole, or any part hereof, other than the part so declared to
be unconstitutional or invalid.
(Ord. 22-1979, passed 9-11-1979)
§ 1240.06 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in these Subdivision Regulations:
      (1)   ALLEY. A public way having a right- of-way of not less than 20 feet
and providing access to the rear of properties.
      (2)   BLOCK. An area of land bounded on all sides by a street or streets.
      (3)   BUILDING LINE.  A line indicating the minimum horizontal distance
between the street right-of-way line and buildings.
      (4)   COMMUNITY FACILITIES PLAN.  The plan for community facilities which
is part of the Comprehensive Master Plan of the Village.
      (5)   COMPREHENSIVE MASTER PLAN. The Comprehensive Plan made and adopted
by the Planning Commission and Council indicating the general locations
recommended for thoroughfares, streets, parks, public buildings, zoning
districts and public improvements.
      (6)   COUNCIL.  Council of the Village.
      (7)   CROSSWALK.  A public right-of-way continuing a sidewalk across a
public right-of-way or street to provide pedestrian access.
      (8)   CUL-DE-SAC STREET.  A short minor street having only one outlet for
vehicular traffic, the other end being permanently terminated by a vehicular
turnaround.
      (9)   DEAD-END STREET.  A street only partially constructed in terms of
its ultimately planned length and having only one outlet for vehicular traffic.
      (10)   DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOT.  A lot with both the front and back lot lines
abutting on a public street.
      (11)   EASEMENT.  A grant by the owner of land for the specified use of a
part of such land to a person, firm, corporation or public utility, or to the
public in general.
      (12)   ENGINEER.  A qualified registered engineer licensed to practice
civil engineering in the State.
      (13)   EXISTING LAND USE PLAN.  The Existing Land Use Plan of the
Village, which is part of the Comprehensive Master Plan of the Village.
      (14)   GENERAL LAND USE PLAN.  The General Land Use Plan of the Village,
which is part of the Comprehensive Master Plan of the Village.
      (15)   HIGHWAY.  An existing major street designated as a numbered
Federal, State or County highway and designed to primarily accommodate traffic
movement through the Village.
      (16)   IMPROVEMENTS.  Grading, street pavements, curbs, gutters,
sidewalks, street lights, street signs, water mains, storm and sanitary sewers
and other utility mains, piping and other required facilities.
      (17)   LOT. A parcel of land intended for transfer of ownership or
building development, which parcel has frontage on an improved public street or
access thereto.
      (18)   LOT, CORNER.  A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their
intersection.
      (19)   LOT SPLIT.  A division of land along an existing public street,
not including the opening, widening or extension of any street or road,
involving not more than five lots after the original tract has been completely
subdivided, as set forth in Ohio R.C. 711.131.
      (20)   MINOR STREET.  A street which is not a highway, primary or
secondary thoroughfare, parkway or local or collector street and which is
intended to serve and provide access exclusively to the properties abutting
thereon.
      (21)   OPEN SPACE, PUBLIC.  Land which may be dedicated or reserved for
acquisition for general use by the public, including parks, recreation areas,
school sites, community or public building sites and other similar lands.
      (22)   PEDESTRIAN WAY.  A right-of-way, dedicated to public use, which
cuts across a block to facilitate pedestrian access to adjacent streets and
properties.
      (23)   PLANNING COMMISSION.  The Planning Commission of the Village.
      (24)   PRELIMINARY PLAN.  The preliminary or tentative plat, plan, map or
drawing upon which the layout and design of a proposed subdivision is submitted
to the Planning Commission for consideration and tentative approval.
      (25)   PRIMARY THOROUGH-FARE.  A thoroughfare designed as a major street
to primarily accommodate major traffic movements as indicated on the
Thoroughfare Plan.
      (26)   RECORD PLAT.  The final record plat, plan or drawing, and any
accompanying required data or information, which is submitted to the Planning
Commission for final approval of a proposed subdivision.
      (27)   RIGHT OF WAY.  The width, between property lines, of a street,
alley, crosswalk or easement.
      (28)   SECONDARY THOROUGHFARE.  A thoroughfare which is designed to
supplement a primary thoroughfare and which is primarily a feeder traffic way
as indicated on the Thoroughfare Plan.
      (29)   SET-BACK LINE OR BUILDING LINE.  A line indicating the minimum
horizontal distance between the street right-of-way line and buildings.
      (30)   STREET.  The full width of land located between the property lines
bounding any public way which provides use by the public as a matter of right
for the purpose of vehicular traffic, whether designated as a street, highway,
thoroughfare, parkway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, circle, court or
otherwise.
      (31)   STREET, LOCAL OR COL-LECTOR.  A street, as indicated on the
Thoroughfare Plan, intended to collect vehicular traffic from local streets
within a neighborhood or industrial district and feed such traffic onto
secondary and primary streets.
      (32)   SUBDIVIDER.  A person who divides or proposes to divide land so as
to constitute a subdivision, and includes any authorized agent of the
subdivider or owner.
      (33)   SUBDIVISION.
         A.   The division of any parcel of land shown as a unit on the last
preceding tax roll into two or more parcels, sites or lots, any one of which is
less than five acres, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer
of ownership, provided that the division or partition of land into parcels of
more than five acres not involving any new streets or easements of access, and
the sale or exchange of parcels between adjoining lot owners, where such sale
or exchange does not create additional building sites, shall be exempted; or
         B.   The improvement of one or more parcels of land for residential,
commercial or industrial structures or groups of structures involving the
division or allocation of land for the opening, widening or extension of any
street, except private streets serving industrial structures, and the division
or allocation of land as open spaces for common use by owners, occupants or
lease holders or as easements for the extension and maintenance of public
sewer, water, storm drainage or other public facilities.
      (34)   SURVEYOR.  A surveyor registered in the State.
      (35)   THOROUGHFARE.  A major street.
      (36)   THOROUGHFARE PLAN.  The official plan of highways, primary and
secondary thoroughfares, parkways and other major streets, including collector
streets, which is part of the Comprehensive Master Plan of the Village.
      (37)   VILLAGE ENGINEER.  The Engineer of the Village.
      (38)   ZONING ORDINANCE.  The official Village Zoning Code.
(Ord. 22-1979, passed 9-11-1979)
CHAPTER 1242: ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY
1242.01   Enforcement by Planning Commission.
1242.02   Variances.
1242.03   Fees.
1242.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Plat and subdivision defined - see Ohio R.C. 711.001
   Fee of designated public land to vest when plat recorded - see Ohio R.C.
711.01, 711.07
   Cornerstones and permanent markers - see Ohio R.C. 711.03, 711.14
   Plat acknowledgment and recording - see Ohio R.C. 711.06
   Municipal corporations may adopt rules and regulations - see Ohio R.C.
711.101
   Planning Commission - see P. & Z.
Ch. 1220
   Subdivision proposals in flood hazard areas - see B. & H. 1466.15(d)
§ 1242.01 ENFORCEMENT BY PLANNING COMMISSION.
   These Subdivision Regulations shall be administered by the Planning
Commission.
(Ord. 22-1979, passed 9-11-1979)
§ 1242.02 VARIANCES.
   (a)   Where the Planning Commission finds that extraordinary hardships may
result from unusual topographical or other conditions if strict compliance with
these Subdivision Regulations is enforced, the Commission may issue a variance
to these Subdivision Regulations, except §§
1248.02,
1248.06,
1248.07 and
Chapter 1250, so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest
secured, provided that such variance will not have the effect of nullifying the
intent and purpose of the Official Thoroughfare Plan, the Official Land Use
Plan and these Subdivision Regulations.
   (b)   In granting variances and modifications, the Commission shall require
such additional conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the
objectives of the standards and/or requirements so varied or modified.
(Ord. 22-1979, passed 9-11-1979)
§ 1242.03 FEES.
   (a)   Schedule. Council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges and
expenses and a collection procedure for the processing of preliminary plans and
improvement drawings.
   (b)   Payment.
      (1)   Preliminary plan. No action shall be taken on a preliminary plan
before the Planning Commission until or unless preliminary charges and fees
have been paid in full.
      (2)   Final plat. The Secretary of the Planning Commission shall not
endorse his or her approval on a final plat until or unless all fees required
in these Subdivision Regulations have been paid in full.
(Ord. 22-1979, passed 9-11-1979)
§ 1242.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of these
Subdivision Regulations shall be fined not more than twenty-five dollars
($25.00) for each day that the violation or noncompliance continues after the
mailing of a notice by the Village to the responsible party, fixing a date
certain for compliance with these Subdivision Regulations.
(Ord. 22-1979, passed 9-11-1979)
CHAPTER 1244: PROCEDURE FOR SUBDIVIDING
1244.01   Plats required.
1244.02   Compliance with design standards and required improvements.
1244.03   Procedure for approval.
1244.04   Preliminary plans.
1244.05   Improvement plans.
1244.06   Record plats.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Fee of designated public land to vest when plat recorded - see Ohio R.C.
711.01, 711.07
   Approval or rejection; rules to govern plats - see Ohio R.C. 711.05, 711.09
   Plat acknowledgment and recording - see Ohio R.C. 711.06, 711.09, 711.103
   Specifications for plans and plats - see P. & Z.
Ch. 1246
   Improvements required prior to submission of record plats - see P. & Z.
1250.01
   Plan approval procedure - see Pt. 12,
Title 4, Appx. A
   Plans and plats for excavations - see B. & H. 1460.05, 1460.07
§ 1244.01 PLATS REQUIRED.
   No person having control of any land within the Village shall subdivide or
lay out such land in lots unless by a plat in accordance with regulations and
procedures set forth in these Subdivision Regulations. No plat shall be
recorded and no lot shall be sold from such plat unless the plat has first been
approved by the Planning Commission. In the event of any such violation, or
imminent threat thereof, the Law Director is hereby authorized to institute any
appropriate action or proceeding in law or equity to prevent, restrain, enjoin,
abate or correct such violation. Such action shall be in addition to any other
remedy or penalty provided by these Subdivision Regulations or by law.
(Ord. 22-1979, passed 9-11-1979)
§ 1244.02 COMPLIANCE WITH DESIGN STANDARDS AND REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS.
   The planning and developing of a subdivision shall comply with the general
standards of design as set forth in
Chapter 1248 and in
Appendix B, following the text of these Subdivision Regulations, and with the
requirements for installation of improvements set forth in
Chapter 1250.
(Ord. 22-1979, passed 9-11-1979)
§ 1244.03 PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL.
   The Planning Commission shall establish requirements for the submission,
review and approval processes involving preliminary plans, improvement plans
and record plats. Such requirements may be changed at any time by a majority
vote of the Commission.
   Procedures for submittal of all plats and plans as established by the
Commission are included in
Appendix A following the text of these Subdivision Regulations, and shall be
complied with in the submittal, review and approval of all subdivisions.
(Ord. 22-1979, passed 9-11-1979)
§ 1244.04 PRELIMINARY PLANS.
   (a)   Generally. The subdivider shall prepare a preliminary plan of the
proposed subdivision, which plan shall conform with the requirements set forth
in §
1246.02.
   (b)   Filing. The preliminary plan shall be filed in accordance with
procedures set forth in
Appendix A following the text of these Subdivision Regulations.
   (c)   Review. The Planning Commission shall check the preliminary plan as to
its conformity with the General Land Use Plan and the Thoroughfare Plan, and as
to its compliance with the standards and requirements set forth in these
Subdivision Regulations. Such review shall be carried out in the manner
established in
Appendix A.
   (d)   Tentative approval. The Commission shall tentatively approve or
disapprove the preliminary plan, or approve it with modifications noted thereon
of any changes that will be required. One copy shall be returned to the
subdivider, with the date of such tentative approval or disapproval endorsed
thereon.
   (e)   Extent of approval. Tentative approval of the preliminary plan shall
be an approval of the design features of the tract only. The Village Engineer,
the Building Commissioner/Inspector or any other official having jurisdiction
may modify engineering or construction details as may be necessary for the
protection of the public interest. The preliminary plan approval shall be
effective for two  years, provided that approval of improvement plans any time
during such two-year period shall extend the effective period of such
preliminary plan for five years after the date of improvement plan approval.
Within reason, any time period mentioned in this division may be extended by
the Commission.
(Ord. 22-1979, passed 9-11-1979)
§ 1244.05 IMPROVEMENT PLANS.
   (a)   Construction of improvements. Improvements required under these
Subdivision Regulations shall be constructed in accordance with the
specifications set forth in Chapter 1250 prior to approval of the final record
plat.
   (b)   Bond in lieu of improvements. The subdivider may request approval of
the record plat immediately following approval of the preliminary plan and
prior to the installation of required improvements, provided that the Village
is furnished with a performance bond or other type of bond in accordance with §
1250.02. Such bond shall be used to ensure the satisfactory construction and
performance of such improvements at the time and terms fixed by the Planning
Commission and in accordance with these Subdivision Regulations and other
Village regulations.
   (c)   Posting of bond. Bond posting shall be in accordance with the
procedure set forth in Appendix A following the text of these Subdivision
Regulations.
   (d)   Approval of plans. Improvement plans required in §
1250.05 shall be approved by the Village Engineer before approval of the record
plat and before construction is begun. Improvement plans shall be prepared in
accordance with the requirements set forth in §
1246.03.
   (e)   Filing and review. Filing and review of improvement plans shall be in
accordance with the procedure set forth in
Appendix A.
(Ord. 22-1979, passed 9-11-1979)
§ 1244.06 RECORD PLATS.
   (a)   Generally. Upon completion of all required improvements or posting of
appropriate securities as stipulated in §
1244.05, the subdivider shall prepare a record plat which shall conform to the
requirements set forth in §
1246.04.
   (b)   Filing. Filing of record plats shall be in accordance with the
procedure set forth in
Appendix A following the text of these Subdivision Regulations.
   (c)   Review. The Planning Commission shall check the record plat as to its
compliance with the standards and requirements set forth in these Subdivision
Regulations. Review of the plat shall be in accordance with the procedure set
forth in Appendix A.
   (d)   Final approval. After fees required by these Subdivision Regulations
have been paid, and a copy of the final record plat has been received by the
Planning Commission from the Village Engineer, and provided that the record
plat is found to conform with the preliminary plan as tentatively approved and/
or modified, the Commission shall approve the final record plat and the
Secretary of the Commission shall enter such approval thereon in writing.
   (e)   Acceptance of dedications. Approval of dedications shall be in
accordance with §
1250.08.
   (f)   Recording. The Secretary of the Planning Commission shall notify the
subdivider, in writing, of the final action of the Commission.
   (g)   Submission of tracing. The subdivider shall furnish either the
original tracing of the plat or a sepia or other acceptable reproducible
drawing thereof to the Commission.
(Ord. 22-1979, passed 9-11-1979)
CHAPTER 1246: SPECIFICATIONS FOR PLANS AND PLATS
1246.01   Preparation by engineer or surveyor.
1246.02   Contents of preliminary plans.
1246.03   Contents of improvement plans.
1246.04   Contents of record plats.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Fee of designated public land to vest when plat recorded - see Ohio R.C.
711.01, 711.07
   Approval or rejection; rules to govern plats - see Ohio R.C. 711.05, 711.09
   Plat acknowledgment and recording - see Ohio R.C. 711.06, 711.09, 711.103
   Procedure for subdividing - see P. & Z.
Ch. 1244
   Improvements required prior to submission of record plats - see P. & Z.
1250.01
   Plan approval procedure - see Pt. 12, Title 4,
Appx. A
   Plans and plats for excavations - see B. & H. 1460.05, 1460.07
§ 1246.01 PREPARATION BY ENGINEER OR SURVEYOR.
   All plats or plans submitted for review under these Subdivision Regulations
shall be prepared by or under the supervision of an engineer or surveyor, as
the case may require, registered in the State.
(Ord. 22-1979, passed 9-11-1979)
§ 1246.02 CONTENTS OF PRELIMINARY PLANS.
   A preliminary plan shall include the following:
   (a)   Vicinity sketch. A vicinity sketch drawn at a scale of 400 feet or
more to the inch shall be drawn on or shall accompany the preliminary plan.
Such sketch shall show:
      (1)   The relation of the proposed development to its general
surroundings, including the location of proposed streets and their connections
to existing or proposed streets in adjacent subdivisions; and
      (2)   The names and boundaries of adjacent existing subdivisions and
names of record owners of unplatted tracts immediately adjoining the proposed
subdivision.
   (b)   Scale and north arrow. The scale of the preliminary plan shall be 100
feet to the inch, and a north arrow shall be clearly shown on the plan.
   (c)   Plan title. The plan title shall include the following:
      (1)   Name of subdivision. The name of the subdivision, which name shall
not duplicate or closely approximate the name of any other subdivision in the
County;
      (2)   Location. The tract designation according to real estate records of
the County
Recorder, showing location by section, range, township, county and state;
      (3)   Names of developers. The names and addresses of the owner of
record, the subdivider and the engineer and/or surveyor; and
      (4)   Date. The date of plat preparation.
   (d)   Existing features and conditions. The following existing features and
conditions shall be shown:
      (1)   Streets and other features. The locations, widths and names of all
existing or platted street rights-of-way and pavements or other public ways;
utility easements; parks and other public open spaces included within or
adjacent to the tract; other important features such as existing buildings,
watercourses and drainage channels; and corporation, section, township and
county lines;
      (2)   Names of abutting owners and subdivisions. The names of adjacent
subdivisions and owners of adjoining tracts of unsubdivided land;
      (3)   Zoning districts. Zoning boundary lines, if any, as they exist on
the official Zoning Map included in the Zoning Code; and
      (4)   Topography. Contours, normally with intervals of five feet,
referenced to U.S.G.S. Datum, as required by the Planning Commission.
   (e)   Proposed development features. The plan shall indicate the following
features:
      (1)   Boundary lines. The boundary lines, accurate in scale, of the
proposed area to be subdivided;
      (2)   Proposed street plan. The layout of streets, including names and
widths of proposed rights-of-way and crosswalks;
      (3)   Lot layout. The layout and number of proposed lots and typical lot
sizes;
      (4)   Dedications and reservations of land. Parcels of land intended to
be dedicated or temporarily reserved for public use, or to be reserved by deed
covenant for use of all property owners in the subdivision, and conditions, if
any, of such dedication or reservation; and
      (5)   Watercourses. If the subdivision is traversed by a channel, stream,
creek or other watercourse, the present and/or proposed location of such
watercourse.
(Ord. 22-1979, passed 9-11-1979)
§ 1246.03 CONTENTS OF IMPROVEMENT PLANS.
   (a)   Certification. Improvement plans and other engineering data shall be
prepared and certified by a registered professional engineer.
   (b)   Drawings. Sets of improvement drawings shall be at a scale and in a
medium as determined by the Village Engineer or the Building Commissioner/
Inspector, with the approval of Council. Such drawings shall include the
following items, plus any additional information or drawings which may be
required by the Engineer or the Commissioner/Inspector:
      (1)   Streets.
         A.   All streets delineated in the plan, showing radii, functions of
curves, names, etc.;
         B.   Centerline profiles of all streets, with grades, including any
proposed sewer lines and manholes. The scale of such profiles shall be as
follows: horizontal, 50 feet to the inch; vertical, ten feet to the inch. Where
a proposed street ends at a property line, or may be extended in the future,
the profile shall be shown for a distance of 200 feet beyond the subdivision
boundary line or past the end of the street.
         C.   The typical section of each type of proposed street to be used,
as specified in the Engineering Rules and Regulations set forth in
Appendix C following the text of these Subdivision Regulations; and
         D.   Proposed street names, which shall not duplicate or closely
approximate the names of any other streets in the Village, except extensions of
existing streets; and
      (2)   Sanitary sewers and storm drainage. Plans and profiles of proposed
sanitary sewers and storm sewers or drainage courses, with grades and sizes
indicated, or the method of storm water disposal in lieu of sewers; and a
drainage plan showing all existing and proposed storm sewers, manholes, catch
basins, culverts, watercourses and other underground structures within the
tract and immediately adjacent thereto, with pipe sizes, grades and water
openings indicated thereon. The drainage plan shall show the method to be used
for the adequate disposal of all such storm water, including drainage outlets,
and such other data as may be required by the Village Engineer.
(Ord. 22-1979, passed 9-11-1979)
§ 1246.04 CONTENTS OF RECORD PLANS.
   Record plats shall be prepared as follows:
   (a)   Scale; north arrow; medium of drawing. The record plat shall be drawn
at a scale of 50 feet to the inch, and such scale shall be indicated
graphically on the plat along with a north arrow. Plats shall be drawn on linen
tracing cloth or similar durable material on a sheet 24 inches wide by 36
inches long. When more than one sheet is used for any plat, each sheet shall be
numbered consecutively and shall contain a notation giving the total number of
sheets. There shall be a binding margin of one and one-half inches on the left
side of the 36 inch length and one-inch margins on all other sides.
   (b)   Plat title. Plat titles shall include the following:
      (1)   Name of subdivision. The name of the subdivision;
      (2)   Location. The tract designated by section, range, township, county
and state;
      (3)   Names of developers. The names and addresses of the owner of
record, the subdivider and the engineer and/or surveyor; and
      (4)   Date. The date of plat preparation.
   (c)   Boundaries, bearings and other specifications. The following data
shall appear on the record plat:
      (1)   Boundaries. Plat boundaries with lengths of courses to hundredths
of a foot and bearings to half minutes. The error of closure shall not exceed
one in 5,000. Boundaries shall be determined by an accurate survey in the
field. When required, all closure calculations shall be submitted to the
Village Engineer.
      (2)   Recorded streets. The names, exact locations and widths along the
property lines of all existing or recorded streets intersecting or paralleling
and adjacent to the plat boundaries;
      (3)   Abutting tracts. The names of adjacent subdivisions and of record
owners of adjacent parcels of unplatted land;
      (4)   Bearings; distances. Monuments located and accurately described on
the plat by bearings and distances to the nearest established street line,
section line, county line, subdivision of record, etc., where applicable;
      (5)   Corporate limits and section boundaries. Any section lines,
corporation lines or recognized monuments, located and accurately described on
the plat;
      (6)   Monuments. An accurate description of the location, material and
size of reference monuments, carried out in accordance with the requirements
set forth in the Ohio Revised Code; and
      (7)   Layout.
         A.   Streets and walkways. The names and exact location bearings,
angles of intersection and widths of all streets and crosswalks within the
plat;
         B.   Easements. Easements for rights- of-way provided for public
services, utilities and surface drainage, and any limitations of such
easements;
         C.   Lot lines. Lot numbers and lines, with accurate dimensions in
feet and hundredths and with bearings or angles related to street and crosswalk
lines;
         D.   Lengths of curves. Lengths of all arcs, radii points of curvature
and tangent bearings or other information required by the County Recorder; and
         E.   Dedication or reservation lines. Accurate boundaries of any area
to be dedicated for public use, with the purposes indicated thereon, and of any
area to be reserved by deed covenant for common use of all property owners in
the subdivision.
   (d)   Restrictions; Certifications; Protective Covenants; Acceptance. The
following data shall be included on the record plat:
      (1)   Restrictive covenants. Private restrictions, if any, including
boundaries of each type of use restriction, and other private restrictions for
each definitely restricted section of the subdivision;
      (2)   Owner’s acknowledgment. The owner’s acknowledgment of the plat and
all contents and restrictions shown thereon, before an officer authorized to
take the acknowledgment of deeds, which officer shall certify his or her
official act on the plat;
      (3)   Certification by surveyor. Certification by a registered surveyor
attesting to the accuracy of the survey made by him or her; that all monuments
shown thereon actually exist; that their location, size and material are
correctly shown; and that he or she has fully complied with these Subdivision
Regulations;
      (4)   Planning Commission certificate. Certification by the Secretary of
the Planning Commission that the plat meets all applicable requirements. Such
certificate shall be affixed to the final plat.
      (5)   Acceptance of dedicated land. Space for a statement of the
Village’s acceptance of land dedicated by the owner for street and other public
areas, with lines for signature and date.
(Ord. 22-1979, passed 9-11-1979)
CHAPTER 1248: DESIGN STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS
1248.01   Compliance generally.
1248.02   Compliance with master plans.
1248.03   Neighborhood plans.
1248.04   Street layouts.
1248.05   Blocks.
1248.06   Minimum rights of way for streets, crosswalks and easements.
1248.07   Minimum pavement and sidewalk widths.
1248.08   Street grades and curves.
1248.09   Intersections.
1248.10   Lots.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Cornerstones and permanent markers - see Ohio R.C. 711.03, 711.14
   Change of name, vacating and narrowing streets - see Ohio R.C. 723.04 et
seq.
   Surface treatment of streets - see Ohio R.C. 723.23, 723.31
   Notice to construct or repair sidewalks - see Ohio R.C. 729.03
   Streets - see S.U. & P.S.
Ch. 1020
   Sidewalks - see S.U. & P.S.
Ch. 1022
   Trees - see S.U. & P.S.
Ch. 1026
   Compliance with design standards - see P. & Z.
1244.02
§ 1248.01 COMPLIANCE GENERALLY.
   In designing the layout of a subdivision, the subdivider shall comply with
the requirements and general principles set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 22-1979, passed 9-11-1979)
§ 1248.02 COMPLIANCE WITH MASTER PLANS.
   (a)   Thoroughfare Plan. A subdivision layout shall conform to the Official
Thoroughfare Plan if and when such a Plan is adopted by the Planning
Commission. Whenever any existing or proposed thoroughfare, parkway or other
major or collector street designated on the Thoroughfare Plan abuts or
traverses a tract to be subdivided, such part of such right-of-way shall be
platted by the subdivider in the location and at the width indicated on the
Thoroughfare Plan.
   (b)   General Land Use Plan. The layout of the subdivision shall conform to
the Official General Land Use Plan if and when such a Plan is adopted by the
Planning Commission. Where a proposed park or other recreational area, school
site or other public ground shown on such Plan is located in whole or in part
within the proposed subdivision, such proposed public ground, if not dedicated
to the Village or the Board of Education, shall be reserved by the subdivider
for acquisition by the Village or the Board, within a period of two years from
the Commission approval of the preliminary drawing, by purchase or other means,
unless released by the Village or the Board. If the Village notifies the
developer of its decision to buy public ground as shown on the General Land Use
Plan within the first year of the time specified in this division, the time
period will automatically be extended by one additional year.
(Ord. 22-1979, passed 9-11-1979)
§ 1248.03 NEIGHBORHOOD PLANS.
   If a tentative plan has been prepared by the Planning Commission for the
neighborhood wherein a proposed subdivision lies, the subdivision layout shall
conform generally to such plan.
(Ord. 22-1979, passed 9-11-1979)
§ 1248.04 STREET LAYOUTS.
   (a)   Circulation. The street pattern shall provide ease of circulation
within the subdivision as well as convenient access to adjoining streets,
thoroughfares or unsubdivided lands as may be required by the Planning
Commission. Minor residential streets should be so planned as to discourage
their use by nonlocal traffic.
   (b)   Consistency with adjoining streets. The arrangement of streets shall
make provisions for the continuation of the principal existing or proposed
streets in adjoining areas, or their proper projection where adjoining land is
not subdivided, insofar as they are necessary for public requirements.
   (c)   Allowance for hardship to adjoining owners. The street layout shall be
designed so as not to cause a hardship to owners of adjacent property when they
plat their own land and seek to provide for convenient access to it. The
Planning Commission may require land to be reserved for future street purposes
to be developed by an adjacent land owner at a later date.
   (d)   Extensions to subdivision boundary lines. Proposed streets shall be
extended to the boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided, unless prevented
by topography or other physical conditions or unless, in the opinion of the
Planning Commission, such extension is not necessary or desirable for the
coordination of the layout of the subdivision with the existing layout or the
most suitable layout of adjacent tracts.
   (e)   Intersections. Proposed streets shall intersect one another as nearly
at right angles as topography and other limiting factors of good design permit.
   (f)   Street jogs. Street jogs with centerline offsets at intersections
shall not be allowed unless the distance between such centerline offsets is at
least 200 feet on local and collector streets, 300 feet on secondary
thoroughfares and 500 feet on primary thoroughfares.
   (g)   Cul-de-sacs. Cul-de-sacs may be approved where necessitated by
topography or where, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, they are
appropriate for the type of development contemplated. Turnarounds of the
circular type shall be required. Except in unusual circumstances, the
Commission shall not approve a cul-de-sac with a length greater than 700 feet,
and in no case shall such length be greater than 800 feet.
   (h)   Temporary dead-end streets. Except as otherwise provided in these
Subdivision Regulations, temporary dead-end streets may be approved where
necessitated by the layout of the subdivision or staging of development,
provided that temporary paved turnarounds shall be constructed at the end of
such streets in cases where more than eight lots front on such streets. The
widths of rights-of-way or temporary easements shall be the same as that
required for permanent turnarounds. The extra right-of-way in excess of the
street right-of-way shall be vacated upon extension of the temporary street,
and the reconditioning of such street and all surface improvements and front
yards concerned shall be carried out at the expense of the subdivider
responsible for the extension of such temporary dead- end street.
   (I)   Half streets. Dedication of half streets shall not be permitted,
except in special situations which are in the public interest. Where there
exists a dedicated or platted half street adjacent to the tract being
subdivided, the other half shall be platted if, in the opinion of the Planning
Commission, it is necessary to promote proper development.
   (j)   Private streets. Except in unusual conditions when held desirable by
the Planning Commission, or in cases permitted in accordance with the Zoning
Code, private streets will not be approved.
(Ord. 22-1979, passed 9-11-1979)
§ 1248.05 BLOCKS.
   (a)   Width. Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two tiers of
lots of appropriate depth, except in the case of approved double frontage lots
abutting a primary thoroughfare.
   (b)   Length. Blocks shall not exceed 1,800 feet in length.
   (c)   Crosswalks. Crosswalks shall be suitably located where required by the
Planning Commission to provide adequate pedestrian circulation.
   (d)   Irregularly shaped blocks. Irregularly shaped blocks, including those
indented by cul-de-sacs, containing interior parks or playgrounds and adequate
parking space, will be acceptable when properly designed and covered by
agreements as to maintenance of such park areas.
   (e)   Intersecting streets on primary thoroughfares. The number of
intersecting streets along primary thoroughfares shall be held to a minimum.
Wherever practical, blocks along such thoroughfares shall be not less than
1,200 feet in length.
(Ord. 22-1979, passed 9-11-1979)
§ 1248.06 MINIMUM RIGHTS OF WAY FOR STREETS, CROSSWALKS AND EASEMENTS.
   (a)   Primary thoroughfares and existing highways. Rights-of-way of primary
thoroughfares and existing highways shall be as specified in the Official
Thoroughfare Plan, but not less than 100 feet in any case.
   (b)   Secondary thoroughfares. Rights-of-way of secondary thoroughfares
shall be as specified in the Official Thoroughfare Plan, but not less than 80
feet in any case.
   (c)   Collector streets. Rights-of-way of collector streets shall be as
specified in the Official Thoroughfare Plan, but not less than 70 feet in any
case.
   (d)   Local streets. Rights-of-way of local streets shall be 60 feet. Cul-
de-sacs shall terminate in a circular turnaround having a minimum right-of-way
diameter of 102 feet. Dead-end streets with no turnaround facilities shall not
be approved except as authorized in §
1248.04(h).
   (e)   Alleys. Alleys, where platted, shall have a minimum width of 22 feet.
   (f)   Crosswalks. Crosswalks shall be a minimum of ten feet wide.
   (g)   Utility Easements. Utility easements, where required, shall be at
least ten feet wide along rear or side lot lines.
   (h)   Easements Along Streams. Whenever any stream or important surface
drainage course is located in the area being subdivided, and open drainage is
to be permitted, the subdivider shall provide an adequate easement along each
side of the stream or open drainage course for the purpose of widening,
deepening, relocating, improving or protecting the stream or open drainage
course for drainage or recreational use.
(Ord. 22-1979, passed 9-11-1979)
§ 1248.07 MINIMUM PAVEMENT AND SIDEWALK WIDTHS.
   Minimum pavement widths, measured back-to- back of curb, shall be installed
at the subdivider’s expense in accordance with the following requirements:
   (a)   Primary and secondary thoroughfares and collector streets. Minimum
widths for primary thoroughfares shall be 58 feet; for secondary thoroughfares,
48 feet; and for collector streets, 38 feet. In cases of primary or secondary
thoroughfares usually requiring pavements wider than the minimum, the matter of
financial and other arrangements for installing such wider pavements or
expanding the pavements at some future date shall be taken up by the developer
with officials having jurisdiction therefor, except as provided in §
1250.04(a)(1).
   (b)   Collector street exceptions. In cases where a collector street does
not front directly on a public school site, or, in the opinion of the Planning
Commission, where such street will not provide the shortest and most logical
route from at least 250 dwelling units within the neighborhood, as delineated
in the Official Comprehensive Master Plan, to destinations outside the
neighborhood, a pavement width of 28 feet measured back-to-back of curb may be
permitted. In all cases, the costs of collector streets shall be financed by
the subdivider.
   (c)   Local streets. The minimum width for local streets shall be 30 feet.
The pavement of a turning circle at the end of a cul-de-sac shall have a
minimum outside diameter of 80 feet back-to-back of curb.
   (d)   Alleys and service drives. The minimum width for alleys and service
drives shall be 20 feet, unless planned for one-way directional movement.
   (e)   Sidewalks and crosswalks. Sidewalks shall be installed on both sides
of all streets and within the right-of-way or easement of any crosswalk and
shall have a minimum width of four feet.
(Ord. 22-1979, passed 9-11-1979)
§ 1248.08 STREET GRADES AND CURVES.
   The Planning Commission shall establish standards for all street grades and
curves. Such standards may be changed at any time by a majority vote of the
Commission.
   Street grade and curve standards, as established by the Commission, are
included in Appendix B following the text of these Subdivision Regulations and
shall be complied with in the design and approval of subdivisions.
(Ord. 22-1979, passed 9-11-1979)
§ 1248.09 INTERSECTIONS.
   (a)   Property lines. At the intersection of two streets, property line
corners shall be rounded by an arc, the minimum radius of which shall be 12.5
feet.
   (b)   Street curbs. Street curbs or edges of street pavements shall be
rounded by radii of at least 25 feet for local and collector streets and 30
feet for primary and secondary thoroughfares.
   (c)   Small-Angle Intersections. The minimum radii noted in this section
shall be increased when the smallest angle of intersection is less than 80
degrees, or in any case where the Planning Commission considers an increase
necessary.
   (d)   Angles. The minimum intersection angle of centerlines at intersections
shall be 80 degrees on local streets and 85 degrees on all other streets and
thoroughfares.
(Ord. 22-1979, passed 9-11-1979)
§ 1248.10 LOTS.
   (a)   Size, shape and orientation. The size, shape and orientation of lots
shall be appropriate to the location of the proposed subdivision and for the
types of development contemplated, in compliance with applicable requirements
set forth in the Zoning Code.
   (b)   minimum frontage and lot widths. Lot frontage and width shall comply
with the requirements set forth in the Zoning Code.
   (c)   Access.
      (1)   Generally. All lots shall front on an improved public street except
as otherwise allowed in the Zoning Code.
      (2)   Lots fronting directly on a primary thoroughfare. Any lot which is
platted after the enactment of these Subdivision Regulations (Ordinance 22-
1979, passed September 11, 1979) and which fronts or is proposed to front
directly on a primary thoroughfare, as delineated on the Official Thoroughfare
Plan, shall have a turnaround provided in conjunction with the driveway serving
the structure thereon, to discourage motor vehicles from backing out onto the
primary thoroughfare.
   (d)   Double frontage lots. Lots with double frontage shall not be approved,
except to avoid frontage upon heavily traveled thoroughfares.
   (e)   Lot lines. Side lines of lots shall be approximately at right angles
or radial to the street line unless, in the opinion of the Planning Commission,
a variation from this rule will give a better street and lot plan.
   (f)   Building lines or set-back lines. Minimum building lines or set-back
lines shall comply with the requirements set forth in the Zoning Code.
(Ord. 22-1979, passed 9-11-1979)
CHAPTER 1250: IMPROVEMENTS
1250.01   Installations required prior to submission of record plats.
1250.02   Bonds.
1250.03   Cost of improvements.
1250.04   Required improvements.
1250.05   Construction plans.
1250.06   Inspections.
1250.07   Time limits for completion.
1250.08   Acceptance of streets.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Inspection of construction; acceptance by Village - see Ohio R.C. 711.091
   Streets and sidewalks - see S.U. & P.S.
Ch. 1020,
Ch. 1022
   Assessments for improvements - see S.U. & P.S.
Ch. 1028
   Sewers - see S.U. & P.S.
Ch. 1040
   Water - see S.U. & P.S.
Ch. 1042
   Gas - see S.U. & P.S.
Ch. 1044
   Electricity - see S.U. & P.S.
Ch. 1046
   Design standards - see S.U. & P.S. Ch. 1048
   Compliance with improvement requirements - see P. & Z.
1244.02
   Improvement plans - see P. & Z.
1244.05,
1246.03
§ 1250.01 INSTALLATIONS REQUIRED PRIOR TO SUBMISSION OF RECORD PLATS.
   As a condition precedent to approval of a plat of a subdivision of land
within the Village, all improvements required by this chapter shall be
completed prior to the filing of the final record plat with the Planning
Commission. Such improvements shall be installed in accordance with the
standards set forth or authorized to be set forth in these Subdivision
Regulations and under the supervision of the officials herein designated.
(Ord. 22-1979, passed 9-11-1979)
§ 1250.02 BONDS.
   If improvements are not completed as required in §
1250.01, the subdivider shall furnish the Village with a performance bond in
the form of cash, property bond or bond of a recognized surety company
acceptable to the Planning Commission, sufficient to cover the cost, including
predicted inflation increase, as estimated by the appropriate Village agency,
of all improvements required to be installed by the subdivider. Such bond shall
be used to ensure the actual construction and installation of such improvements
after approval of the final plat and within the time stated in §
1250.07. Such bond shall be subject to approval of the Law Director and shall
be filed with the Finance Director.
§ 1250.03 COST OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, all improvements, whether
constructed before or after approval of the final record plat as provided in
this chapter, shall be installed at the subdivider’s cost.
(Ord. 22-1979, passed 9-11-1979)
§ 1250.04 REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS.
   (a)   Streets. Streets shall be graded to the full width of the right-of-way
and shall be fully constructed and paved in accordance with standards and
specifications established by the Village, as specified in Appendix C following
the text of these Subdivision Regulations. Specifically:
      (1)   Primary and secondary thoroughfares. Where the Planning Commission
requires a pavement width greater than the required minimum and/or a right-of-
way width greater than the required minimum, the Village shall pay the cost of
pavement construction in excess of the required minimum and the cost of right-
of-way in excess of the required minimum. The Commission may approve lesser
pavement widths in negotiating for the acquisition of additional rights-of-way.
      (2)   Collector and local streets. The cost of all improvements on
collector and local streets, including turnarounds at the ends of cul-de-sacs,
shall be paid by the subdivider.
      (3)   Sidewalks. Concrete sidewalks shall be installed on both sides of
the street in accordance with the specifications of the Village. The Planning
Commission may waive sidewalk requirements on one side of the street.
   (b)   Storm water sewer or drainage system. Every subdivision shall be
provided with a storm water sewer or drainage system which is adequate to serve
the platted area and which otherwise meets the standards and specifications of
the Village.
   Where feasible, storm water drainage may be permitted by means of ditches in
drainage courses recommended by the Village Engineer and endorsed by the
Planning Commission. Such type of drainage shall be treated for erosion as
recommended by the Engineer and approved by the Commission.
   (c)   Sanitary sewers. Every subdivision shall be provided with a complete
sanitary sewerage system connected with available sewer mains, including a
lateral connection for each lot. All sewers shall be constructed in accordance
with Village standards.
   (d)   Water distribution. Every subdivision shall be provided with a
complete water distribution system adequate to serve the area being platted, in
accordance with requirements of the Cincinnati Water Works.
   (e)   Planting.
      (1)   Parkways. All landscaped strips, parkways and screening areas
dedicated to the public shall be graded and seeded in an appropriate manner.
      (2)   Street trees. Shade or ornamental trees to be planted in the
Village rights-of-way shall be in accordance with Appendix F following the text
of these Subdivision Regulations.
   (f)   Street name signs. Street name signs shall be provided at all street
intersections or where a change of direction of a street requires a change of
street name. The signs shall be of the size and type approved for use by the
Village.
   (g)   Permanent monuments. Accurately located monuments shall be placed and
constructed in accordance with the requirements of the Ohio Revised Code. These
monuments shall be located on the record plat and certified by the subdivider’s
surveyor.
(Ord. 22-1979, passed 9-11-1979)
§ 1250.05 CONSTRUCTION PLANS.
   Construction plans for improvements to be installed shall be prepared by a
qualified registered engineer and submitted in accordance with the
specifications of officials having jurisdiction over such plans. No
improvements shall be installed until and unless such plans have been received
and approved by such officials.
(Ord. 22-1979, passed 9-11-1979)
§ 1250.06 INSPECTIONS.
   Prior to starting any of the work covered by approved construction plans,
the subdivider shall make arrangements to provide for inspection of the work,
which inspection shall be sufficient, in the opinion of the Service Director/
Street Commissioner or the Building Commissioner/Inspector, to ensure
compliance with the plans and specifications as approved. The subdivider shall
also obtain written approval thereof from the Service Director/Street
Commissioner or the Building Commissioner/ Inspector before commencing the
work.
(Ord. 22-1979, passed 9-11-1979)
§ 1250.07 TIME LIMITS FOR COMPLETION.
   Construction of all improvements required under this chapter shall be
completed within three years from the date of approval of the commencement of
the work, as specified in §
1250.06, unless good cause can be shown for the granting of an extension of
time, which extension shall be made by Council.
(Ord. 22-1979, passed 9-11-1979)
§ 1250.08 ACCEPTANCE OF STREETS.
   The approval of a final record plat by the Planning Commission shall not be
deemed to be an acceptance of the dedication of any public street or any other
proposed public way or open space shown on such plat. Such streets and
improvements included therein shall be accepted as public streets and ways
under Ohio R.C. 711.091. Such acceptance shall be endorsed on the plat at the
time such approval is given by the Clerk of Council.
APPENDIX A: PLAN APPROVAL PROCEDURE
   (a)   Procedure for Approval. In accordance with §
1244.03, the Planning Commission should establish procedures for the
submission, review and approval of all preliminary plans, improvement plans and
record plats. Time requirements for processing, as well as the number of prints
needed for review of various public agencies, should also be included. In cases
where other agencies exercise approval authority, a complete description of
such procedures should also be included.
   (b)   Method for Plan Approval.
      (1)   Preliminary plans. The developer shall work out layout and road
patterns with the County Regional Planning Commission staff and deliver an
approved and initialed plan and three copies thereof to the Village offices for
review by the Village Engineer and the Building Commissioner/Inspector. All
plans submitted to the Village for review shall not be folded, but may be
rolled.
         When such plans are approved, the Village Engineer and Building
Commissioner/Inspector shall submit one signed copy to the Planning Commission
with their approval report and one copy to each Commission member.
         The Commission will discuss and approve the plan after any required
changes are accomplished.
         After approval by the Commission, the developer shall submit seven
copies of the corrected plan to the Village Administrator, to be distributed as
follows: one for the Regional Planning Commission; two for the Village
Engineer; one for the Building Commissioner/Inspector; one for the Planning
Commission; and two for the developer.
      (2)   Water works plan. The developer shall submit two copies of a water
works plan to the Village Administrator for review by the Village Engineer. All
plans submitted to the Village for review shall not be folded, but may be
rolled.
            The Village Engineer shall mark revisions on one copy of the water
works plan and return such copy to the developer. The developer shall make the
necessary revisions on such plan, resubmit two sets of the corrected plan to
the Engineer for Planning Commission approval and submit approved copies of the
corrected plan to the Cincinnati Water Works Department for its approval.
            After approval by the Cincinnati Water Works Department, the
developer shall submit three copies of the final approved plan to the Village
Administrator to be distributed as follows: two for the Village Engineer and
one for the Fire Department.
      (3)   Subdivision improvement plans. Subdivision improvement plans must
follow the approved preliminary plans as to lot layout and road pattern.
            The developer shall deliver three copies of improvement plans,
grading plans and supporting data for sanitary and storm sewer design to the
Village Administrator for review by the Village Engineer. All plans submitted
to the Village for review shall not be folded, but may be rolled.
            The Engineer will mark revisions on one copy of these plans and
supporting data for sanitary and storm sewer design and send them along with
one unmarked copy of each to the Metropolitan Sewer District (M.S.D.) for
review and approval. The District’s Sanitary Engineer will add his or her
notations to the marked copy and return such copy to the developer. The absence
of any required data shall be sufficient cause for immediate rejection by the
Village Engineer.
            The developer shall correct all revisions and send three corrected
copies and the original marked copy to the Metropolitan Sewer District. The
Sanitary Engineer shall review such plans to see that all revisions for
sanitary and storm sewers have been corrected, and if so, he or she will sign
two copies and send them along with the original marked copy to the Village
Engineer.
            The Village Engineer shall review such plans to see that all other
revisions have been corrected, and if so, he or she will approve and sign such
plans. If corrections are not satisfactory to the Village Engineer, he or she
will send one marked copy to the developer with instructions to correct the
resubmitted plans.
            As a matter of policy the Village Engineer may, in all cases
mentioned in this division, correspond directly with the developer’s
consultant, with the developer’s permission in writing. The Village Engineer
will submit one signed copy to the Planning Commission with his or her approval
report.
            The Commission will discuss and approve the plans after any
required changes are accomplished.
            To ensure placement on the Commission agenda, all plans which are
presumably correct must be submitted to the Village Engineer at least two weeks
prior to the Commission agenda closing date.
            The developer shall submit ten copies of the approved plan to the
Secretary of the Planning Commission for signature. Such signed prints will be
distributed by the Village Administrator as follows: two for the Metropolitan
Sewer District, one for Cincinnati Gas and Electric, one for the County Board
of Health, one for the Cincinnati Water Works Department, two for the Village
Engineer, one for the Planning Commission, and two for the developer.
      (4)   Record plats. The developer shall submit two copies of the record
plat to the Village Administrator for review by the Village Engineer. All plans
submitted to the Village for review shall not be folded, but may be rolled.
            The Village Engineer will mark revisions on one copy and send such
copy back to the developer. The developer shall correct all revisions and send
the marked copy and corrected copies to the Engineer. The Engineer shall review
the plans to see that all revisions have been corrected, and if so, he or she
shall sign and approve the plans. If the corrections are not satisfactory to
the Engineer, he or she shall send one marked copy to the developer with
instructions to correct and resubmit the plans. The Engineer will send two
copies of the corrected plans to the Metropolitan Sewer District.
            The Engineer shall determine the amount of bond required, including
predicted inflation increase, if any, for roadway improvements. The
Metropolitan Sewer District shall determine the amount of the bond required, if
any, for underground improvements and send this bond amount to the Engineer.
The Engineer shall notify the developer of the total amount of bond required,
if any. The Engineer may elect to determine the amount of the bond for storm
sewers.
            The developer shall post the necessary bond with the Finance
Director, who will notify the Village Engineer, in writing, that the bond has
been received.
            As a matter of policy, the Engineer may, in all cases mentioned in
this division, correspond directly with the developer’s consultant, with the
developer’s permission in writing.
            The Engineer shall submit his or her approval report, one corrected
copy of the record plat and the original corrected tracing to the Planning
Commission, and shall submit one copy to each member after all bonds have been
received.
            The Commission will approve the record plat for recordation and the
Secretary of the Commission will sign the original tracing.
            The original polyester film tracing will be given to the developer
so it can be recorded, and five copies of it will be given to the Village
Administrator for distribution as follows: one for the Planning Commission; two
for the Engineer; one for the Metropolitan Sewer District; and one for the
Cincinnati Water Works Department.
            After the streets indicated on his or her record plat have been
accepted by the Village, the developer shall submit the original tracing to the
Village Administrator. The Engineer shall have the Clerk of Council sign this
tracing and return it to the developer. The developer shall furnish the Village
Administrator five copies of the final record plat for distribution, as
mentioned in this division. The Planning Commission meeting agenda closing date
shall be ten days prior to the regular Commission meeting.
APPENDIX B: STREET GRADE AND CURVE STANDARDS
   (a)   Establishment. In accordance with §
1248.08, the Planning Commission shall establish standards for all street
grades and curves.
   As a means of coordinating development with the standards of the County, the
Planning Commission hereby establishes all County street grades and curve
standards as requirements for all subdivisions within the Village, provided
that any amendment to County standards dated after the adoption of this
Appendix (Ordinance 22-1979, passed September 11, 1979) shall not take effect
in the Village without prior approval of the Planning Commission.
   (b)   Specifications.
      (1)   Curves. The minimum radius of curvature on the centerline shall be
500 feet for primary or secondary thoroughfares, 200 feet for collector streets
and 100 feet for minor residential streets.
      (2)   Grades. Maximum grades shall not exceed six percent for primary or
secondary thoroughfares or twelve percent for collector or local streets. The
minimum grade of all streets shall be 0.8 percent. Grades across intersections
shall not exceed four percent except at the discretion of the Village Engineer
and/or the County Engineer.
            Changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves of a minimum
length equal to 15 times the algebraic difference in rate of grade for
thoroughfares, and one-half such minimum length for minor or local streets.
(Ord. 22-1979, passed 9-11-1979)
APPENDIX C: ENGINEERING RULES AND REGULATIONS; BACKFILL REQUIREMENTS
   (a)   Engineering Rules and Regulations. In all cases not specifically
covered by these Subdivision Regulations and appendices thereto, the
appropriate sections of the existing County Engineering Rules and Regulations,
as amended, shall remain in effect. However, all amendments to the County
Engineering Rules and Regulations taking effect after the passage of these
Subdivision Regulations (Ordinance 22-1979, passed September 11, 1979) shall
not be binding, unless approved by the Planning Commission and adopted by
Council.
   The requirements for backfilling of trenches set forth in division (b)
hereof are an exception to this division.
   (b)   Backfill Requirements. Excavations for any purpose under street
pavements, sidewalks or areas to be paved shall be backfilled with granular
material meeting the requirements for 310 material as per the State
Construction and Material Specifications. No paving operation shall be
permitted until all excavations have been backfilled, compacted, inspected and
approved.
   All trenches made in the subgrade of the proposed roadbed or sidewalk area,
and all trenches parallel to the roadway where the edge of the trench is nearer
than one foot to the edge of the proposed pavement or the proposed curb, shall
be backfilled with granular material. All transverse trenches shall be
backfilled two feet outside the limits of the proposed roadbed of the pavement.
   Granular material used for bedding and backfilling shall be compacted, with
mechanical tampers, under and around the conduit and to the top of the trench
in layers not to exceed four inches in thickness. Granular material may be
compacted with water if satisfactory drainage is provided for the free water.
When compacting with water, the granular material may be deposited in ponded
water, or it may be placed in layers not to exceed twelve inches loose depth
and each layer thoroughly saturated with water. The material shall be filled
and compacted to the final grade, line and cross-section of the subgrade as
shown on the improvement plan. The granular material shall be compacted to 95
percent of its maximum laboratory dry weight.
   Trenches in areas in the unimproved portion of the right-of-way shall be
backfilled with suitable soil placed in layers not to exceed four inches in
thickness and compacted with mechanical tampers. The soil shall be compacted to
95 percent of its maximum laboratory dry weight. Granular material may be used
in backfilling such trenches. The granular material shall be placed and
compacted as mentioned in this division.
(Ord. 22-1979, passed 9-11-1979)
CHAPTER D: DITCHES, CHANNELS AND SWALES
   (a)   Generally. As used in this appendix, “ditches” means open watercourses
for the purpose of carrying water overland to or in lieu of closed conduits or
to other ditches, channels or swales. “Ditches” includes channels and swales.
   Ditches shall be shown on the improvement plan as part of the drawings and
in profile at the same scale as storm and sanitary sewers.
   The plan shall also contain a typical section of the ditch, showing width of
bottom, side slopes and type and dimensions of lining.
   (b)   Design. The design of ditches shall consist of the following:
      (1)   Hydraulically determining the depth and configuration of ditch
necessary to carry the design peak flow at the design velocity. The cross-
section of the ditch shall be as shown in the standard drawings.
      (2)   Determining the type and dimensions of the ditch lining needed to
maintain proper erosion control to prevent scour or needed to prevent
undesirable sedimentation.
   (c)   Design Criteria. All ditches shall be designed for the ultimate use of
the land and in accordance with the following:
      (1)   Review information. The information necessary for proper review is
the station on the ditch of the point being considered; discharge (Q); velocity
(v); coefficient of friction (n); depth (d); and the type, limits and
dimensions of ditch lining.
      (2)   Design sheets. The ditch design sheet recommended by the Village
Engineer, or a reasonable fascimile thereof, shall be used in the design and
shall accompany the plans submitted for review.
      (3)   Points of design. Each ditch shall be checked for the information
required in division (c)(1) hereof at each point where a concentrated discharge
enters the ditch, at each point where the type of ditch lining changes, at each
change in grade and at various points throughout its length at a maximum of
400-foot intervals. The entire reach of ditch shall be designed for the total
discharge at the lower end of the reach.
      (4)   Surface run-off. The quantity of surface run-off or discharge shall
be computed by the rational formula Q=ciA.
         A.   Coefficient of run-off (c). A weighted value of c shall be
computed for each contributing area using the following values:
                     0.9      -   roof and hard surfaced areas
                     0.7      -   steep grassed areas (4:1 or steeper)
                     0.4      -   for unpaved areas, lawns and yards
         B.   Intensity of precipitation (I). The intensity of rainfall shall
be obtained by use of the rainfall duration-versus-intensity chart D-802 - Area
D - Ohio Department of Highways Location and Design Manual. The duration of
rainfall shown on the graph is the concentration time or an estimate of the
time for the water to flow from the most remote part of the drainage area to
the point in the ditch being analyzed. Such time can best be estimated by the
use of the overland flow chart found in Volume One of the Date Book for Civil
Engineers by Seelye. The minimum time to the first point shall be 15 minutes.
         C.   Design frequency. The design frequency for depth shall be a ten-
year storm and for velocity a two-year storm, except where existing or proposed
buildings would be flooded, then in which case a 25 year design frequency shall
be used for depth.
      (5)   Hydraulic design. The ditch will be hydraulically designed by the
use of Manning’s formula for open-channel flow. In order to expedite the
determination of velocity and depth, the charts contained in the Bureau of
Public Roads, Hydraulic Design series No. 3, “Design Charts for Open Channel
Flow” may be used.
         A.   Coefficient of friction (n). The coefficient of friction shall be
determined as follows:
                     n =      .015 paved lining of precast concrete riprap
                     n =      .03 bare earth (seeding)
                     n =      .04 sodding of grouted riprap
                     n =      .08 dumped rock channel protection
         B.   Allowable velocities. The maximum allowable velocities for
various linings shall be as follows:
                     Bare earth (seeding) - to 2.5 feet per second (fps)
                     Sodding - 2.5 fps to 5.5 fps
               Dumped rock channel protection - Over 5.5 fps, or paved lining,
precast concrete riprap or grouted riprap
         C.   Minimum grades or velocity. The minimum grade on any ditch shall
be 0.3 percent. On occasion it may be necessary to establish a minimum velocity
to preclude any undesirable sedimentation in the ditch. These minimum
velocities will be at the discretion of the Village Engineer and will be
handled individually.
   (d)   Grading Plan. The developer shall furnish a grading plan to the
Village Engineer unless specifically advised otherwise. If the grading plan is
not submitted, the improvement plan review will be delayed and acceptance of
the subdivision will be postponed until the grading plan can be reviewed.
   (e)   Culverts and Storm Sewers.
      (1)   Generally. Culverts and storm sewers that begin as an open pipe
shall be checked for headwater depth. The headwater depth shall be such that no
property damage will result at the design storm and all water shall be
contained within the established drainage easement.
      (2)   Inlet and outlet ditches. Inlet and outlet ditches for culverts and
storm sewers shall be hydraulically checked, and where, in the opinion of the
Village Engineer, excessive velocities exist, erosion control shall be
provided. The centerline profile of the existing ditch at the inlet and outlet
of a culvert or storm sewer shall be shown at least 100 feet beyond the point
of the beginning or end of the work.
   (f)   Interpretation and Extra Data. The interpretation of this appendix is
the sole responsibility of the Village Engineer. The Engineer may, at his or
her discretion, require any other data he or she deems necessary for a proper
review.
(Ord. 22-1979, passed 9-11-1979)
APPENDIX E: STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DRAWINGS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/400a1417679729aa03ba6ecffb49741da640bf15/
IMAGES/0-0-0-35.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/400a1417679729aa03ba6ecffb49741da640bf15/
IMAGES/0-0-0-37.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/400a1417679729aa03ba6ecffb49741da640bf15/
IMAGES/0-0-0-39.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/400a1417679729aa03ba6ecffb49741da640bf15/
IMAGES/0-0-0-41.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/400a1417679729aa03ba6ecffb49741da640bf15/
IMAGES/0-0-0-43.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/400a1417679729aa03ba6ecffb49741da640bf15/
IMAGES/0-0-0-45.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/400a1417679729aa03ba6ecffb49741da640bf15/
IMAGES/0-0-0-47.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/400a1417679729aa03ba6ecffb49741da640bf15/
IMAGES/0-0-0-49.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/400a1417679729aa03ba6ecffb49741da640bf15/
IMAGES/0-0-0-51.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/400a1417679729aa03ba6ecffb49741da640bf15/
IMAGES/0-0-0-53.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/400a1417679729aa03ba6ecffb49741da640bf15/
IMAGES/0-0-0-55.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/400a1417679729aa03ba6ecffb49741da640bf15/
IMAGES/0-0-0-57.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/400a1417679729aa03ba6ecffb49741da640bf15/
IMAGES/0-0-0-59.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/400a1417679729aa03ba6ecffb49741da640bf15/
IMAGES/0-0-0-61.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/400a1417679729aa03ba6ecffb49741da640bf15/
IMAGES/0-0-0-63.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/400a1417679729aa03ba6ecffb49741da640bf15/
IMAGES/0-0-0-65.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/400a1417679729aa03ba6ecffb49741da640bf15/
IMAGES/0-0-0-67.jpg]
 
APPENDIX F: STREET TREE LIST
Small Trees (under 25' in tree lawns of at least 3') — under wires OK
   [ ]   Acer ginnala Amur maple
   [ ]   Acer platanoides 'Crimson Sentry' crimson sentry Norway maple
   [ ]   Acer tataricum tartarian maple
   [ ]   Acer truncatum 'Pacific Sunset' pacific sunset shantung maple
   [ ]   Amelanchier arborea 'Cumulus' serviceberry
   [ ]   Amelanchier canadensis downy serviceberry
   [ ]   Amelanchier x grandiflora 'Autumn Brillance' autumn brillance
serviceberry
   [ ]   Amelanchier x grandiflora 'Robin Hill' robin hill serviceberry
   [ ]   Amelanchier laevis Allegheny serviceberry
   [ ]   Carpinus betulus upright European hombeam
   [ ]   Carpinus japonica Japanese hornbeam
   [ ]   Cercis canadensis eastern redbud
   [ ]   Cercis canadensis var. alba eastern redbud
   [ ]   Corpus kousa kousa dogwood
   [ ]   Corpus mas comelian-cherry dogwood
   [ ]   Crataegus crusgalll var. lnermis thornless cockspur hawthorn
   [ ]   Crataegus x lavallei Lavelle hawthorn
   [ ]   Crataegus phaenopyrum Washington hawthorn
   [ ]   Crataegus phaenopyrum x Crataegus crusgalli 'Vaughn' Vaughn hawthorn
   [ ]   Crataegus punctuta var. inermis 'Ohio Pioneer' thornless Ohio pioneer
hawthorn
   [ ]   Crataegus viridis 'Winter King' winter king hawthorn
   [ ]   Magnolia soulangiana saucer magnolia
   [ ]   Magnolia stellata star magnolia
   [ ]   Magnolia virginiana sweet bay magnolia
   [ ]   Malus spp. flowering crabapple
Disease resistant cultivars: 'Ormiston Roy', 'Sentinel', 'Floribunda',
'Candymint', 'Louisa', 'and Lollipop'
      o   Red flowering 'Centurion' (red fruit-narrow upright form), 'Liset',
'Prairifire' (orange- red fruit — upright form), Indiana Magic', 'Royal Ruby',
'Adams' (red fruit-round form), 'Red Barron' (dark red fruit — narrow upright
form)
      o   Pink flowering 'Strawberry Parfait', 'Velvet Pillar', 'Centennial',
'Pink Beauty', 'Radiant'
      o   White flowering 'Adirondack', Donald Wyman' (great for urban use — be
sure to specify tree form, disease resistant but susceptible to fire-blight,
red fruit) Excalibur, 'Holiday Gold', 'Firebird', 'Madonna', 'Sugar Tyme',
'White Angel', 'Red Jewel', `Snowcloud', 'Spring Snow', 'White Candle',
'Baccata', `Jackii', 'Bob White'
   [ ]   Malus transitoria 'Golden Raindrops' crabapple
   [ ]   Pyrus fauriei 'Westwood' Korean sun pear
   [ ]   Syringe reticulata 'Ivory Silk' Japanese tree lilac
   [ ]   Syringe pekinensis cultivars Japanese tree lilac
Medium Trees (under 40' in tree lawns of at least 5) – over high wires OK
   [ ]   Acer buergerianum trident maple
   [ ]   Acer campestre hedge maple
   [ ]   Acer griseum paper bark maple
   [ ]   Acer miyabei
   [ ]   Acer pseudoplatanus sycamore maple
   [ ]   Acer triflorum
   [ ]   Acer truncatum `Keithsform'
   [ ]   Acer truncatum x Acer platanoides 'Norwegian Sunset' Norwegian sunset
maple
   [ ]   Aesculus x carnea red horse chestnut
   [ ]   Cercidiphyllum japonicum katsura tree
   [ ]   Cladrastis kentukea yellowwood
   [ ]   Eucommia ulmoides hardy rubber tree
   [ ]   Halesia carolina Carolina silver bell
   [ ]   Ilex opaca American holly
   [ ]   Koelreuteria paniculata goldenrain tree
   [ ]   Magnolia grandiflora 'Bracken's Brown Beauty' southern magnolia
   [ ]   Parrotia persica Persian ironwood
   [ ]   Phellodendron amurense 'Macho' Amur cork tree
   [ ]   Prunus x okame okame cherry
   [ ]   Prunus sargenti sargent cherry
      o   'Columnar Sargent Rancho'
   [ ]   Prunus serrulata Japanese flowering cherry
   [ ]   Prunus subhirtella var. autumnalis higan cherry
   [ ]   Prunus yedoensis yoshino cherry
   [ ]   Pyrus calleryana callery pear
      o   'Aristocrat', ' Autumn Blaze', 'Capital', 'Cleveland Select', 'Red
Spire', 'Trinity'
   [ ]   Quercus marilandica blackjack oak
   [ ]   Sassafras albidium sassafras
   [ ]   Sophora japonica 'Regent', Japanese pagoda
   [ ]   Sorbus alnifolia Korean mountain ash
   [ ]   Stewartia pseudocamellia Japanese stewardia
   [ ]   Tilia cordate little-leaf linden,
      o   'Greenspire”Gleneven”Corinthian'
   [ ]   Tilia x euchlora Crimean linden
   [ ]   Tilia heterophylla bee tree linden
   [ ]   Tilia pallida pale leaf linden
   [ ]   Tilia platyphyllos big leaf linden
   [ ]   Tilia tomentosa sterling silver linden
      o   'Sterling'
Large Trees (over 40' in tree lawns of at least 7') – No wires
   [ ]   Acer nigrum black maple
   [ ]   Acer X freemanii freeman maple
      o   'Autumn Blaze', 'Celebration', `Jeffsred'
   [ ]   Acer platanoides, Norway maple
      o   'Cleveland', 'Crimson King', 'Emerald Queen', 'Olmstead', Schwedler
   [ ]   Acer rubrum red maple
      o   'Autumn Flame', 'October Glory', 'Red Sunset', 'Autumn Radiance',
`Karpick', 'Northwood'
   [ ]   Acer saccharum sugar maple
      o   'Goldspire', 'Green Mountain' 'Commemoration'
   [ ]   Acer trunatum X platanoides Warrensred' sunset maple
   [ ]   Betula nigra Hertiage' river birch
   [ ]   Cladrastis lutea, also 'Perkins Pink' American yellowwood
   [ ]   Corylus avellana European filbert
   [ ]   Corylus colurna, Turkish filbert
   [ ]   Ginkgo biloba, ginkgo or maidenhair (male only)
      o   'Fairmont', 'Lakeview', 'Mayfield', 'Palo Alto', 'Princeton Sentry',
'Sinclair', 'Autumn Gold'
   [ ]   Gleditsia triacanthos var. inermas, thornless honeylocust
      o   'Skyline', 'Imperial', 'Shademaster'
   [ ]   Gymnocladus dioicus, Kentucky coffee tree
   [ ]   Larix decidua European larch
   [ ]   Larix kaempferi Japanese larch
   [ ]   Liriodendron tulipifera tulip tree
   [ ]   Liquidambar styraciflua sweet gum
      o   'Moraine', 'Rotundiloba' (and/or 'Rotundifolia')
   [ ]   Magnolia acuminata cucumber tree
   [ ]   Metasequoia glyptostroboides dawn redwood
   [ ]   Nyssa sylvatica black gum
   [ ]   Platanus x acerfolia London plane
      o   'Bloodgood'
   [ ]   Platanus occidentalis American sycamore
   [ ]   Quercus acutissima saw tooth oak
   [ ]   Quercus alba white oak
   [ ]   Quercus bicolor swamp white oak
   [ ]   Quercus coccinea scarlet oak
   [ ]   Quercus ellipsoidalis northern pin oak
   [ ]   Quercus falcate southern red oak
   [ ]   Quercus frainetto 'Schmidt' forest green oak
   [ ]   Quercus gambelii gamble oak
   [ ]   Quercus imbricaria shingle oak
   [ ]   Quercus lyrata over cup oak
   [ ]   Quercus macrocarpa bur oak
   [ ]   Quercus muehlenbergii Chinkapin oak
   [ ]   Quercus michauxii swamp chestnut oak
   [ ]   Quercus phellos willow oak
   [ ]   Quercus prinus chestnut oak
   [ ]   Quercus robur English oak
   [ ]   Quercus robur x bicolor 'Long' regal prince oak
   [ ]   Quercus rubra red oak
   [ ]   Quercus stellata post oak
   [ ]   Quercus shumardii shumard oak
   [ ]   Quercus velutina black oak
   [ ]   Taxodium distichum bald cypress
   [ ]   Tilia americana American linden
      o   ‘Sentry' 'Wendell'
   [ ]   Tilia americana X euchlora 'Redmond' Redmond linden
   [ ]   Ulmus americana American elm
      o   'Princeton', 'Commendation', 'Triumph', 'New Horizon' 'New Harmony'
      o   'Valley Forge', 'Frontier', 'Homestead', 'Pioneer'
   [ ]   Ulnus carpinifolia English elm
   [ ]   Ulmus japonica X wilsoniana 'Morton' accolade elm
   [ ]   Ulmus parvifolia lacebark elm
   [ ]   Zelkova serrata 'Green Vase', Japanese zelkova
(Ord. 25-2007, passed - -2007)
TITLE SIX: ZONING
CHAPTER 1252: GENERAL PROVISIONS
1252.01   Purpose and scope.
1252.02   Short title.
1252.03   Interpretation and conflicts.
1252.04   Compliance required.
1252.05   Application to existing construction.
1252.06   Separability.
1252.07   Grandfathering.
§ 1252.01 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   This Zoning Code is enacted in accordance with a comprehensive plan for the
purpose of promoting the public health, safety, convenience and general
welfare. This Zoning Code contains provisions for establishing land use
classifications; dividing the Municipality into districts; imposing
regulations, restrictions and prohibitions upon the land use and occupancy of
real property; limiting the height, area and bulk of buildings and the space
around them; establishing standards of performance and design; and providing
for the administration and enforcement of this Zoning Code.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1252.02 SHORT TITLE.
   These regulations shall be known as and may be cited as the Zoning Ordinance
of Woodlawn, Ohio, the Land Use Regulations of Woodlawn, Ohio or the Zoning
Code.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1252.03 INTERPRETATION AND CONFLICTS.
   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Zoning Code
shall be held to be minimum requirements. Wherever this Zoning Code imposes a
greater restriction than is imposed or required by other rules, regulations or
ordinances applicable to Woodlawn, this Zoning Code shall govern.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1252.04 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   Except as hereinafter specified, no land, building, structure or premises
shall hereafter be used, and no building, part thereof or other structure shall
be located, erected, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged or altered,
except in conformity with the regulations specified in this Zoning Code for the
district in which it is located. Such regulations include, but are not limited
to, the use of the building, structure or land, including performance standards
for the control of any dangerous and objectionable elements in connection with
such use; the height, size and dimensions of buildings or structures; the size
or dimensions of lots, yards and other open spaces surrounding buildings; and
the provision, location, size, improvement and operation of off-street parking,
loading and unloading spaces.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1252.05 APPLICATION TO EXISTING CONSTRUCTION.
   Nothing in this Zoning Code shall require any change in the overall layout,
plans, construction, size or designated use of any development, building,
structure or part thereof for which official approval and required building
permits have been granted before the enactment of this Zoning Code provided
that the use, building or structure is legally conforming prior to the
enactment of this Zoning Code or any subsequent amendments that may occur.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1252.06 SEPARABILITY.
   This Zoning Code and the various chapters, sections and paragraphs hereof
are hereby declared to be severable. If any chapter, section, subsection,
paragraph, sentence or phrase of this Zoning Code is adjudged unconstitutional
or invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this Zoning
Code shall not be affected thereby.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
 § 1252.07 GRANDFATHERING.
   Any use which legally exists at the time of the adoption of this Zoning Code
shall be permitted to continue to exist as it currently operates and shall be
considered “grandfathered” under the regulations of this Zoning Code. These
uses shall be regulated under Chapter 1298, Nonconformities.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
CHAPTER 1253: DEFINITIONS
1253.01   Definitions.
§ 1253.01 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this Zoning Code, “building” includes “structure,” “used”
includes “arranged, designed, constructed, altered, converted, rented or
leased” or “intended to be used,” and “shall” is mandatory, not directory. In
addition, unless the context indicates a different meaning, the following words
and terms shall be defined as used in this Zoning Code:
   (1)   Accessory structure. “Accessory structure” means a structure detached
from the principal structure, located on the same lot and customarily
incidental and subordinate to the principal structure.
   (2)   Accessory use. “Accessory use” means a use, located on the same lot
and customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use.
   (3)   Alley or lane. “Alley or lane” means a public or private way, not more
than 20 feet wide, affording only secondary means of access to abutting
property.
   (4)   Animal hospital or veterinarian clinic. “Animal hospital or
veterinarian clinic” means a building used for the medical treatment, housing
or boarding of domestic animals such as dogs, cats, rabbits and birds by a
veterinarian.
   (5)   Apartment. “Apartment” means a suite of rooms or a room in a multi-
family building arranged and intended as a place of residence for a single
family or group of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit.
   (6)   Apartment house. See “Dwelling, multi- family”.
   (7)   Applicant. “Applicant” means the owner of real estate or an appointed
agent of the owner, who makes application to the Municipality of Woodlawn for
action by the Planning Commission or Board of Zoning Appeals.
   (8)   Assisted living facility. “Assisted living facility” means a
residential care facility, other than a licensed nursing home, that provides
personal care for persons with impairments in performance of activities of
daily living and has the capacity to meet unscheduled needs for assistance.
Typical to this facility is that each residence is private occupancy, furnished
by occupant, with food service, laundry and gathering areas shared in the
facility.
   (9)   Automobile or trailer sales area. “Automobile or trailer sales area”
means an open area, other than a street, used for the display, sale or rental
of new or used motor vehicles or trailers in operable condition and where no
repair work is done.
   (10)   Automobile repair, major. “Major automobile repair” means the general
repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of engines, motor vehicles (one and one-
half tons and under) or trailers; collision services, including body, frame or
fender straightening or repair; overall painting or a paint shop; vehicle steam
cleaning; and any repairs defined in “Automobile repair, minor.”
    (11)   Automobile repair, minor. “Minor automobile repair” means incidental
body or fender
   (12)   Automobile wash or automatic car wash. “Automobile wash” or
“automatic car wash” means a building or structure where chain conveyors,
blowers, steam cleaners, spray wands or hoses, and other mechanical devices are
employed for the purpose of washing motor vehicles.
   (13)   Automobile wrecking. “Automobile wrecking” means the dismantling or
disassembling of used motor vehicles or trailers, or the storage, sale or
dumping of dismantled, partially demolished or dismantled, obsolete or wrecked
vehicles or their parts.
   (14)   Bar or tavern. “Bar or tavern” means an establishment, licensed by
the State of Ohio, serving alcoholic beverages in which the principal business
is the sale of such beverages at retail for consumption on the premises and
where food may be available for consumption on the premises. This use includes
cocktail lounges.
   (15)   Basement. “Basement” means a story whose floor is more than 12 inches
but not more than half of its story height below the average level of the
adjoining ground (as distinguished from a cellar, which is a story more than
one-half below such level).
   (16)   Bed and breakfast establishment. “Bed and breakfast” is any owner
occupied dwelling unit that contains no more than four rooms where lodging,
with or without meals, is provided for compensation.
   (17)   Beginning of construction. “Beginning of construction” means the
incorporation of labor and material inside or outside of the walls of the
building or the removal or grading of topsoil on a site, whichever is performed
first.
   (18)   Billboard or signboard. See “Sign, Billboard”.
   (19)   Block. “Block” means, in describing the boundaries of a district, the
legal description. In all other cases, “block” means the frontage abutting on
one side of a street between two intersecting streets, or between an
intersecting street and a railroad right- of-way, watercourse, cul-de-sac or
end of the street.
   (20)   Board. “Board” means the, Board of Zoning Appeals.
   (21)   Buffer or bufferyard. “Buffer or bufferyard” means an area of healthy
and viable vegetation, natural or planted, adjoining or surrounding a land use
and unoccupied in its entirety by any building structure, paving or portion of
such land use, for the purposes of separating, screening and softening the
effects of the land use. No part of this buffer is to be used for active
recreation, parking, or interior access drives. A buffer may include a wall,
fence or berm, connecting driveways, underground utilities and permitted
signage as provided in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 1295 or any
other related chapter.
   (22)   Buffer, boundary. “Boundary buffer” means a linear area adjacent to
the side and/or rear property line that is set aside to separate, screen, and
soften the detrimental impacts of different uses or intensities upon one
another and upon the surrounding neighborhood.
   (23)   Buffer, streetscape. “Streetscape buffer” means a linear area
adjacent to the front property line extending from side lot-line to side lot-
line that is set aside to shield or enhance views into the parking lot,
establish coordination among diverse buildings, setbacks and uses, to define
the street and access points, to retain the quality of the environment by
providing appropriate vertical mass in keeping with dimensions of horizontal
voids, and to diminish the presence of wires/poles, lights and other clutter
along the public right-of-way.
   (24)   Building. “Building” means any structure having a roof supported by
columns or walls, used or intended to be used for the shelter or enclosure of
persons, animals or property. When such a structure is divided into separate
parts by one or more unopened, continuous walls extending from the ground up,
each part is deemed to be a separate building for the purpose of this Zoning
Code, except with regard to minimum side yard requirements as provided in this
Zoning Code.
   (25)   Building, height of. “Height of building” means the vertical distance
from the average finished grade at the front wall of the building to the
highest point of the coping of a flat roof, or to the deck line of a mansard
roof, or to the mean height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and
gambrel roofs excluding chimneys, vent pipes, lightning rods, crestings and
antennae not regulated herein.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/400a1417679729aa03ba6ecffb49741da640bf15/
IMAGES/0-0-0-69.jpg]
 
   Building Height
   (26)   Building inspection. “Building inspection” means an examination of a
new or existing building by an authorized building official or fire official
for the purpose of determining the compliance of such structure with applicable
building and fire codes.
   (27)   Building Inspector. See “Municipal Building Commissioner”.
   (28)   Building line. See “Setback line”.
   (29)   Building lot area. “Building lot area” means the part of the lot not
included within the open areas required by this Zoning Code.
   (30)   Bulk storage or display. “Bulk storage or display” shall mean the
display of two or more items which are identical or nearly identical examples
of which would include but are not limited to raw materials, firewood, mulch,
fertilizer, building materials, building maintenance products, packaged food
products, soft drinks, salt products, furniture and household goods, statuary
and other manufactured concrete products, and like items.
   (31)   Cellar. “Cellar” means a story, the floor of which is more than one-
half of its story height below the average grade level at the exterior walls of
the building. A cellar shall be counted as a story, for the purpose of height
regulations, only if it is used for dwelling purposes by other than a janitor
or caretaker employed on the premises.
   (32)   Cemetery. “Cemetery” means land used or intended to be used for the
burial of the human dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including
columbaria, crematories, mausoleums and mortuaries if operated in connection
with and within the boundaries of such cemetery.
   (33)   Child day care. “Child day care”, as defined by Ohio R.C. § 5104.01,
child day care means:
      A.   “Type A family day-care home” and “type A home” mean a permanent
residence of the administrator in which child care or publicly funded child
care is provided for seven to 12 children at one time or a permanent residence
of the administrator in which child care is provided for four to 12 children at
one time if four or more children at one time are under two years of age. In
counting children for the purposes of this division, any children under six
years of age who are related to a licensee, administrator, or employee and who
are on the premises of the type A home shall be counted. “Type A family day-
care home” and “type A home” do not include any child day camp.
      B.   “Type B family day-care home” and “type B home” mean a permanent
residence of the provider in which child care is provided for one to six
children at one time and in which no more than three children are under two
years of age at one time. In counting children for the purposes of this
division, any children under six years of age who are related to the provider
and who are on the premises of the type B home shall be counted. “Type B family
day-care home” and “type B home” do not include any child day camp.
   (34)   Clinic. “Clinic” means a licensed medical or dental facility in the
State of Ohio used for the care, diagnosis and treatment of sick, ailing,
infirm and injured persons who are not provided with board or room or kept
overnight on the premises.
    (35)   Club. “Club” means a non-profit association of persons who are bona
fide members that are organized for some common purpose or belief. Clubs shall
exclude religious places of worship or groups organized solely or primarily to
render a service customarily carried on as a commercial enterprise.
   (36)   Commercial communication antenna. “Commercial communication antenna”
means a tower, pole or other similar device, erected on the ground or roof top,
for the purpose of transmitting or receiving radio, micro, cellular, or other
electromagnetic waves between terrestrially and/or orbitally based uses.
   (37)   Commercial entertainment. “Commercial entertainment” means a facility
for any profit-making activity which is generally related to spectator
entertainment such as motion picture theaters, stadiums, arenas, concert halls,
and theaters for live performance.
   (38)   Commission. “Commission” means the Planning Commission.
   (39)   Condominium. “Condominium” means an arrangement under which a tenant
in a building or complex of buildings holds full title to an individual unit
and joint ownership in the common grounds.
   (40)   Convalescent home. “Convalescent home” means a building or group of
buildings, public or private, which provides personal care or nursing to ill,
physically infirm or aged persons who are not related by blood or marriage to
the operator, after they leave the hospital but before they are released from
observation and treatment.
   (41)   Convenience retail. See “Retail, convenience”.
   (42)   Council. “Council” means Council of Woodlawn.
   (43)   Court. “Court” means an open unoccupied and unobstructed space, other
than a yard, on the same lot with a building or group of buildings, which space
is enclosed on three or more sides by the buildings.
   (44)   Density. “Density” means the number of dwelling units per acre of
land.
   (45)   Dental clinic. See “Clinic”.
   (46)   Development and research facility. “Development and research
facility” means an establishment in which scientific research, investigation,
prototype development and process development, testing or experimentation is
conducted, excluding the manufacturing or sale of products, except as
incidental and accessory to the main purpose of the laboratory.
   (47)   Display sign. See “Sign, display.”
   (48)   Distribution center. “Distribution center” means a facility engaged
in the receipt, storage and distribution of goods, products, cargo and
materials and where the goods, products, cargo or materials are stored in the
facility for a period of not more than seven days.
   (49)   District. “District” means a portion of the Municipality within which
certain uniform regulations and requirements or various combinations thereof
apply under this Zoning Code.
   (50)   District, overlay. “Overlay district” means a district established by
ordinance to prescribe special regulations to be applied to a site in
combination with the underlying zoning district regulations.
   (51)   Drive-in or drive-through facility. “Drive-in or drive-through
facility” means any portion of a building or structures from which business is
transacted, or is capable of being transacted, directly with customers located
in a motor vehicle during such business transactions.
   (52)   Driveway. “Driveway” means a private improved way providing access
for vehicles from a road or alley to a garage, carport or dwelling that may
also be used for off-street parking for vehicles for the dwelling occupants.
   (53)   Dwelling. “Dwelling” means any building or portion thereof designed
or used exclusively as the residence or sleeping place of one or more persons,
but not including a tent, cabin, house trailer, mobile home, boarding house,
hotel or motel.
   (54)   Dwelling group. “Dwelling group” means a group of two or more
detached buildings located on a parcel of land in one ownership and having a
yard or court in common.
   (55)   Dwelling, attached. “Attached dwelling” means single-family dwelling
attached to two or more one-family dwellings by common vertical walls, with
each dwelling located on a separate lot. This type of use can include, but not
be limited to: townhouses, row houses, condominiums, patio homes or other types
of zero lot line dwellings.
   (56)   Dwelling, multi-family. “Multi-family dwelling” means a building or
portion thereof designed for or used by three or more families or housekeeping
units.
   (57)   Dwelling, secondary. “Secondary dwelling” means the addition of a
second independent dwelling, attached or detached to the primary single-family
dwelling, housing a relative related by blood or marriage on the same lot.
   (58)   Dwelling, single-family detached. “Single- family detached dwelling”
means a building designed or used exclusively for residence purposes by one
family or housekeeping unit, each dwelling being separated by open space or
yards.
   (59)   Dwelling, two-family. “Two-family dwelling” means a building designed
for or used exclusively by two families or housekeeping units, living
independently of each other, with cooking and sanitary facilities in each
dwelling unit.
   (60)   Dwelling unit. “Dwelling unit” means one room, or a suite of two or
more rooms, designed for or used by one family for living and sleeping purposes
and having at least one kitchen or kitchenette and at least one bathroom for
the exclusive use of the occupying family.
   (61)   Educational Institution. “Educational institution” means a public or
private facility that provides a curriculum of elementary or secondary academic
instruction, including kindergartens, elementary schools, junior high schools,
high schools and technical, vocational and collegiate level courses. For the
purposes of this Zoning Code, a home school is not considered an educational
institution.
    (62)   Essential services. “Essential services” means the erection,
construction, alteration or maintenance, by public utilities or Municipal or
other governmental agencies, of underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam
or water transmission or distribution systems; collection, communication,
supply or disposal systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers,
pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals
and hydrants; and other similar equipment and accessory items in connection
therewith, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such
public utilities or Municipal or other governmental agencies or for the public
health, safety or general welfare, but not including buildings.
   (63)   Family. “Family” means one or more individuals occupying a dwelling
and living as a single housekeeping unit under a common housekeeping plan based
on an intentionally structured relationship providing organization and
stability.
   (64)   Fence. “Fence” means a man-made barrier or divider intended to
prevent escape or intrusion, to mark a boundary or to enclose an area. Such a
barrier or divider usually consists of posts and wire or boards as its
principal components.
   (65)   Financial institution. “Financial institution” means any building,
property or activity of which the principal use or purpose of which is the
provision of financial services including but not limited to banks, facilities
for automated teller machines (ATMs), credit unions, savings and loan
institutions and mortgage companies that are FDIC or NCUA insured. Check
cashing, payday loan businesses or similar type facilities are not considered
financial institutions.
   (66)   Floor area. “Floor area” means the sum of the gross horizontal areas
of each floor of the principal building, measured from the exterior walls or
from the center line of party walls, including the floor area of accessory
buildings and structures.
   (67)   Frontage. “Frontage” means the horizontal distance between the side
lot lines measured at the point where the side lot lines intersect the street
right- of-way. On curvilinear streets, the arc between the side lot lines shall
be considered the lot frontage. Where a lot abuts more than one street, the
Board of Zoning Appeals shall determine the frontage for purposes of this
Zoning Code.
   (68)   Frontage, where measured. The frontage of a lot shall be measured
along the front property line, but may be modified in the case of a curvilinear
street.
   (69)   Funeral home. “Funeral home” means any dwelling or other structure
used and occupied by a professional licensed mortician for burial preparation
and funeral services.
   (70)   Garage, private. “Private garage” means a detached accessory building
or a portion of the principal building used only for the storage of passenger
vehicles or other personal property owned by the family or families' resident
upon the premises. A carport shall be construed to be a private garage.
   (71)   Garage, public. “Public garage” means a structure or portion thereof,
other than a private garage, used for the temporary storage of motor vehicles
or trailers which are accessory to a principally permitted use located on the
same lot.
   (72)   Garden center or greenhouse. “Garden center or greenhouse” means a
building whose roof and sides are made largely of glass or other transparent or
translucent materials in which the temperature and humidity can be regulated
for the cultivation of plant material for subsequent sale or for personal
enjoyment. Retail sales of merchandise relating to lawn and gardening may also
occur including the sale of seeds, grass seed, fertilizer, mulch, landscape
stone, topsoil, straw and trees.
   (73)   Group home. “Group home” means any residential facility, licensed by
the State of Ohio, designed to allow not more than eight persons, needing
specialized care, counseling, ongoing medical treatment or supervision to live
in the same building or complex of buildings and engage in some congregate
activity in a non-institutional environment as regulated by Ohio R.C. Chapters
3722 and 5123.
   (74)   Hedge. “Hedge” means a growth of shrubbery planted to function as a
boundary or fence.
   (75)   Home occupation. “Home occupation” means any occupation which is
customarily incidental to the principal use of the premises and is conducted by
a resident occupant that does not alter the exterior of the property or affect
the residential character of the neighborhood.
   (76)   Hospital. “Hospital” means a building or portion thereof used for
human in-patient medical or surgical care for the sick or injured and including
related facilities such as laboratories, out-patient departments, training
facilities, central service facilities, and staff offices that are an integral
part of the facilities.
   (77)   Hotel. “Hotel” means a facility offering lodging accommodations, in
individual rooms accessed through an interior corridor, on a daily rate to the
public where additional accessory services such as restaurants, meeting rooms
and fitness facilities may be an integral part of the facility.
   (78)   Impervious surface. “Impervious surface” means any hard-surfaced,
man-made area that does not readily absorb or retain water, including but not
limited to building roofs, parking and driveway areas, sidewalks and paved
recreational facilities.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/400a1417679729aa03ba6ecffb49741da640bf15/
IMAGES/0-0-0-71.jpg]
 
   Impervious Surface
   (79)   Impervious surface ratio. “Impervious surface ratio” means a measure
of the intensity of land use that is determined by dividing the total area of
all impervious surfaces on the site by the total area of the site or lot.
   (80)   Industry. “Industry” means the storage, repair, manufacture,
preparation or treatment of any article, substance or commodity for a
commercial use.
   (81)   Industrial use. “Industrial use” means the assembly, fabrication or
processing of goods and materials; or any operation or facility including
buildings, equipment structures, or stationary items used for industrial
purposes.
   (82)   Industrial use, light. “Light industrial use” means the assembly,
fabrication, or processing of goods and materials using processes that
ordinarily do not create noise, smoke, fumes, odors, glare, or health or safety
hazards outside of the building or lot which such assembly, fabrication, or
processing takes place, where such processes are housed entirely within a
building, or where the area occupied by outdoor storage of goods and materials
used in such processes does not exceed 25% of the floor area of all buildings
on the property. “Light industrial” shall not include hazardous materials
treatment and storage facilities, agricultural industries, plating or
enameling, pilot plants, prototype production plants, abattoirs, tanning and
fur finishing, or petroleum and gas refining.
   (83)   Kennel. “Kennel” means any lot or premises on which three or more
dogs or cats, or any combination thereof, are housed, groomed, bred, boarded,
trained or sold, or which offers provision for minor medical treatment, with
the exception that a newborn unweaned litter of dogs and/or cats shall not be
counted among the maximum amount of dogs or cats permitted in this paragraph.
   (84)   Kitchen. “Kitchen” means any room in a building or dwelling unit,
which is used for cooking or the preparation of food.
   (85)   Living space. “Living space” means the space or spaces used or
intended to be used for living, sleeping, eating or cooking, or a combination
thereof, but not including bathrooms, toilet compartments, closets, halls,
storage rooms, laundry and utility rooms, basement recreation rooms and similar
spaces.
   (86)   Loading space. “Loading space” means an off-street space or berth on
the same lot with a building it is providing service to, or contiguous to a
group of buildings for the temporary parking of a vehicle while loading or
unloading merchandise or materials, and which abuts upon a street, alley or
other appropriate means of access.
   (87)   Lot. “Lot” means a piece or parcel of land occupied or intended to be
occupied by a principal building or by a group of such buildings and accessory
buildings, or utilized for a principal use and uses accessory thereto, together
with such open spaces as are required by this Zoning Code, and having a
frontage on a public street that has been improved, dedicated and officially
accepted by the Municipality.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/400a1417679729aa03ba6ecffb49741da640bf15/
IMAGES/0-0-0-73.jpg]
 
   Lot(s)
   (87)   Lot area. “Lot area” means the computed area contained within the lot
lines.
   (88)   Lot, corner. “Corner lot” means a lot abutting upon two or more
streets at their intersection or upon two parts of the same street, such
streets or parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less than 130
degrees. The point of intersection of the street lines is the corner. In all
residential districts, a corner lot shall have two front yards.
   (89)   Lot depth. “Lot depth,” means the mean horizontal distance between
the front and rear lot lines.
   (90)   Lot, interior. “Interior lot” means a lot other than a corner lot.
   (91)   Lot line. “Lot line,” means the property lines bounding the lot.
   (92)   Lot line, front. “Front lot line” means the line separating the lot
from the street on which it fronts.
   (93)   Lot line, rear. “Rear lot line” means the lot line opposite and most
distant from the front lot line.
   (94)   Lot line, side. “Side lot line” means any lot line other than a front
or rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street is called a
side street lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot or lots
is called an interior side lot line.
   (95)   Lot line, street or alley. “Street or alley lot line” means a lot
line separating the lot from a street or alley.
   (96)   Lot, flag (panhandle or dogleg). “Flag lot” (panhandle lot or dogleg
lot) means a lot, being otherwise landlocked, having a portion of its area
included in a narrow neck or peninsula extending to a frontage, usually for the
purpose of providing private access into it.
   (97)   Lot, through. “Through lot” means a lot having frontage on two
parallel or approximately parallel streets. Such lot shall have two front yards
and no rear yard.
   (98)   Lot width. “Lot width,” means the mean width of the lot measured at
right angles to its depth.
   (99)   Marijuana. “Marijuana” means marijuana as defined by R.C. § 3719.01.
   (100)   Master Plan. “Master Plan” means the long-range plan for the
desirable use of land in Woodlawn, as officially adopted and as amended from
time to time by the Planning Commission. The purpose of such Plan is, among
other things, to serve as a guide in the zoning and progressive changes in the
zoning of land to meet the changing needs in the subdivision and use of
undeveloped land, and in the acquisition of rights- of-way or sites for public
purposes, such as streets, parks, schools and public buildings.
   (101)   Manufacturing. “Manufacturing” means the process of making or
fabricating raw materials by hand, machinery or the combination thereof into
finished parts or products.
   (102)   Medical clinic. See “Clinic”.
   (103)   Medical marijuana. “Medical marijuana” means marijuana that is
cultivated, processed, dispensed, tested, possessed, or used for a medical
purpose.
   (104)   Medical marijuana cultivation facility. “Medical marijuana
cultivation facility” means a facility at which medical marijuana is grown,
harvested, packaged, and/or transported as authorized by R.C. Chapter 3796.
   (105)   Medical marijuana dispensary. “Medical marijuana dispensary” means
an establishment that sells medical marijuana as authorized by R.C. Chapter
3796.
   (106)   Medical marijuana processing facility. “Medical marijuana processing
facility” means a facility at which medical marijuana products as processed as
authorized by R.C. Chapter 3796.
   (107)   Meeting or banquet hall. “Meeting or banquet hall” means a facility
available for lease by private parties that may or may not include food and
beverage service.
   (108)   Mobile food vendor. A food service operation or retail food
establishment that is operated from a food truck, food trailer, pedi-food cart,
or pushcart and that can or does routinely change locations but will be fixed
on-site. For the purposes of this definition, a mobile food vending unit
excludes food delivery operations and vending machines.
   (109)   Motel or motor hotel. “Motel” or “motor hotel” means a facility
offering lodging accommodations, in individual rooms accessed from the parking
area, on a daily rate to the public where additional accessory services such as
restaurants, meeting rooms and fitness facilities may be an integral part of
the facility.
   (110)   Motor vehicle filling station. “Motor vehicle filling station” means
a building or other structure on a tract of land, used for the retail sale of
gasoline or other motor vehicle fuels and oil for vehicles using the same fuel
or lubrication. The sale of convenience goods, such a prepackaged foods and
drinks, and sundries, may be permitted as an accessory use.
   (111)   Motor vehicle service station. “Motor vehicle service station” means
a building or other structure on a tract of land where the following activities
are permitted: dispensing oil, grease, antifreeze, tires, batteries and
automobile accessories directly to users of motor vehicles, tuning engines,
repairing wheels and brakes, waxing, polishing and other minor servicing and
repair to the extent of the installation of the items enumerated in this
paragraph. All other activities shall be prohibited, including, but not limited
to, upholstering work, auto glass work, painting, welding, tire recapping, auto
dismantling and auto sales.
2025 S-8
71   Definitions     § 1253.01
   (112)   Nonconforming building. “Nonconforming building” means a building,
structure or premises legally existing and/or used at the time of adoption of
this Zoning Code (Ordinance 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013), or any amendment
thereto, and which does not conform with the use regulations of the district in
which it is located. Any such building, structure or premises conforming in
respect to use but not in respect to height, area, yards, courts or distance
requirements from more restricted districts or uses shall not be considered a
nonconforming use.
   (113)   Nonconforming lot. “Nonconforming lot” means a lot which was
lawfully created at the time of adoption of this Zoning Code (Ordinance 17-
2013, passed 9-24-2013), but which does not conform to the minimum requirements
specified for the zone in which it is located.
   (114)   Nonconforming use. “Nonconforming use” means any building or land
lawfully occupied by a land use at the time of the adoption of this Zoning
Code, or subsequent amendments thereto, which no longer conforms with the
permitted uses or regulations of the district in which it is situated.
   (115)   Nursing home. “Nursing home” means a privately operated place of
domicile or other facility, licensed by the State of Ohio, which offers skilled
nursing and dietary care for persons who are ill or incapacitated, or service
for the rehabilitation of persons who are convalescing from illness or
incapacitation. See definition for Convalescent (rest home).
   (116)   Office, professional, administrative or business. “Professional,
administrative or business office” means a building or portion of a building
wherein services are performed involving predominately administrative,
professional or clerical operations.
   (117)   Open space. “Open space” means land used for resource protection,
recreation, amenity and/or buffers.
   (118)   Outdoor display. “Outdoor display” means an area of designated size,
located on the outside of a building or structure, used for the display of
merchandise, goods, wares or tangible property normally sold, rented or leased
within the business on the property where the merchandise is displayed.
   (119)   Outdoor storage. “Outdoor storage” means the keeping, in an
unenclosed area, of personal or business property, goods, junk, wares, or
merchandise that relate to the use of the lot but are not located in that
specific spot for customer viewing or immediate sale (see “outdoor display”),
in the same place, for a period of more than 24 hours. See also “bulk storage
or display”.
   (120)   Parcel. “Parcel” means any quantity of land and water capable of
being described with such specificity that its location and boundaries may be
established as distinct from other parcels which is designated by its owner or
developer as land to be used or developed as a unit, or which has been used or
developed as a unit.
   (121)   Park. “Park” means any land owned by a public agency and open for
use by the general public for active or passive recreational purposes or as a
refuge for wildlife.
   (122)   Parking area, private. “Private parking area” means an open area for
the same uses as a private garage.
 
   (123)   Parking area, public. “Public parking area” means an open area,
other than a street or other public way, used for the parking of automobiles
and available to the public, whether for a fee or as an accommodation for
clients and customers.
   (124)   Parking space. “Parking space”, means a permanently surfaced area
exclusive of driveways or access drives, for the purpose of parking one motor
vehicle.
   (125)   Performance standard. “Performance standard” means a criterion
established in the interest
 
2025 S-8
§ 1253.01   Woodlawn - Planning and Zoning Code   72
of protecting the public health and safety for the control of noise, odor,
smoke, noxious gases and other objectionable or dangerous elements generated by
and inherent in or incidental to land uses.
   (126)   Personal service. “Personal service” means any for-profit enterprise
which primarily offers services to the general public such as a health club,
fitness facility, shoe repair, watch repair, barber shop, beauty parlor,
laundromat, dry cleaner and similar activities. “Personal services” do not
include sexually oriented business.
   (127)   Planned Unit Development (PUD). “Planned Unit Development (PUD)” is
defined and regulated in Chapter 1288, Planned Unit Development.
   (128)   Profession. “Profession” means an occupation involving the
dispensation of a service that involves either some skill or knowledge, or that
requires connections to other businesses not easily or readily available to the
general public.
   (129)   Public or semi-public uses. “Public or semi-public use” means any
building, structure, facility, or complex used by the general public, whether
constructed by any state, county or municipal government agency or agent
thereof. This shall include, but not be limited to: government buildings, fire
station, police station, post office, library, treatment plant, water tower,
community or recreation center, or government maintenance facility.
   (130)   Recreation facility. “Recreation facility” means any land, building
or structure that provides facilities for sports or leisure activities
including, but not limited to: athletic fields, playgrounds, ball courts,
picnic areas, bike/hike trails or swimming pools, amusement parks, ice skating
rinks and rock climbing walls.
   (131)   Religious place of worship. “Religious place of worship” means a
building for the assembly of a congregation of people regularly attending or
holding religious services, meeting and other related activities.
   (132)   Residential use. “Residential use” means a home, abode, dwelling
unit or place, where a family or individual(s) live; where such a place has
areas for living and eating within the structure. This category includes but is
not limited to single-family detached units, single-family detached units in
clustered or zero lot line developments, multi-family units, and manufactured
or mobile homes as well as uses such as bed and breakfast facilities, granny
cottages, group homes, and day care/Type A.
   (133)   Restaurant. “Restaurant” means an eating establishment where food is
prepared and served at counters or tables for consumption within a wholly
enclosed building or off-premises.
   (134)   Restaurant, drive-in. “Drive-in restaurant” means an eating
establishment where the primary function is the service of food prepared for
consumption in motor vehicles on the premises, regardless of limited table
space.
 
   (135)   Restaurant, drive-through. “Drive- through restaurant” means an
eating establishment where a significant portion of business transactions are
capable of being conducted, directly with customers located in a motor vehicle
through a window in the building.
   (136)   Restaurant, fast food. “Fast food restaurant” means an eating
establishment whose principal business is the sale of rapidly prepared food,
directly to the consumer in a ready-to- consume state for consumption, either
within the restaurant or off-premises, in an average preparation time of 240
seconds or less.
   (137)   Retail business. “Retail business” means any business selling goods,
wares or merchandise directly to the ultimate consumer for direct consumption
and not for resale.
   (138)   Retail, convenience. “Convenience retail” means a business that
customarily provides prepackaged food products, and beverages for consumption
off premises, newspapers, magazines, limited groceries and household items or
other small scale retail items for sale to the general public.
   (139)    Retail showroom. “Retail showroom” means a building or portion of a
building used for the display of products for sale to the general public
related to the primary use of the property.
   (140)   Right-of-way. “Right-of-way (R.O.W.)” means land dedicated to, or
owned by, the public for use as a roadway, walk or other way.
   (141)   Satellite dish. “Satellite dish” means an antenna used for the
reception of television and other electronic signals, as regulated by §
1296.25, Satellite Dishes.
   (142)   Self storage warehouse. “Self storage warehouse” means a building
containing varying sizes of individual, compartmentalized, and controlled
access stalls, rooms, or lockers that are rented or leased to individuals,
organizations, or businesses for the storage of personal property.
   (143)   Setback line. “Setback line” means the line beyond which no building
or part thereof shall project, except as otherwise provided by this Zoning
Code. “Setback line” shall include the front, side and rear yard setback lines.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/400a1417679729aa03ba6ecffb49741da640bf15/
IMAGES/0-0-0-75.jpg]
 
   Setback(s)
   (144)    Sexually oriented business. “Sexually oriented business” is a
facility having a significant portion of its function as adult entertainment
which includes the following listed categories:
      A.   Adult book store. An “adult book store” means an establishment
deriving a majority of its gross income from the sale or rental of, or having a
majority of its stock in trade in, books, magazines or other periodicals, films
or mechanical or non- mechanical devices, which constitute adult materials.
      B.   Adult material. “Adult material” means any book, magazine,
newspaper, pamphlet, poster, print, picture, slide, transparency, figure,
image, description, motion picture film, phonographic record or tape, other
tangible thing, or any service, capable of arousing interest through sight,
sound, or touch and:
         1.   Which material is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on matter displaying, describing, or representing sexual activity,
masturbation, sexual excitement, nudity, bestiality, or human bodily functions
or elimination; or
         2.   Which service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
sexual activity, masturbation, sexual excitement, nudity, bestiality, or human
bodily functions or elimination.
      C.   Adult motion picture theater. “Adult motion picture theater” means
an enclosed motion picture theater or motion picture drive-in theater used for
presenting, and deriving a majority of its gross income from adult material for
observation by patrons therein.
      D.   Adults only entertainment establishment. “Adults only entertainment
establishment” means an establishment which features services which constituted
adult material, or which features exhibitions of persons totally nude, or
topless, bottomless, strippers, male or female impersonators, or similar
entertainment which constitute adult material.
   (145)    Short term rental. Short-term rental means a building or part
thereof, other than a hotel, motel or bed and breakfast establishments, where
lodging is provided by any individual, corporation, or other entity for
compensation for periods of less than 30 consecutive days, as agreed upon by
the owner and guest.
   (146)   Sign. Any device, structure, fixture, painting or visual image
designed to be seen from an outdoor location and using graphics, symbols,
letters or numbers for the purpose of conveying a message or advertising or
identifying any establishment, product, goods or services.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/400a1417679729aa03ba6ecffb49741da640bf15/
IMAGES/0-0-0-77.jpg]
 
   Sign(s)
   (147)   Sign, area of. “Area of sign” means the total exterior surface,
computed in square feet, of a sign having only one exposed exterior surface, or
one-half the total of the exposed exterior surface, computed in square feet, of
a sign having more than one surface.
   (148)   Sign, awning. “Awning sign” means a sign painted, attached, embossed
or affixed to a fixed or retractable awning.
   (149)   Sign, banner. “Banner sign” means a sign of lightweight fabric,
canvas, plastic or similar material that is temporarily mounted between or to a
pole or building.
   (150)   Sign, billboard. “Billboard sign (signboard)” means a sign directing
attention to a specific business, product, service, entertainment activity or
other commercial activity offered, sold or conducted elsewhere than upon the
lot on which the sign is located. Billboard signs are also referred to as off-
premises signs.
   (151)   Sign, bulletin board. “Bulletin board sign” means an on-premises
sign which is primarily intended to announce events that contain noncommercial
messages.
   (152)   Sign, canopy. “Canopy sign” means a sign attached to the side, or
underside of a canopy at a 90 degree angle to the street, intended for
pedestrian visibility.
   (153)   Sign, changeable copy. “Changeable copy sign” means a sign or
portion thereof where the message or graphic is not permanently affixed to the
structure, framing or background and may be periodically replaced or covered
over, manually or by electronic or mechanical devices.
   (154)   Sign, directional. “Directional sign” means a sign indicating a
direction or location to which pedestrian or vehicular traffic is requested to
move.
   (155)   Sign, display. “Display sign” means a structure that is arranged,
intended, designed or used as an advertisement, announcement or direction,
including a sign, billboard and advertising device of any kind.
   (156)   Sign, free-standing. “Free-standing sign” means a sign which is
supported wholly by a pole or poles and is designed so as to permit at least
six feet of visibility under the sign face.
   (157)   Sign, ground. “Ground sign” means a free-standing sign which has a
supporting base designed as
an integral part of the sign resting totally or primarily on the ground.
   (158)   Sign, identification. “Identification sign” means a sign which is
primarily intended to indicate the name, owner, manager and/or address of an
existing building or business.
   (159)   Sign, informational. “Informational sign” means a sign which
presents miscellaneous information or instructions intended to serve the
public, rather than to promote a business, product, political viewpoint or
issue.
   (160)   Sign, political. “Political sign” means a sign advocating action on
a public issue, indicating a candidate for public office, or expressing an
opinion or belief.
   (161)   Sign, portable. “Portable sign” means a sign which is designed to be
transported and is not physically attached to any part of a building or ground.
 
   (162)   Sign, projecting. “Projecting sign” means a sign erected on the
outside wall of a building and which projects out at an angle greater than 0
degrees therefrom.
   (163)   Sign, real estate. “Real estate sign” means a sign directing
attention to the promotion, development, construction, rental, sale or lease of
a property on which it is located.
   (164)   Sign, roof. “Roof sign” means any sign erected upon and positioned
completely or partially over the roof of any building.
   (165)   Sign, temporary. “Temporary sign” means a sign of any type,
announcing special events of sales, to announce the sale, lease or rental of
property and which is designed to be used for a specific period of time as
established in Chapter 1292, Signs and Outdoor Advertising.
   (166)   Sign, wall. “Wall sign” means a sign attached to or displayed or
painted on an exterior wall and in a manner parallel with the wall surface.
2025 S-8
§ 1253.01   Woodlawn - Planning and Zoning Code   76
   (167)   Sign, window. “Window sign” means a sign painted on, attached to, or
suspended directly behind or in front of a window or the glass portion of a
door, that is intended to be viewed from the outside of a building.
   (168)   Site plan. “Site plan” means a plan, prepared to scale, showing
accurately and with complete dimensions, the boundaries of a site and the
location of all buildings, structures, uses and principal site development
features proposed for a specific parcel of land.
   (169)   Storage warehouse. “Storage warehouse” means a building used
primarily for the storage of goods and materials.
   (170)   Story. “Story” means that portion of a building between the surface
of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or, if there is no
floor above it, then the space between the floor and ceiling next above it.
   (171)   Story, first. “First story” means the lowest story or the ground
story of any building, the floor of which is not more than 12 inches below the
average contact ground level at the exterior walls of the building, except that
any basement or cellar used for residence purposes, other than for a janitor or
caretaker and his or her family, shall be deemed a first story.
   (172)   Story, half. “Half story” means a partial story under a gable, hip
or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which on at least two opposite exterior
walls are not more than four feet above the floor of such story. However, any
partial story used for residence purposes, other than for a janitor or
caretaker and his or her family, shall be deemed a full story.
   (173)   Story, mezzanine. “Mezzanine story” means a story which covers one-
third or less of the area of the story directly underneath it. A mezzanine
story shall be deemed a full story if it covers more than one-third of the area
of the story directly underneath it.
   (174)   Street. “Street” means a public right-of-way which provides a public
means of access for motor vehicles to abutting property. “Street” includes
avenue, drive, circle, road, parkway, boulevard, highway, thoroughfare or any
similar term.
   (175)   Structural alteration. “Structural alteration” means any change in
the structural members of a building, such as walls, columns, beams or girders.
 
   (176)   Structure. “Structure” means anything constructed, the use of which
required a permanent location on the ground or an attachment to something
having a permanent location on the ground.
   (177)   Swimming pool. “Swimming pool” means a permanently constructed or
portable water-filled enclosure, having a depth of more than 18 inches below
the level of the surrounding land or an above surface enclosure having a depth
of more than 30 inches, designed, used and maintained for swimming or bathing
purposes.
   (178)   Tavern. See “Bar or tavern”.
   (179)   Thoroughfare plan. “Thoroughfare plan” means the Official
Thoroughfare Plan of Woodlawn, as adopted by the Planning Commission,
establishing the location and official right-of-way width of principal highways
and streets in the Village, on file in the office of the Commission, dated
October 5, 1970, together with all amendments subsequently adopted.
   (180)   Thoroughfare, primary or secondary. “Primary or secondary
thoroughfare” means an officially designated Federal or State numbered highway,
a County or other road or street designated as a primary thoroughfare on the
Official Thoroughfare or Major Street Plan for the Municipality, or a County or
other road or street designated as a secondary thoroughfare on such Plan,
respectively.
   (181)   Trailer or mobile home. “Trailer” or “mobile home” includes
automobile trailer, trailer
 
2025 S-8
77   Definitions     § 1253.01
 
coach or house trailer, and means any vehicle or structure constructed in such
a manner as to permit occupancy thereof as sleeping quarters; the conduct of a
business, trade or occupation; use as a selling or advertising device or use
for storage or conveyance of goods, equipment or machinery, and so designed
that it is to be mounted on wheels and used as a conveyance on highways and
streets, propelled or drawn by its own or other motor power.
   (182)   Training center. “Training center” means a facility providing
education and training involving job-related skills, certification or
licensure.
   (183)   Truck transfer terminal. “Truck transfer terminal” means a facility
where trucks load and unload cargo and freight and where the cargo and freight
may be broken down or aggregated into smaller or larger loads for transfer to
other vehicles or modes of transportation.
   (184)   Use. “Use” means the purpose for which land or a building or
structure is arranged, designed or intended, or for which either land or a
building or structure is or may be occupied or maintained.
   (185)   Use, accessory. See “accessory use” definition.
   (186)   Use, conditional. “Conditional use” means a use which is permitted
in a district only if a Conditional Use Permit therefor is expressly authorized
by the Planning Commission in accordance with § 1254.08, Conditional Use
Permits.
   (187)   Use, principal permitted. “Principal permitted use” means a use
which is permitted outright in a district for which a Zoning Permit may be
issued by the Zoning Officer in accordance with § 1254.05, Zoning Certificate
of Compliance.
   (188)   Variance. “Variance” means a modification of the strict terms of the
relevant regulations where such modification will not be contrary to the public
health, safety, or welfare and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the
property and not the result of the action of the applicant, a literal
enforcement of the regulations would result in unnecessary and undue hardship.
   (189)   Veterinary hospital. See “Animal hospital”.
   (190)   Woodlawn Building Commissioner. “Woodlawn Building Commissioner”
means the Building Commissioner of the Municipality or his or her authorized
representative.
   (191)   Woodlawn Engineer. “Woodlawn Engineer” means the Municipal Engineer
of Woodlawn or his or her authorized representative.
   (192)   Yard. “Yard” means an open space on a lot, other than a court,
unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise
provided in this Zoning Code.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/400a1417679729aa03ba6ecffb49741da640bf15/
IMAGES/0-0-0-79.jpg]
 
   Lot Examples
   (193)    Yard, front. “Front yard” means a yard extending the full width of
the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the
front lot line and a line parallel thereto on the lot or the wall line of a
structure. A lot that fronts on two streets and all corner lots in “R”
Districts shall have two front yards.
   (194)   Yard, front; how measured. The depth of a front yard shall be
measured from the right-of-way line of the existing street on which the lot
fronts. However, if the proposed location of the right-of-way line of such
street as established on the Thoroughfare Plan or on its related base map
differs from that of the existing street, then the required front yard depth
shall be measured from the right-of- way as designated on such Thoroughfare
Plan or base map.
   (195)   Yard, rear. “Rear yard” means a yard extending across the full width
of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum distance between the rear lot
line and a line parallel thereto on the lot or the wall line of a structure,
provided that on a corner lot, the rear yard shall be opposite the street
frontage having the least width.
   (196)   Yard, side. “Side yard” means a yard extending from the front yard
to the rear yard, the width of which is the minimum horizontal distance between
the side lot line and a line parallel thereto on the lot or the wall line of a
structure.
   (197)   Yard, side, least width; how measured. The least width of a side
yard shall be measured from the nearest side lot line, and if the nearest side
lot line is on a side street, such lot line shall be measured from the right-
of-way line on the existing street. If the proposed location of the right-of-
way line of the side street, as established on the Thoroughfare Plan or on the
base map, differs from that of the side street as it exists, then the required
side yard width shall be measured from the right-of-way of such street as
designated on the Thoroughfare Plan or base map.
   (198)   Zoning Board of Appeals. “Zoning Board of Appeals” means the Board
of Zoning Appeals of the Municipality.
   (199)   Zoning Map. “Zoning Map” means the Zoning Map of Woodlawn, including
all amendments thereto.
   (200)   Zoning Officer. “Zoning Officer” means the Zoning Officer and/or
Inspector of the Municipality or his or her authorized representative.
   (201)   Zoning Certificate. “Zoning Certificate” means a document or
approval issued by the Zoning Officer authorizing buildings, structures or uses
consistent with this Zoning Code and for the purpose of carrying out and
enforcing its provisions. In any case, where a building permit is issued, the
building permit also serves the function of the Zoning Certificate.
   (202)   Zoning Certificate of Compliance. “Zoning Certificate of Compliance”
means a document issued by the Zoning Officer certifying that all required
zoning regulations, and as may be amended by approved variance or conditions
imposed, are in compliance with this Zoning Code and as may be amended from
time to time.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013; Ord. 13-2017, passed 6-27-2017; Ord. 31-2024,
passed 12-10- 2024)
CHAPTER 1254: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
1254.01   Purpose.
1254.02   Establishment of a Zoning Officer.
1254.03   Responsibilities of the Zoning Officer.
1254.04   Determination of Permissible Use Certificate.
1254.05   Zoning Certificate of Compliance.
1254.06   Effect of pending amendments on determination of Permissible Use
Certificate and Zoning Certificate of Compliance applications.
1254.07   Responsibilities of the Planning Commission.
1254.08   Conditional use permits.
1254.09   Determination of similar uses.
1254.10   The Woodlawn Council.
1254.11   Amendments.
1254.12   Site Plan Review.
§ 1254.01 PURPOSE.
   This chapter sets both the powers and duties of the Zoning Officer, the
Planning Commission, and Council with respect to the administration of the
provisions of this Zoning Code.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1254.02 ESTABLISHMENT OF A ZONING OFFICER.
   There is hereby established the office of Zoning Officer and for the
purposes of this Zoning Code, the Building Commissioner may be designated as
the Zoning Officer, or such duties may be performed by another person
designated by the Municipal Manager or Council. The Zoning Officer shall
enforce this Zoning Code in accordance with the provisions hereof. All
department officials and public employees of the Municipality vested with the
duty and authority to issue permits or licenses shall conform to this Zoning
Code and shall issue no permit or license for any use, building or purpose in
conflict with this Zoning Code. Any permit or license issued in conflict with
this Zoning Code shall be null and void and of no effect whatsoever.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1254.03 RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE ZONING OFFICER.
   The Zoning Officer shall have the following responsibilities and powers:
   (a)   Enforce the provisions of this Zoning Code and interpret the meaning
and application of its provisions, including both map and text.
   (b)   Inspect properties within the Village to determine compliance with
regulations and to issue violation notices when necessary.
   (c)   Receive, review and make determinations on applications for
determination of Permissible Use Certificates and Zoning Compliance
Certificates.
   (d)   Issue zoning certificates as provided by this Code, and keep a record
of same with notations of special conditions involved.
   (e)   Review and process plans pursuant to the provisions of this Code.
   (f)   Make determinations as to whether violations of this Code exist,
determine the nature and extent thereof, and notify the owner in writing,
specifying the exact nature of the violation and the manner in which it shall
be corrected by the owner, pursuant to the procedures in this Code.
   (g)   Conduct inspections of buildings and uses of land to determine
compliance or noncompliance with this Code.
   (h)   Maintain permanent and current records required by this Code,
including but not limited to: the Official Zoning Map, determination of
Permissible Use Certificates, Zoning Certificates, inspection documents and
records of all variances, amendments and conditional uses. These records shall
be made available for use of the Council, Planning Commission, the Board of
Zoning Appeals and to the public.
   (i)   Initiate the revocation of a permit or approval issued contrary to
this Code.
    (j)   Act upon all applications within 30 days after they are filed in full
compliance with all applicable requirements. A Zoning Certificate or written
notification and explanation of refusal shall be issued to the applicant within
said 30 days. Failure to notify the applicant of such refusal within this
period shall entitle the applicant to submit his request to the Woodlawn Board
of Zoning Appeals.
   (k)   Examine and refer to the Planning Commission applications for a Zoning
Certificate when site plan review is required as specified in this chapter.
   (l)   Forward findings of fact as to alleged violations of this Code to the
Law Director.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1254.04 DETERMINATION OF PERMISSIBLE USE CERTIFICATE.
   (a)   Required. Unless the Board of Zoning Appeals has granted a variance,
no owner shall use, change the use of or permit the use of any structure,
building, land or site, or part thereof, existing or hereafter created,
erected, changed, converted or enlarged, wholly or partly, until a
Determination of Permissible Use Certificate, which may be a part of the
building permit, has been issued by the Zoning Officer. Such Determination of
Permissible Use Certificate shall show that such building or premises, or part
thereof, and the proposed use thereof, are in conformity with this Zoning Code.
The Zoning Officer shall issue a Determination of Permissible Use Certificate,
provided that he or she is satisfied that the structure, building or premises,
the proposed use thereof and the proposed methods of water supply and disposal
of sanitary waste conform with all applicable requirements of this Zoning Code,
and when approval of grading, drainage and other site design plans has been
given in writing to the Zoning Officer from the Municipal Engineer.
   (b)   Excavation permits. No permit for excavation or construction shall be
issued by the Building Commissioner unless the plans, specifications and
intended use conform, to this Zoning Code or a variance granted by the Board of
Zoning Appeals, and until written approval of the excavation has been received
from the Municipal Engineer.
   (c)   Application; plans. Every application for a Determination of
Permissible Use Certificate shall be required for:
      (1)   A new building;
      (2)   An addition to an existing building;
      (3)   Changes to an existing site;
      (4)   Use of vacant land; or
      (5)   A change of owner or lessee for nonresidential premises.
   And shall be accompanied by:
      (1)   Plans in the number specified by this Zoning Code or by the Zoning
Officer where such number may not exist;
      (2)   Drawn to scale in black line or blue print, showing:
         A.   The actual shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon or to
be changed in use, in whole or in part;
         B.   The exact location, size and height of any building or structure
to be erected or altered;
         C.   In the case of a proposed new building or structure or proposed
alteration of an existing building or structure as would substantially alter
its appearance;
         D.   Drawings or sketches showing the front, side and rear elevations
of the proposed building or structure, or as the structure as it will appear
after the work for which a permit is sought has been completed, shall be
provided.
      (3)   The existing and intended use of each building or structure or part
thereof;
      (4)   The number of families or housekeeping units the building is
designed to accommodate and, when no buildings are involved, the location of
the present use and proposed use to be made of the lot; and
      (5)   Such other information with regard to the lot and neighboring lots
as may be necessary to determine and provide for the enforcement of this Zoning
Code shall be shown on the plans.
   One copy of such plans shall be returned to the owner when such plans have
been approved by the Zoning Officer, together with such Determination of
Permissible Use Certificate as may be granted. All dimensions shown on these
plans relating to the location and size of the lot to be built upon shall be
based on an actual survey, and each survey submitted, including a topographical
survey if required or requested, shall be prepared by and bear the seal of a
surveyor registered in the State of Ohio. The lot and the location of the
building thereon shall be staked out on the ground before construction is
started. A Determination of Permissible Use Certificate shall be posted in a
conspicuous place at the site to which it refers visible from the public right-
of-way.
   (d)   Time limit for issuance or denial. The Zoning Officer shall act upon
all such applications within 30 days after they are filed in full compliance
with all applicable requirements. The Zoning Officer shall either issue a
Determination of Permissible Use Certificate within 30 days or shall notify the
applicant, in writing, of the refusal of such certificate and the reasons
therefore. Failure to notify the applicant of such refusal within such 30 days
shall entitle the applicant to a Determination of Permissible Use Certificate,
unless the applicant consents to an extension of time.
   (e)   Failure to commence work. A Determination of Permissible Use
Certificate which has been issued for which no work has commenced within six
months after issuance thereof, shall expire by limitation, and where work is
commenced and then abandoned for one year, the Zoning Officer or authorized
representative shall order the incomplete structure to be removed by the owner.
Upon failure of the owner to remove the same within six months, such owner may
be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalty contained in Chapter
1299, Violations, Remedies and Fees.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1254.05 ZONING CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE.
   (a)   Required. No owner, lessee or tenant shall occupy any structure,
building, land or site, or part thereof, existing or hereafter erected,
created, changed, converted or enlarged, unless a Zoning Certificate of
Compliance has been issued by the Zoning Officer after inspection.
   (b)   Conditions. A Zoning Certificate of Compliance shall be applied for by
the owner of any land, property or building after the work identified in the
Determination of Permissible Use Certificate has been completed.
   (c)   Review and approval. Pending the issuance of a final Zoning
Certificate of Compliance, a temporary Zoning Certificate of Compliance may be
issued for not more than six months during the completion of the alterations or
during partial occupancy of a building pending its completion. Such temporary
Zoning Certificate of Compliance shall not be construed as in any way altering
the respective rights, duties or obligations of the owners or of the
Municipality relating to the use or occupancy of the premises or any other
matter covered by this Zoning Code. Such temporary Zoning Certificate of
Compliance shall not be issued except under such restrictions and provisions as
will adequately ensure the safety of the occupants. If a temporary certificate
is issued, the applicant shall notify the Zoning Officer, in writing, that all
work has been completed. A Zoning Certificate of Compliance, a temporary Zoning
Certificate of Compliance or a written notice denying such certificate shall be
issued by the Zoning Officer to the applicant within a reasonable time.
   (d)   Records; fees; posting. A record of all Zoning Certificates of
Compliance shall be kept on file in the office of the Zoning Officer and copies
shall be furnished, on request, to persons having a proprietary or tenancy
interest in the building or land affected. A fee for the issuance of the Zoning
Certificate of Compliance shall be charged. Such fee shall be established by
Woodlawn Council.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1254.06 EFFECT OF PENDING AMENDMENTS ON DETERMINATION OF PERMISSIBLE USE
CERTIFICATE AND ZONING CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE APPLICATIONS.
   A determination of Permissible Use Certificate or a Zoning Certificate of
Compliance for a change in use may be withheld during the period in which an
amendment to this Zoning Code or the Zoning Map is pending (after having been
recommended by the Planning Commission or introduced by Council), if the
amendment would affect the building or use applied for. However, the Zoning
Certificate or Zoning Certificate of Compliance shall not be withheld for more
than 90 days after the application was submitted or after final action by
Council has been taken, whichever is the shorter period.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1254.07 RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE PLANNING COMMISSION.
   The Planning Commission shall have the following responsibilities and powers
as they relate to this Code:
   (a)   Carry on a continuous review of the effectiveness and appropriateness
of this Code and recommend such changes or amendments, to Woodlawn Council, as
it feels would be appropriate.
   (b)   Hold public hearings as required by this Code, notice of which shall
be given in accordance with Ohio R.C. § 713.12.
   (c)   Initiate advisable Official Zoning District Map changes, or changes in
the text of the Code where same will promote the best interest of the public in
general through recommendation to the Woodlawn Council.
   (d)   Review proposed zoning amendments and Planned Unit Development
applications as filed by a property owner, providing recommendation to the
Woodlawn Council.
   (e)   Conduct Site Plan Review for projects requiring such approval.
   (f)   Review and approve/disapprove Conditional Use applications.
   (g)   Review and approve/disapprove requests for determinations of similar
use.
   (h)   Review requests for special permits for recommendation to the Woodlawn
Council.
   (i)   Function in any further capacity as required by the Municipal Charter.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1254.08 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS.
   Conditional use permits shall be required for types of uses designated as
conditionally permitted in a particular use district. Such particular use may
be permitted and desirable in certain districts, but not without consideration
in each case of the effect of the use upon neighboring land and the effect the
neighboring land will have on the use. The application of the planning
standards for determining the location and extent of such use is a planning
function, and not in the nature of a variance or appeal. Conditional Use
Permits run with the land and not the applicant/owner.
   (a)   Conditional use process.
      (1)   The Planning Commission may hear and decide upon applications for a
Conditional Use Permit in accordance with the provisions of these regulations.
      (2)   In considering an application for a Conditional Use Permit, the
Planning Commission must make an affirmative finding that the proposed
Conditional Use is to be located in a district wherein such use may be
conditionally permitted, and that all conditions for approval of Conditional
Uses have been met. The Planning Commission shall give due regard to the nature
and condition of all adjacent uses and structures and the consistency therewith
of the proposed Conditional Use and any potential nuisances.
      (3)   A public hearing shall be held by the Planning Commission in
considering an application for a Conditional Use Permit, Notice shall be given
not less than ten days prior to the date of public hearing, by posting notice
on or near the parcel of land involved, at places which will be conspicuous to
the neighboring properties and to the public, by mailing notice to the adjacent
property owners, and by publishing notice in a newspaper of general
circulation.
   (b)   Conditional use application. An application for a Conditional Use
Permit shall contain the following information:
      (1)   Completion of the required application form.
      (2)   The total area in the development in square feet and acres.
      (3)   The existing zoning of the property in question and all adjacent
properties.
      (4)   All right-of-way and any easement lines located on or adjacent to
the property which is proposed to be continued, created, relocated or
abandoned.
      (5)   Existing topography with a maximum of ten-foot contour intervals.
      (6)   The proposed finished grade of the development shown by contours
not larger than five feet.
      (7)   The locations of all existing and proposed buildings in the
described parcels, the uses to be contained therein and the total number of
buildings including dimensions, heights, gross floor area and number of
stories.
      (8)   Location and dimension of all curb cuts, driving lanes, off-street
parking and loading areas including the number of spaces, angles of stalls,
grades, surfacing materials, drainage plans, and illumination of facilities.
      (9)   All sidewalks and other pedestrian systems.
      (10)   Open areas; existing and proposed.
      (11)   Location of all walls, fences, and buffer yards, including
proposed wall, fence or buffer design or composition.
      (12)   Location, size, height, colors, typeset, materials, lighting, and
orientation of all signs.
      (13)   Location of all existing and proposed streets, highways and
alleys.
      (14)   All existing and proposed water and sanitary sewer lines
indicating pipe sizes, types and grades.
      (15)   The schedule of phasing of the project, if applicable.
      (16)   Proposed plans for the exterior of the building, including
building elevations, photographs and proposed finishes or materials.
      (17)   A statement and supporting documentation describing how the
applicant believes that the request conforms to the standards for conditional
uses listed in §
1254.08(c).
      (18)   Such other information as required by the Planning Commission to
determine the conformance with this Code.
   (c)   Standards for conditional use. The Commission shall not grant a
conditional use unless it shall, in each specific case, make specific written
findings of fact directly based upon the particular evidence presented to it,
that support conclusions that:
      (1)   The proposed conditional use will comply with all applicable
regulations of this Code, including lot size requirements, development
standards and use limitations.
      (2)   Adequate utility, drainage and other such necessary facilities have
been or will be provided.
      (3)   Adequate access roads or entrance and exit drives will be provided
and will be so designed as to prevent traffic hazards and to minimize traffic
conflicts and congestion to public streets and alleys.
      (4)   All necessary permits, and licenses for the use and operation of
the conditional use have been obtained, or evidence has been submitted that
such permits and licenses are obtainable for the proposed Conditional Use on
the subject property.
      (5)   All exterior lights for artificial open-air illuminations are so
shaded as to avoid casting direct light upon any property located in a
residential district and to prevent glare that may cause a nuisance to the
public.
      (6)   The location and size of the conditional use, the nature and
intensity of the operation involved or conducted in connection with it, the
size of the site in relation to it, and the location of the site with respect
to streets given access to it, shall be such that it will be in harmony with
the appropriate and orderly development of the district in which it is located.
      (7)   The location, nature, and height of buildings, structures, walls,
and fences on the site and the nature and extent of landscaping and screening
on the site shall be such that the use will not unreasonably hinder or
discourage the appropriate development, use and enjoyment of adjacent land,
buildings and structures.
      (8)   Evidence that the conditional use desired will not adversely affect
the public health and safety.
   (d)   Conditions and restrictions. In granting a Conditional Use Permit, the
Commission may impose such conditions, safeguards and restrictions upon the
premises benefitted by the conditional use as may be necessary to comply with
the standards set out in this chapter to reduce or minimize potentially
injurious effects of such conditional uses upon other property in the
neighborhood, and to carry out the general purpose and intent of this Code.
   (e)   Period of validity.
      (1)   A Conditional Use Permit granted by the Commission shall terminate
at the end of one year from the date on which the Commission grants the
conditional use, unless within the one year period a building permit is
obtained and the erection or alteration of a structure is started.
      (2)   A change in use to another conditional use shall require a
reapplication of the conditional use permit with the Planning Commission.
   (f)   Cultivation and processing of medical marijuana; medical marijuana
dispensaries. In addition to the general standards applicable to all
conditional uses, the Planning Commission shall, when studying an application
for conditional use pertaining to a medical marijuana cultivation facility or a
medical marijuana processing facility, consider the following criteria:
      (1)   The impact of the proposed use on public safety in the surrounding
community;
      (2)   The impact of the proposed use on the economic welfare of the
surrounding community;
      (3)   The impact of the proposed use on the general welfare of the
surrounding community in regard to odors which may emanate from the proposed
use; and
      (4)   The impact of the proposed use on any disproportional concentration
of medical marijuana cultivation facilities or medical marijuana processing
facilities in the surrounding community.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013; Ord. 13-2017, passed 6-27-2017)
§ 1254.09 DETERMINATION OF SIMILAR USES.
   Uses other than those specifically mentioned in this Zoning Code as
permitted uses in each district may also be allowed therein, provided that, in
the judgment of the Planning Commission, such other uses are of a similar
character to those mentioned and will have no adverse influence or no more
adverse influence on adjacent properties, the neighborhood or the community
than the permitted uses specifically mentioned for the district, in accordance
with the following standards.
   (a)   The determination as to whether a main or accessory use is similar to
uses permitted by right shall be considered as an expansion of the use
regulations of the district and not as a variance applying to a particular
situation. Any main use found similar shall thereafter be included in the
enumeration of main uses permitted by right. In the case of an accessory use,
the accessory use shall thereafter be permitted as accessory by right in that
district to the main use to which it is accessory. Application for similar use
shall be made to the Planning Commission by submitting a site plan as set forth
in §
1254.12, Site Plan Review.
   The Planning Commission shall grant or deny the similar use permit utilizing
the following standards:
      (1)   That such use is found to be compatible with the intent statement
of the district for which it is being considered;
      (2)   That such use is not listed in any other main classification of
permitted uses, or in the case of accessory uses that the use is not listed as
an accessory use to the main use in any other district;
      (3)   That such main use conforms to the basic characteristics of the
classification to which it is to be added, and is more appropriate thereto than
to any other main classification;
      (4)   That the use does not create dangers to the health or safety, and
does not create offensive noise, vibration, dust, heat, smoke, odor, glare, or
other objectionable influences to an extent greater that normally resulting
from other uses listed in the classification to which it is to be added; and
      (5)   That such use does not create traffic to a greater extent than the
other uses listed in the classification to which it is to be added.
   (b)   If approved, the use shall be identified as a conditional permitted
use, subject to the standards and regulations of §
1254.08, Conditional Use Permits, in this Zoning Code unless a formal Zoning
Code text amendment is conducted, as per §
1254.11, Amendments, incorporating such use as a principal permitted or
accessory permitted use.
   (c)   Appeals to the decision of the Planning Commission shall be made to
the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1254.10 THE WOODLAWN COUNCIL.
   The powers and duties of the Woodlawn Council as they relate to this Code
are as follows:
   (a)   Approve the appointment of a Zoning Officer and any assistants, to
administer and enforce the provisions of these regulations.
   (b)   Approve the appointment of members of Planning Commission as regulated
by the Municipal Charter.
   (c)   Approve the appointment of a Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance
with the Municipal Charter.
   (d)   Initiate or act upon suggested amendments to the Zoning Regulations
text or the Official Zoning District Map after receiving the recommendations of
the Woodlawn Planning Commission.
   (e)   Determine fees for permits, application review and violations. Each
written application for a Zoning Certificate, Zoning Amendment, Administrative
Appeal, Conditional Use Permit, Similar Use, Special Permit, Site Plan Review
or Variance shall be accompanied by filing fees.
   (f)   Provide for maintaining and keeping current the permanent records
required by these regulations, including but not limited to the Official Zoning
District Map, Zoning Certificate, inspections, and all official zoning actions
of the Woodlawn Council. Such records shall be made available for use by the
Woodlawn Council, Planning Commission, Board of Zoning Appeals, and the public.
   (g)   To hear and decide appeals to the decision of the Planning Commission
regarding an application for site plan review.
   (h)   Review and approve/disapprove requests for Concept Plans for Planned
Unit Developments.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1254.11 AMENDMENTS.
   (a)   Authority of Council; initiation.
      (1)   Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare or good
zoning practice requires, Council may, by ordinance, after recommendations
thereon by the Planning Commission and subject to the procedure provided in
this section, amend, supplement or change the regulations, district boundaries
or classifications of property, now or hereafter established by this Zoning
Code or amendments thereto.
      (2)   The Planning Commission shall submit to Council recommendations
regarding all applications or proposals for amendments or supplements. An
amendment, supplement, reclassification or change may be initiated by the
Commission on its own motion, by motion of Council or by the filing of a
verified application therefore by one or more of the owners or lessees of the
property within the area proposed to be changed or affected by the proposed
amendment or supplement.
   (b)   Applications; information. Applications for any change of district
boundaries or classifications of property as shown on the Zoning Map, and for
regulation/text amendments, shall be submitted in triplicate to the Planning
Commission or Zoning Officer, who shall forward the application to the Planning
Commission, upon such forms and accompanied by such data and information as may
be prescribed for that purpose by the Commission, so as to ensure the fullest
practical presentation of the facts for the permanent record.
    Application shall include the following information as a minimum:
      (1)   Such data shall include, in the event of a map amendment, a plat or
map drawn to a scale of not less than 100 feet to the inch (1" = 100') showing
the land in question, its location, the length and location of each boundary
thereof, the location of existing uses and buildings and the principal use of
all properties within 300 feet of such land.
      (2)   When the request is for a text amendment, the application shall
include a clear description of the proposed language to be added, removed or
altered in the Zoning Code, including a clear reference to any and all sections
of the Code to be amended.
      (3)   Each such application shall be verified by at least one of the
owners or lessees of property within the area proposed to be reclassified,
attesting to the truth and correctness of all facts and information presented
with the application.
      (4)   Applications for amendments or district changes initiated by the
Commission or Council shall be accompanied by a resolution of record of either
body pertaining to the proposed amendment.
      (5)   Any person desiring a change in the zoning classification of
property shall file, with the application for such change, a statement giving
the names and addresses of the owners of all properties lying within 300 feet
of any part of the exterior boundaries of the premises, the zoning
classification of which is proposed to be changed.
   (c)   Hearings by Planning Commission. Before submitting its recommendations
on a proposed amendment or reclassification to Council, the Planning Commission
shall hold at least one public hearing thereon, notice of which shall be given
by one publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the Municipality at
least ten days before the date of such hearing. The notice shall state the
place and time at which the proposed amendment to this Zoning Code, including
the text and maps, may be examined. Notice shall also be given to all property
owners within 300 feet of the affected property based on the data provided by
the applicant. A general notice is required for a text amendment, not
notification of property owners.
   (d)   Planning Commission recommendations. Following such hearing, the
Commission may recommend that the application be granted as requested, may
recommend a modification of the zoning amendment requested in the application
or may recommend that the application be denied. These recommendations shall
then be certified to Council.
   (e)   Hearings by Council; notice. After receiving from the Commission the
certification of such recommendations on the proposed amendment or supplement,
and before the adoption of such amendment, Council shall hold a public hearing
thereon. At least 30 days' notice of the time and place of such hearing shall
be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Municipality. If the proposed amendment intends to rezone or redistrict ten or
less parcels of land, as listed in the tax duplicate, written notice of the
hearing shall be mailed by the Clerk of Council, by first class mail, at least
20 days before the date of the public hearing, to the owners of property within
and contiguous to, and directly across the street from, such parcels, to the
addresses of such owners appearing on the County Auditor's current tax list.
   (f)   Amendments initiated by Council. Council may, from time to time, on
its own motion or on petition, after public notice and hearing as provided by
law, and after report by the Planning Commission, amend, supplement or change
the boundaries or regulations in this Zoning Code or subsequently established.
If the Commission disapproves the proposed change, such amendment shall not be
passed except by a favorable vote of three-fourths of all members of Council.
   (g)   Minimum district size. Each district or noncontiguous portion of a
district shall be at least five acres.
   (h)   Pending Zoning Map changes. Whenever Council has taken under
advisement a change or amendment of the Zoning Map from a less restricted
district to a more restricted district classification, as evidenced by a
resolution of record, no Zoning Certificate or Zoning Certificate of Compliance
shall be issued within 30 days from the date of such resolution, which
certificate or permit would authorize the construction of a building or the
establishment of a use which would become nonconforming under the contemplated
redistricting plan.
   (i)   Fee. Each application for a zoning amendment or district change,
except one initiated by the Planning Commission, shall be accompanied by a
check payable to the Clerk-Treasurer or a cash payment, in an amount to be
determined by the Council, sufficient to cover the costs of publishing, posting
and/or mailing notices of hearings.
   (j)   Conditions for approval. The Planning Commission and Woodlawn Council
shall favorably consider an application for a zoning amendment, whether to the
Zoning Regulation text or to the Official Zoning District Map, only if the
request for a change of zoning meets the at least one of the following
conditions:
      (1)   A manifest error exists in the Zoning Code text and/or designations
on the Official Zoning District Map;
      (2)   The amendment will result in accordance with, or more appropriate
conformance to, the Woodlawn Master Plan;
      (3)   Substantial change in area conditions have occurred; or
      (4)   A legitimate requirement can be shown for the need for additional
land area for the particular zoning district.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1254.12 SITE PLAN REVIEW.
   Site plan review shall be as follows:
   (a)   Applicability. This section shall apply to new property development
and any collective substantial expansion of existing structures, except for
individual single-family dwellings and two-family dwellings (duplexes) and
parking lots of five spaces or smaller. Substantial expansion of existing
structures shall be defined as an increase of the existing structure by 20
percent or more in gross floor area. Furthermore, no building shall be erected
or structurally altered on any lot or parcel in zones where a site plan is
required, except in accordance with the regulations of this section and an
approved site plan. No Zoning Certificate or Zoning Certificate of Compliance
shall be issued prior to the approval of a site plan.
   (b)   Contents of Site Plan. Before a permit is issued for construction,
copies of a site plan at a scale no smaller than 1 inch to 100 feet (1"=100')
shall be filed with the Zoning Officer setting forth, identifying and locating
the following:
      (1)   The total area in the development in square feet and acres.
      (2)   The existing zoning of the property in question and all adjacent
properties including properties located across a street from the subject
property.
      (3)   All right-of-way and easement lines located on or adjacent to the
property which is proposed to be continued, created, relocated or abandoned.
      (4)   Existing topography with a maximum of ten-foot contour intervals.
      (5)   The proposed finished grade of the development shown by contours
not larger than five feet.
      (6)   The locations of all existing and proposed buildings in the
described parcels, the uses to be contained therein and the total number of
buildings including dimensions, heights, gross floor area and number of
stories.
      (7)   Location and dimension of all curb cuts, driving lanes, off-street
parking and loading areas including the number of spaces, angles of stalls,
grades, surfacing materials, drainage plans, and illumination of facilities.
      (8)   All sidewalks and other open areas.
      (9)   Location of all walls, fences, and buffer yards.
      (10)   Location, size, height, colors, typeset, materials, lighting, and
orientation of all signs.
      (11)   Location of all existing proposed streets, highways and alleys.
      (12)   All existing and proposed water and sanitary sewer lines
indicating pipe sizes, types and grades.
      (13)   The schedule of phasing of the project, if applicable.
      (14)   A lighting plan for the project including a photometric plan and
proposed lighting fixture types/styles and mounting heights.
      (15)   A landscape plan.
      (16)   A storm water management plan.
      (17)   Proposed plans for the exterior of the building, including
building elevations, photographs and proposed finishes or materials.
      (18)   A traffic impact study, if required by the Planning Commission.
      (19)   Such other information as required by the Planning Commission to
determine the conformance with this Code.
   (c)   Site Plan Review guidelines. The following principles shall guide the
exercise of site planning review by the Planning Commission:
      (1)   The use or expansion is in conformance with the most recent
Woodlawn Master Plan.
      (2)   The natural topographic and landscape features of the site shall be
incorporated into the plan and the development to the greatest extent feasible.
      (3)   Buildings and open spaces should generally be in proportion and in
scale with existing structures and spaces in the area within 300 feet of the
development site.
      (4)   A site that has an appearance of being congested, overbuilt or
cluttered can evolve into a blighting influence and therefore such should not
be congested, over built or cluttered.
      (5)   Open spaces should be linked together.
      (6)   Natural separation should be preserved or created on the site by
careful planning of the streets and clustering of buildings using natural
features and open spaces for separation. Existing vegetation removal should be
kept to a minimum.
      (7)   Screening of intensive uses should be provided by utilizing
landscaping, fences or walls to enclose internal areas.
      (8)   Buildings should be sited in an orderly, non-random fashion. Long,
unbroken building facades should be avoided.
      (9)   In connection with the siting of buildings taller than one story,
the location should be oriented to maximize the privacy of the occupants of
adjacent buildings.
      (10)   Short loop streets, cul-de-sacs and residential streets should be
used for access to low- density residential land uses in order to provide a
safer living environment and a stronger sense of neighborhood identity.
      (11)   Street location and design should conform to existing topographic
characteristics. Cutting and filling shall be minimized in the construction of
streets. Flat as possible grades should be utilized proximate to intersections.
      (12)   Pedestrian circulation in nonresidential areas should be arranged
so that off-street parking areas are located within a convenient walking
distance of the use being served. Handicapped parking should be located as near
as possible to be accessible to the structure. Pedestrian and vehicular
circulation should be separated as much as possible, through crosswalks
designated by pavement markings, signalization or complete grade separation.
      (13)   Path and sidewalk street crossings should be located where there
is a good sight distance along the road, preferably away from sharp bends or
sudden changes in grade.
      (14)   Parking lots and garages should be located in such a way as to
provide safe, convenient ingress and egress. Whenever possible there should be
a sharing or curb cuts of more than one facility. Parking areas should be
screened and landscaped and traffic islands should be provided to protect
circulating vehicles and to break up the monotony of continuously paved areas.
      (15)   Drive-through establishments such as restaurants and banks should
be located to allow enough automobile waiting space for peak hour operation
without interference with other parking lot circulations.
   (d)   Action by Planning Commission for Site Plan Review. Upon submission of
the complete application as outlined under §
1254.12(b) for site plan review to the Zoning Officer, the application shall be
transmitted to the Planning Commission within 30 days, where they shall review
the site plan pursuant to this section. A public hearing shall be held by the
Planning Commission in reviewing a site plan. Notice shall be given not less
than ten days prior to the date of public hearing, by posting notice on or near
the parcel of land involved, at places which will be conspicuous to the
neighboring properties and to the public, by mailing notice to the adjacent
property owners, and by publishing notice in a newspaper of general
circulation. The Planning Commission may approve, disapprove or approve with
modifications the site plan as submitted.
   The Planning Commission shall act upon all site plans within 30 days after
the receipt of the complete application from the Zoning Officer. Within the
said 30-day period, a majority of the members of the Planning Commission
present at a meeting thereof may vote to extend the said period for a period of
time not to exceed an additional 60 days.
   (e)   Appeal of Planning Commission decision for Site Plan Review. An appeal
can be made to the Woodlawn Council regarding a decision by the Planning
Commission regarding approval of a site plan review. An applicant, or other
aggrieved party, may appeal to the Woodlawn Council to evaluate the decision of
the Planning Commission as related to a site plan review application. The
Council may uphold the decision of the Planning Commission, overturn the
decision of the Planning Commission or modify the decision of the Planning
Commission. An affirmative vote of five members of the Council is required to
overturn or modify the recommendation of the Planning Commission. Appeals to
the Planning Commission decision shall be made within 30 days of action by the
Planning Commission.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
CHAPTER 1256: BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
1256.01   Composition; terms of office.
1256.02   Quorum; voting, rules and regulations.
1256.03   Meetings and records.
1256.04   Powers and duties.
1256.05   Exercise of powers.
1256.06   Appeals.
1256.07   Variances.
1256.08   Application for appeal or variance.
§ 1256.01 COMPOSITION; TERMS OF OFFICE.
   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall consist of seven Woodlawn residents, as
stipulated by the Municipal Charter. The composition of the Board shall be as
follows:
   (a)   Two members of Council selected annually by Council;
   (b)   One member of the Planning Commission selected annually by the
Planning Commission; and
   (c)   Four citizens of the Municipality selected by recommendation of the
Mayor with the concurrence of Council. Residents shall serve a four-year term,
except that terms of the members of the first Board shall be staggered so that
two new members will be appointed for two years. Thereafter, two citizen
members will be appointed every two years to a four- year term on the Board.
   (d)   Members of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be removed for
nonperformance of duty or misconduct, by the Municipal Council, upon written
charges having been filed with the Municipal Council and after a public hearing
has been held regarding such charges. A copy of the charges shall be served
upon the member so charged at least ten days prior to the hearing, personally,
by registered mail or by leaving the copy at his or her usual place of
residence. The member shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to answer
such charges.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1256.02 QUORUM; VOTING, RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (a)   A quorum for all meetings of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall consist
of a minimum of four members. A majority vote by the members present is
required for approval of matters brought before the Board. The Mayor, or in his
or her absence the Acting Mayor, shall preside at the meetings. He or she may
not vote in the Board meeting other than to break a tie by the members. No
member may abstain from voting yea or nay unless there is a conflict of
interest involved.
   (b)   The Board shall adopt, from time to time, such rules and regulations
as it may deem necessary to carry into effect the provisions of this Zoning
Code.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1256.03 MEETINGS AND RECORDS.
   Meetings of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be held at the call of the
Mayor and at such times as the Board may determine. The Mayor, or in his or her
absence the Acting Mayor, shall administer oaths and compel the attendance of
witnesses. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. The Board
shall keep written minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member
upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and
shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which
shall be immediately filed in the office of the Board and shall be a public
record.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1256.04 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the following powers and duties:
   (a)   To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an error
in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Zoning Officer
in the enforcement of this Zoning Code;
   (b)   Authorize such variances, from the terms of this Zoning Code that are
not contrary to the public interest, where, owing to the special conditions, a
literal enforcement of this Code will result in practical difficulties, and so
that the spirit of this Code shall be observed and substantial justice done.
Procedures for variances shall conform to §
1256.07, Variances.
   (c)   Appeals taken on the basis of a decision rendered by the Planning
Commission on conditional use requests.
   The Board of Zoning Appeals may call on any Municipal department for
assistance in the performance of its duties and it shall be the duty of such
departments to render such assistance to the Board of Zoning Appeals as may
reasonably be required.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1256.05 EXERCISE OF POWERS.
   In exercising the powers specified in §
1256.04, Powers and Duties, the Board of Zoning Appeals may, by a majority
vote, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order,
requirement, decision or determination appealed from, and may make such order,
requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end
shall have all the powers of the Zoning Officer from whom the appeal is taken.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1256.06 APPEALS.
   (a)   Filing. Appeals to the Board of Zoning Appeals may be taken by any
person aggrieved or by an officer, department or bureau of the Municipality
affected by any decision of the Zoning Officer or conditional use decision of
the Planning Commission. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days of the
Zoning Officer or Planning Commission action, as prescribed by the Board by
general rule, by filing with the Zoning Officer and with the Board a notice of
appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The Zoning Officer shall forthwith
transmit to the Board copies of all papers constituting the record upon which
the action appealed from is taken.
   (b)   Proceedings stayed. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of
the action appealed from, unless the Zoning Officer certifies to the Board,
after the notice of appeal has been filed with him or her, that, by reason of
facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause
imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be
stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board
or by a court of record on application or notice to the Zoning Officer for good
cause shown.
   (c)   Hearings; notice. The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the
hearing of the appeal and give not less than 30 days public notice thereof in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Municipality, as well as due notice to
all property owners adjacent and across the street from the property in
question, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any
party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. In cases involving
structural additions to residential properties, the Board shall give not less
than ten days nor more than 30 days public notice thereof in a newspaper of
general circulation, as well as due notice to the parties of interest,
including persons whose property faces the frontage or abuts other boundaries
of the lot or parcel under appeal.
   (d)   Fee. The filing fee, as adopted by Municipal Ordinance, shall be paid
to the Municipality at the time the notice of appeal is filed.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1256.07 VARIANCES.
   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the power to authorize upon appeal in
specific cases, filed as provided here, such area variances from the terms,
provisions or requirements of this Zoning Code as will not be contrary to the
public interest provided. Such variances shall be granted only in such cases
where, owing to special and unusual conditions pertaining to a specific piece
of property as described below, the literal enforcement of the provisions or
requirements of this Zoning Code would result in practical difficulty, so that
the spirit of the Zoning Code shall be upheld, public safety and welfare
secured and substantial justice done. Variances shall not be granted for uses
not permitted in the zoning district applicable to the property.
   (a)   Where there are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or
conditions, the literal enforcement of the requirements of this Zoning Code
would involve practical difficulty for an area variance the Board of Zoning
Appeals shall have power to relieve such hardship. In authorizing a variance,
the Board of Zoning Appeals may attach thereto such conditions regarding the
location, character, and other features of the proposed structure or use as it
may deem necessary in the interest of the furtherance of the purpose of the
chapter and in the public interest. In authorizing a variance, with attached
conditions, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall require such evidence and may
require a guarantee or bond as it may deem to be necessary, to enforce
compliance with the conditions attached.
   (b)   Findings of the Board of Zoning Appeals. No such area variance of the
provisions or requirements of this Zoning Code shall be authorized by the Board
of Zoning Appeals if the Board of Zoning Appeals finds that any of the
following facts and conditions exist:
      (1)   Area variance:
         A.   Whether the property in question will yield a reasonable return
or whether there can be any beneficial use of the property without the
variance;
         B.   Whether the variance is substantial;
         C.   Whether the essential character of the neighborhood would be
substantially altered or whether adjoining properties would suffer a
substantial detriment as a result of the variance;
         D.   Whether the variance would adversely affect the delivery of
government services (e.g., water, sewer, garbage);
         E.   Whether the property owner purchased the property with knowledge
of the zoning restriction;
         F.   Whether the property owner's predicament feasibly can be obviated
through some method other than a variance;
         G.   Whether the spirit and intent behind the zoning requirement would
be observed and substantial justice done by granting the variance.
   (c)   Every variance granted or denied by the Board of Zoning Appeals shall
be accompanied by a written finding of fact, based on testimony and evidence
and specifying the reason for granting or denying the variance.
   (d)   Any variance granted but not acted upon within one year shall be
cancelled.
   (e)   Any party adversely affected by a decision of the Board may appeal to
the County Court of Common Pleas on the grounds that such decision was
unreasonable or unlawful. The court may affirm, reverse, vacate or modify the
decision complained of in the appeal.
   (f)   The BZA shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the variance;
give ten days' notice by first class mail to the parties in interest as well as
to all property owners within 250 feet of the subject property.
   (g)   The BZA shall decide the variance within 30 days after the hearing.
This time period may be extended for a period not to exceed 30 days if agreed
to by the BZA and the applicant.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1256.08 APPLICATION FOR APPEAL OR VARIANCE.
   An application for an appeal or variance shall contain the following
information:
   (a)   Name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
   (b)   A brief narrative description of the existing use of the property and
the proposed use.
   (c)   Statement of location of the property (subdivision, township, range,
section number, lot number).
   (d)   A statement indicating the zoning of the property.
   (e)   A brief narrative description of the proposed appeal or variance being
requested, citing the section of the Zoning Code from which the appeal or
variance is being requested.
   (f)   A plan, drawn at an appropriate scale, showing the following:
      (1)   Location of the property, indicating all existing and proposed
structures and lot lines.
      (2)   Locations of the nearest public rights- of-way, and location of all
access points to the site, existing or proposed.
      (3)   Locations of any easements existing or proposed.
      (4)   Locations of any existing or proposed parking areas and driveways,
showing intent to comply with all parking requirements specified by these
regulations.
   (g)   Such other information as may be required by the Board of Zoning
Appeals.
   (h)   Names and mailing addresses of owners of property adjacent to the
subject property as recorded by the Hamilton County Auditor's Office.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
CHAPTER 1258: DISTRICTS GENERALLY AND ZONING MAP
1258.01   Purpose.
1258.02   Division into districts.
1258.03   Zoning Map.
1258.04   Divided lots; extension of districts.
1258.05   Interpretation of district boundaries.
1258.06   Zoning of vacated streets or alleys.
1258.07   Zoning of annexed land.
§ 1258.01 PURPOSE.
   The incorporated territory of Woodlawn, Ohio, is hereby divided into the
following zoning districts wherein regulations are uniform for each class or
type of building or structure or use throughout each zoning district in order
to:
   (a)   Classify, regulate, and restrict the location of residences,
commercial establishments, industries, institutional, recreation and other land
uses, and the location of buildings designed for specified uses;
   (b)   Regulate and limit the height of buildings and structures;
   (c)   Regulate the percentages of lot areas which may be covered by
impervious surfaces;
   (d)   Establish setback lines, sizes of yards and other open spaces
surrounding such buildings;
   (e)   Regulate the density of population of Woodlawn, Ohio.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1258.02 DIVISION INTO DISTRICTS.
   For the purpose of this Zoning Code, Woodlawn is hereby divided into 11
categories or zoning districts.
   (a)   Residence districts:
      R-S   Single-Family Low-Density Residence District
      R-2   Single-Family Low-Density Residence District
      R-3   Single-Family Medium-Density Residence District
      R-M   Multi-Family Residence District
   (b)   Other districts:
      O-S Open Space District
      C-C Civic Center District
      D-1 Downtown Business District
      I-P Industrial Park District
      GMC Glendale Milford Corridor Overlay District
      SP-OL Springfield Pike Corridor Overlay District
      PUD Planned Unit Development District
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1258.03 ZONING MAP.
   The zoning districts and the boundaries thereof are hereby adopted and
established as shown on the Zoning Map of the Municipality of Woodlawn. Such
Map, together with all notations, references, data, district boundaries and
other information shown thereon, shall be considered a part of this Zoning
Code. The Zoning Map, properly attested, shall remain on file in the Municipal
Offices.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1258.04 DIVIDED LOTS; EXTENSION OF DISTRICTS.
   Where a district boundary line established in this chapter, or as shown on
the Official Zoning Map, divides a lot which was in single ownership at the
time of enactment of this Zoning Code (Ordinance 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013),
the use authorized thereon and the other district requirements applying to the
least restricted portion of such lot under this Zoning Code shall be considered
as extending up to 25 feet from the zoning boundary line. The use so extended
shall be deemed to be conforming.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1258.05 INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   Unless otherwise indicated on the Official Zoning Map, zoning district
boundaries follow lot lines, the centerlines of streets or alleys, or the
specified distance from such features, railroad right-of-way lines, or property
lines, as indicated on the Zoning Map.
   All questions concerning the exact location of district boundary lines, or
the meaning and intent of textual provisions of this Zoning Code, shall be
determined by Zoning Officer. When the streets or alleys on the ground differ
from the streets or alley on the Zoning Map, the Planning Commission may apply
the Zoning District designations on the map to the property on the ground in
such a manner as to conform to the intent and purposes of the section in the
judgment of the Commission.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1258.06 ZONING OF VACATED STREETS OR ALLEYS.
   Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official action
as provided by law, the zoning district adjoining the side of such public way
shall be extended automatically, depending on the side to which such lands
revert, to include the right-of-way being vacated, which shall be subject to
all regulations of the extended district.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1258.07 ZONING OF ANNEXED LAND.
   (a)   In every case where property has not been specifically included within
a zoning district, the same is hereby declared to be in the R-S Single-Family
Low-Density Residence District until the Planning Commission and Council
rezones the property through a public hearing process.
   (b)   Territory annexed to or consolidated with the Municipality subsequent
to the effective date of this Zoning Code (Ordinance 17-2013, passed 9-24-
2013), shall, upon the effective date of such annexation or consolidation,
become a part of the R-S District, provided that such territory is not
currently subject to County or Township zoning regulations at the time of the
annexation. Such districting shall be temporary and the Planning Commission
shall recommend to Council, within one year from such date of the annexation or
consolidation, a final zoning district designation on the official Zoning Map
for the annexed territory. However, nothing shall prevent the Commission from
recommending such final zoning map at the time of annexation and consolidation.
   (c)   Upon annexation of territory which is subject to County or Township
zoning regulations at the time of annexation, the zoning regulations in effect
shall remain in full force and shall be enforced by the respective County or
Township zoning officials until the Woodlawn Municipal Council, upon
recommendation of the Planning Commission, officially rezones the territory.
All territory which may hereafter be annexed to the Municipality, if already
zoned, shall be continued in its existing zoning classification until amended
in conformance with the procedures outlined in this Code.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
CHAPTER 1262: R-S SINGLE-FAMILY LOW-DENSITY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
1262.01   Purpose.
1262.02   Principal permitted uses.
1262.03   Accessory permitted uses.
1262.04   Conditional permitted uses.
1262.05   Lot development standards.
1262.06   Minimum off-street parking requirements.
1262.07   Signage requirements.
1262.08   Landscape and buffer requirements.
§ 1262.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the R-S District is to provide land for residential uses in
Woodlawn for the encouragement and establishment of low-density neighborhoods
where sanitary sewer may or may not present and readily available and to
provide a quiet, peaceful setting in which to live, free of commercial
development.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1262.02 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses are permitted as of right in the “R-S” District:
 
Residential Uses                Public and Semi-Public Uses Commercial Uses
Single-family detached dwelling None                        None
Group homes
 
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1262.03 ACCESSORY PERMITTED USES.
   In an R-S District, accessory uses, buildings or other structures
customarily incidental to any permitted or conditionally permitted uses may be
established, erected or constructed. Accessory uses may include the following
and shall conform to the regulations of
Chapter 1296, Provisions Relating to All Districts:
   (a)   Child Day Care; Type B as regulated by Ohio R.C. Chapter 5104.
   (b)   Fences and walls six feet in height or less.
   (c)   Garages, carports or other improved off- street parking spaces for the
use of residents on the premises and their guests.
   (d)   Gardening, the raising of vegetables or fruits and the keeping of
household pets, excluding farm animals, exclusively for the use or personal
enjoyment of the residents of the premises and not for commercial purposes.
   (e)   Home occupation.
   (f)   Outdoor storage.
   (g)   Satellite dishes.
   (h)   Sheds and similar type buildings subject to §
1296.03, Accessory Uses in Residential Districts.
   (i)   Swimming pools.
   (j)   Signs subject to
Chapter 1292.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1262.04 CONDITIONAL PERMITTED USES.
   In an R-S District, the following uses shall be permitted only if
specifically authorized by the Planning Commission in accordance with §
1254.08, Conditional Use Permits:
 
Residential Uses Public and Semi- Public Uses                   Commercial Uses
                 Educational Institution; Primary and Secondary
None             Public and Semi- Public Uses                   None
                 Recreation Uses
                 Religious Place of Worship
 
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1262.05 LOT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   The following development standards shall apply to lots located within the
R-S District:
                                        1 acre (43,560 square feet) single-
                                        family detached dwelling
                                        1-1/2 acre (65,340 square feet) all
                                        other uses
Minimum lot area                        Single-family detached dwellings that
                                        are not on public sanitary sewer shall
                                        be required to conform to the minimum
                                        lot size requirements of the Hamilton
                                        County Health District.
Maximum lot coverage                    40% single-family dwellings
                                        70% all other principal uses
                                        100 feet single-family detached
Minimum lot width at frontage           dwelling
                                        150 feet all other principal uses
                                        35 feet single-family detached dwelling
                                        50 feet all other principal uses
Minimum front yard setback              For infill development, if three or
                                        more dwellings are within 500 feet,
                                        then the average front yard setback
                                        shall be required
                                        5 feet; 30 feet sum of side yard widths
Minimum side yard setback               for single-family detached dwellings
                                        30 feet; 50 feet sum of side yard
                                        widths for all other principal uses
                                        35 feet for single-family detached
Minimum rear yard setback               dwellings
                                        50 feet for all other principal uses
Minimum square footage of single-family 2,000 square foot
dwellings
                                        35 feet or 2-1/2 stories for principal
Maximum building height                 structures
                                        15 feet accessory structures
 
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013; Ord. 11-2017, passed 5-30-2017)
§ 1262.06 MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   Off-street parking requirements shall be as regulated in
Chapter 1294, Off-Street Parking and Loading.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1262.07 SIGNAGE REQUIREMENTS.
   Signage requirements shall be as regulated in
Chapter 1292, Signs and Outdoor Advertising.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1262.08 LANDSCAPE AND BUFFER REQUIREMENTS.
   Landscape and Buffer requirements shall be as regulated in
Chapter 1295, Screening and Landscaping.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
CHAPTER 1264: R-2 SINGLE-FAMILY LOW-DENSITY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
1264.01   Purpose.
1264.02   Principal permitted uses.
1264.03   Accessory permitted uses.
1264.04   Conditional permitted uses.
1264.05   Lot development standards.
1264.06   Minimum off-street parking requirements.
1264.07   Signage requirements.
1264.08   Landscape and buffer requirements.
§ 1264.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the R-2 District is to provide land for residential uses
within Woodlawn for the encouragement and establishment of low density
neighborhoods where sanitary sewer may or may not be present or readily
available and to provide a quiet, peaceful setting in which to live, free of
commercial development.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1264.02 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses are permitted as of right in the R-2 District:
 
Residential Uses                Public and Semi-Public Uses Commercial Uses
Single-family detached dwelling None                        None
Group homes
 
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1264.03 ACCESSORY PERMITTED USES.
   In an R-2 District, accessory uses, buildings or other structures
customarily incidental to any permitted or conditionally permitted uses may be
established, erected or constructed. Accessory uses may include the following
and shall conform to the regulations of
Chapter 1296, Provisions Relating to All Districts:
   (a)   Child Day Care; Type B as regulated by Ohio R.C. Chapter 5104.
   (b)   Fences and walls six feet in height or less.
   (c)   Garages, carports or other improved off- street parking spaces for the
use of residents on the premises and their guests.
   (d)   Gardening, the raising of vegetables or fruits and the keeping of
household pets, excluding farm animals, exclusively for the use or personal
enjoyment of the residents of the premises and not for commercial purposes.
   (e)   Home occupation.
   (f)   Outdoor storage.
   (g)   Satellite dishes.
   (h)   Sheds and similar type buildings subject to §
1296.03, Accessory Uses in Residential Districts (“R” Districts).
   (i)   Swimming pools.
   (j)   Signs subject to Chapter 1292.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1264.04 CONDITIONAL PERMITTED USES.
   In an R-2 District, the following uses shall be permitted only if
specifically authorized by the Planning Commission in accordance with §
1254.08, Conditional Use Permits:
 
Residential Uses Public and Semi- Public Uses                   Commercial Uses
                 Educational institution; primary and secondary
None             Public and semi-public uses                    None
                 Recreation uses
                 Religious place of worship
 
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1264.05 LOT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   The following development standards shall apply to lots located within the
R-2 District:
                                        1 acre (43,560 square feet) single-
                                        family detached dwelling
                                        1-1/2 acre (65,340 square feet) all
                                        other uses
Minimum lot area                        Single-family detached dwellings that
                                        are not on public sanitary sewer shall
                                        be required to conform to the minimum
                                        lot size requirements of the Hamilton
                                        County Health District.
Maximum lot coverage                    40% single-family dwellings
                                        70% all other principal uses
                                        100 feet single-family detached
Minimum lot width at frontage           dwelling
                                        150 feet all other principal uses
                                        35 feet single-family detached dwelling
                                        50 feet all other principal uses
Minimum front yard setback              For infill development, if three or
                                        more dwellings are within 500 feet,
                                        then the average front yard setback
                                        shall be required
                                        5 feet; 30 feet sum of side yard widths
Minimum side yard setback               for single-family detached dwellings
                                        30 feet; 50 feet sum of side yard
                                        widths for all other principal uses
                                        35 feet for single-family detached
Minimum rear yard setback               dwellings
                                        50 feet for all other principal uses
Minimum square footage of single-family 2,000 square foot
dwellings
                                        35 feet or 2-1/2 stories for principal
Maximum building height                 structures
                                        15 feet accessory structures
 
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013; Ord. 11-2017, passed 5-30-2017)
§ 1264.06 MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   Off-street parking requirements shall be as regulated in Chapter 1294, Off-
Street Parking and Loading.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1264.07 SIGNAGE REQUIREMENTS.
   Signage requirements shall be as regulated in Chapter 1292, Signs and
Outdoor Advertising.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1264.08 LANDSCAPE AND BUFFER REQUIREMENTS.
   Landscape and buffer requirements shall be as regulated in Chapter 1295,
Screening and Landscaping.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
CHAPTER 1266: R-3 SINGLE-FAMILY MEDIUM-DENSITY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
1266.01   Purpose.
1266.02   Principal permitted uses.
1266.03   Accessory permitted uses.
1266.04   Conditional permitted uses.
1266.05   Lot development standards.
1266.06   Minimum off-street parking requirements.
1266.07   Signage requirements.
1266.08   Landscape and buffer requirements.
§ 1266.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the R-3 District is to provide land for residential uses in
Woodlawn for the encouragement and establishment of medium density
neighborhoods where sanitary sewer may or may not present or readily available
and to provide a quiet, peaceful setting in which to live, free of commercial
development.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1266.02 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses are permitted as of right in the R-3 District:
 
Residential Uses                Public and Semi-Public Uses Commercial Uses
Single-family detached dwelling None                        None
Group homes
 
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1266.03 ACCESSORY PERMITTED USES.
   In an R-3 District, accessory uses, buildings or other structures
customarily incidental to any permitted or conditionally permitted uses may be
established, erected or constructed. Accessory uses may include the following
and shall conform to the regulations of Chapter 1296, Provisions Relating to
All Districts:
   (a)   Child Day Care; Type B as regulated by Ohio R.C. Chapter 5104.
   (b)   Fences and walls six feet in height or less.
   (c)   Garages, carports or other improved off- street parking spaces for the
use of residents on the premises and their guests.
   (d)   Gardening, the raising of vegetables or fruits and the keeping of
household pets, excluding farm animals, exclusively for the use or personal
enjoyment of the residents of the premises and not for commercial purposes.
   (e)   Home occupation.
   (f)   Outdoor storage.
   (g)   Satellite dishes.
   (h)   Sheds and similar type buildings subject to §
1296.03, Accessory Uses in Residential Districts (“R” Districts).
   (i)   Swimming pools.
   (j)   Signs subject to Chapter 1292.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1266.04 CONDITIONAL PERMITTED USES.
   In an R-3 District, the following uses shall be permitted only if
specifically authorized by the Planning Commission in accordance with §
1254.08, Conditional Use Permits:
 
Residential Uses                Public and Semi-Public Uses Commercial Uses
Single-family attached dwelling Public and semi-public uses
Two-family dwelling             Recreation uses             None
                                Religious place of worship
 
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1266.05 LOT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   The following development standards shall apply to lots located within the
R-3 District:
                                        1/2 acre (21,780 square feet) single-
                                        family detached dwelling
                                        1-1/2 acre (65,340 square feet) all
                                        other uses
Minimum lot area                        Single-family detached dwellings that
                                        are not on public sanitary sewer shall
                                        be required to conform to the minimum
                                        lot size requirements of the Hamilton
                                        County Health District.
Maximum lot coverage                    40% single-family dwellings
                                        70% all other principal uses
Minimum lot width at frontage           100 feet
                                        40 feet single-family detached dwelling
                                        45 feet all other principal uses
Minimum front yard setback              For infill development, if three or
                                        more dwellings are within 500 feet,
                                        then the average front yard setback
                                        shall be required
                                        5 feet; 30 feet sum of side yard widths
Minimum side yard setback               for single-family detached dwellings
                                        30 feet; 60 feet sum of side yard
                                        widths for all other principal uses
                                        35 feet for single-family detached
Minimum rear yard setback               dwellings
                                        40 feet for all other principal uses
Minimum square footage of single-family 2,000 square foot
dwellings
                                        35 feet or 2-1/2 stories for principal
Maximum building height                 structures
                                        15 feet accessory structures
 
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013; Ord. 11-2017, passed 5-30-2017)
§ 1266.06 MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   Off-street parking requirements shall be as regulated in Chapter 1294, Off-
Street Parking and Loading.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1266.07 SIGNAGE REQUIREMENTS.
   Signage requirements shall be as regulated in Chapter 1292, Signs and
Outdoor Advertising.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1266.08 LANDSCAPE AND BUFFER REQUIREMENTS.
   Landscape and Buffer requirements shall be as regulated in Chapter 1295,
Screening and Landscaping.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
CHAPTER 1268: R-M MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
1268.01   Purpose.
1268.02   Principal permitted uses.
1268.03   Accessory permitted uses.
1268.04   Conditional permitted uses.
1268.05   Lot development standards.
1268.06   Minimum off-street parking requirements.
1268.07   Signage requirements.
1268.08   Landscape and buffer requirements.
1268.09   Site plan review required.
§ 1268.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the R-M District is to provide land for more intensive
residential uses in Woodlawn for the encouragement and establishment of multi-
family dwellings where sanitary sewer is present or readily available and to
provide a quiet, peaceful setting in which to live provided that an adequate
review is conducted in accordance with this Code.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1268.02 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses are permitted as of right in the R-M District:
 
Residential Uses                Public and Semi-Public Uses Commercial uses
Group homes
Multi-family dwelling           Public and semi-public uses None
Single-family attached dwelling
Two-family dwelling
 
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1268.03 ACCESSORY PERMITTED USES.
   In an R-M District, accessory uses, buildings or other structures
customarily incidental to any permitted or conditionally permitted uses may be
established, erected or constructed. Accessory uses may include the following
and shall conform to the regulations of
Chapter 1296, Provisions Relating to All Districts:
   (a)   Child Day Care; Type B as regulated by Ohio R.C. Chapter 5401.
   (b)   Fences and walls six feet in height or less.
   (c)   Garages, carports or other improved off- street parking spaces for the
use of residents on the premises and their guests.
   (d)   Gardening, the raising of vegetables or fruits and the keeping of
household pets, excluding farm animals, exclusively for the use or personal
enjoyment of the residents of the premises and not for commercial purposes.
   (e)   Home occupation.
   (f)   Outdoor storage.
   (g)   Satellite dishes.
   (h)   Sheds and similar type buildings subject to Section
1296.03, Accessory Uses in Residential Districts (“R” Districts).
   (i)   Swimming pools.
   (j)   Signs subject to
Chapter 1292.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1268.04 CONDITIONAL PERMITTED USES.
   In an R-M District, the following uses shall be permitted only if
specifically authorized by the Planning Commission in accordance with §
1254.08, Conditional Use Permits:
 
Residential Uses Public and Semi- Public Uses Commercial Uses
None             Recreation uses              None
                 Religious place of worship
 
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1268.05 LOT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   The following development standards shall apply to lots located within the
R-M District:
                                        1/4 acre (10,890 square feet) for each
                                        residential dwelling unit*
                                        1-1/2 acre (65,340 square feet) all
                                        other principal uses
                                        Dwellings that are not on public
                                        sanitary sewer shall be required to
                                        conform to the minimum lot size
Minimum lot area                        requirements of the Hamilton County
                                        Health District.
                                        * The Planning Commission is required
                                        to approve any density increase greater
                                        than four dwelling units per acre (1/
                                        4 acre per dwelling unit) prior to the
                                        issuance of a zoning permit or building
                                        permit.
Maximum lot coverage                    70% all uses
                                        50 feet for each dwelling unit directly
Minimum lot width at frontage           fronting and parallel to the frontage
                                        of the lot
                                        85 feet all other principal uses
Minimum front yard setback              40 feet all uses
                                        15 feet; 30 feet sum of side yard
Minimum side yard setback               widths for residential dwellings
                                        20 feet; 40 feet sum of side yard
                                        widths for all other principal uses
                                        30 feet for single-family detached
Minimum rear yard setback               dwellings
                                        30 feet for all other principal uses
Minimum square footage of single-family 2,000 square foot
dwellings
                                        35 feet or 2-1/2 stories for principal
Maximum building height                 structures
                                        15 feet accessory structures
 
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013; Ord. 11-2017, passed 5-30-2017)
§ 1268.06 MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   Off-street parking requirements shall be as regulated in
Chapter 1294, Off-Street Parking and Loading.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1268.07 SIGNAGE REQUIREMENTS.
   Signage requirements shall be as regulated in
Chapter 1292, Signs and Outdoor Advertising.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1268.08 LANDSCAPE AND BUFFER REQUIREMENTS.
   Landscape and buffer requirements shall be as regulated in
Chapter 1295, Screening and Landscaping.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1268.09 SITE PLAN REVIEW REQUIRED.
   Site plan review is required by the Planning Commission for all residential
projects greater than two dwelling units per individual lot. Site plans shall
conform to the regulations of §
1254.12, Site Plan Review.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
CHAPTER 1269: R-4 SINGLE-FAMILY VARIABLE DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
Section
1269.01   Purpose.
1269.02   Principal permitted uses.
1269.03   Accessory permitted uses.
1269.04   Conditional permitted uses.
1269.05   Lot development standards.
1269.06   Minimum off-street parking requirements.
1269.07   Signage requirements.
1269.08   Landscape and buffer requirements.
§ 1269.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the R-4 District is to provide land within the Village for
the establishment of variable density, single-family neighborhoods.
(Ord. 01-2017, passed 1-31-2017)
§ 1269.02 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses are permitted as of right in the R-4 District:
 
Residential Uses                 Public and Semi-Public Uses Commercial Uses
Single-family detached dwellings None                        None
Group homes
(Ord. 01-2017, passed 1-31-2017)
§ 1269.03 ACCESSORY PERMITTED USES.
   In an R-4 District, accessory uses, buildings or other structures
customarily incidental to any permitted or conditionally permitted uses may be
established, erected or constructed. Accessory uses may include the following
and shall conform to
Chapter 1296, Provisions Related to All Districts:
   (a)   Child day care; Type B as regulated by R.C. Chapter 5401.
   (b)   Fences and walls six feet in height or less.
   (c)   Garages, carports or other improved off-street parking spaces for the
use of residents on the premises and their guests.
   (d)   Gardening, the raising of vegetables and fruits and the keeping of
household pets, excluding farm animals, exclusively for the use or personal
enjoyment of the residents and not for commercial purposes;
   (e)   Home occupation.
   (f)   Outdoor storage.
   (g)   Satellite dishes.
   (h)   Sheds and similar type buildings.
   (i)   Swimming pools.
   (j)   Signs subject to
Chapter 1292.
(Ord. 01-2017, passed 1-31-2017)
§ 1269.04 CONDITIONAL PERMITTED USES.
   In an R-4 District, the following uses shall be permitted only if
specifically authorized by the Planning Commission in accordance with §
1254.08, Conditional Use Permits:
 
Residential Uses Public and Semi-Public Uses Commercial Uses
None             Religious place of worship  None
                 Recreational uses
(Ord. 01-2017, passed 1-31-2017)
§ 1269.05 LOT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   The following development standards shall apply to lots located within the
R-4 District:
                                 ¼ acre (10,890 square feet) single-family
Minimum lot area                 detached
                                 1/3 acre (14,520 square feet) all other
                                 uses
Maximum lot coverage             40% single-family detached dwelling
                                 70% all other permitted uses
Minimum width at frontage        50 feet single-family detached dwelling
                                 85 feet all other permitted uses
Minimum front yard setback       30 feet single-family detached dwelling
                                 40 feet all other permitted uses
Minimum side yard setback        5 feet single-family detached dwelling
                                 15 feet all other permitted uses
Minimum rear yard setback        30 feet single-family detached dwelling
                                 40 feet all other permitted uses
Minimum square footage of single 1,400 square feet
family dwellings
                                 35 feet pf 2½ stories for principal
Maximum building height          structures
                                 15 feet accessory structures
 
(Ord. 01-2017, passed 1-31-2017; Ord. 11-2017, passed 5-30-2017)
§ 1269.06 MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   Off-street parking requirements shall be as regulated in
Chapter 1294, Off-Street Parking and Loading.
(Ord. 01-2017, passed 1-31-2017)
§ 1269.07 SIGNAGE REQUIREMENTS.
   Signage requirements shall be as regulated in
Chapter 1292, Signs and Outdoor Advertising.
(Ord. 01-2017, passed 1-31-2017)
§ 1269.08 LANDSCAPE AND BUFFER REQUIREMENTS.
   Landscape and buffer requirements shall be as regulated in
Chapter 1295, Screening and Landscaping.
(Ord. 01-2017, passed 1-31-2017)
CHAPTER 1270: O-S OPEN SPACE DISTRICT
1270.01   Purpose.
1270.02   Principal permitted uses.
1270.03   Accessory permitted uses.
1270.04   Conditional permitted uses.
1270.05   Lot development standards.
1270.06   Minimum off-street parking requirements.
1270.07   Signage requirements.
1270.08   Landscape and buffer requirements.
§ 1270.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the O-S District is to preserve and protect open spaces and
parks in Woodlawn. Development is permitted in this District only if it is by a
public agency and is recreational in nature.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1270.02 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses are permitted as of right in the O-S District:
 
Residential Uses Public and Semi-Public Uses Commercial Uses
None             Recreation uses             None
 
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1270.03 ACCESSORY PERMITTED USES.
   In an O-S District, accessory uses, buildings or other structures
customarily incidental to any permitted or conditionally permitted uses may be
established, erected or constructed. Accessory uses may include the following
and shall conform to the regulations of
Chapter 1296, Provisions Relating to All Districts:
   (a)   Concession stand and food service if related to the park operation of
the public agency.
   (b)   Fences and walls six feet in height or less.
   (c)   Garden center or greenhouse.
   (d)   Outdoor storage.
   (e)   Sheds or other utility-type buildings.
   (f)   Signs subject to
Chapter 1292.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1270.04 CONDITIONAL PERMITTED USES.
   In an O-S District, the following uses shall be permitted only if
specifically authorized by the Planning Commission in accordance with Section
1254.08, Conditional Use Permit:
 
Residential Uses Public and Semi-Public Uses       Commercial Uses
                 Professional, business or         Private recreational uses
None             administrative offices related to
                 the park operation of the public  Meeting and banquet halls
                 agency
 
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1270.05 LOT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   The following development standards shall apply to lots located within the
O-S District:
Minimum lot area              1-1/2 acres (65,340 square feet)
Maximum lot coverage          25% all uses
Minimum lot width at frontage 100 feet all uses
Minimum front yard setback    45 feet all uses
Minimum side yard setback     30 feet; 60 feet sum of side yard widths
Minimum rear yard setback     40 feet for all uses
Maximum building height       35 feet or 2-1/2 stories for principal structures
                              15 feet accessory structures
 
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1270.06 MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   Off-street parking requirements shall be as regulated in
Chapter 1294, Off-Street Parking and Loading.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1270.07 SIGNAGE REQUIREMENTS.
   Signage requirements shall be as regulated in
Chapter 1292, Signs and Outdoor Advertising.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1270.08 LANDSCAPE AND BUFFER REQUIREMENTS.
   Landscape and buffer requirements shall be as regulated in
Chapter 1295, Screening and Landscaping.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
CHAPTER 1272: C-C CIVIC CENTER DISTRICT
1272.01   Purpose.
1272.02   Principal permitted uses.
1272.03   Accessory permitted uses.
1272.04   Conditional permitted uses.
1272.05   Lot development standards.
1272.06   Minimum off-street parking requirements.
1272.07   Signage requirements.
§ 1272.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the C-C District is to provide a district suited to address
the needs of Woodlawn residents with respect to Federal, State and local
governmental services.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1272.02 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses are permitted as of right in the C-C District:
 
Residential Uses Public and Semi- Public Uses Commercial Uses
None             Public and semi- public uses None
                 Public recreation uses
 
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1272.03 ACCESSORY PERMITTED USES.
   In a C-C District, accessory uses, buildings or other structures customarily
incidental to any permitted or conditionally permitted uses may be established,
erected or constructed. Accessory uses may include the following and shall
conform to the regulations of
Chapter 1296, Provisions Relating to All Districts:
   (a)   Fences and walls six feet in height or less.
   (b)   Outdoor storage.
   (c)   Sheds or other utility-type buildings.
   (d)   Signs subject to
Chapter 1292.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1272.04 CONDITIONAL PERMITTED USES.
   In a C-C District, the following uses shall be permitted only if
specifically authorized by the Planning Commission in accordance with Section
1254.08, Conditional Use Permit:
 
Residential Uses Public and Semi- Public Uses Commercial Uses
None             None                         Clubs
                                              Private recreational uses
 
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1272.05 LOT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   The following development standards shall apply to lots located within the
C-C District:
Minimum lot area              1-1/2 acres (65,340 square feet)
Maximum lot coverage          75% all uses
Minimum lot width at frontage 100 feet all uses
Minimum front yard setback    45 feet all uses
Minimum side yard setback     30 feet; 60 feet sum of side yard widths
Minimum rear yard setback     40 feet for all uses
Maximum building height       35 feet or 2-1/2 stories for principal structures
                              15 feet accessory structures
 
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1272.06 MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   Off-street parking requirements shall be as regulated in
Chapter 1294, Off-Street Parking and Loading.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1272.07 SIGNAGE REQUIREMENTS.
   Signage requirements shall be as regulated in
Chapter 1292, Signs and Outdoor Advertising.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1272.08 LANDSCAPE AND BUFFER REQUIREMENTS.
   Landscape and Buffer requirements shall be as regulated in
Chapter 1295, Screening and Landscaping.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
CHAPTER 1274: D-1 DOWNTOWN BUSINESS DISTRICT
1274.01   Purpose.
1274.02   Principal permitted uses.
1274.03   Accessory permitted uses.
1274.04   Conditional permitted uses.
1274.05   Lot development standards.
1274.06   Minimum off-street parking requirements.
1274.07   Signage requirements.
1274.08   Landscape and buffer requirements.
§ 1274.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the D-1 District is to provide for the development of the
properties along Springfield Pike to promote and to maximize the general and
economic welfare of Woodlawn and to create an environment that encourages
quality economic development, allowing a mixture of retail and office uses.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1274.02 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses are permitted as of right in the D-1 District:
Residential Uses Public and Semi-Public Uses Commercial Uses
Residential Uses Public and Semi-Public Uses Commercial Uses
                 Hospitals                   Commercial entertainment
                                             Hotels and motels
                                             Medical and dental clinics and
                                             laboratories
None             Public and semi-public uses Personal services
                                             Professional, business or
                                             administrative offices
                                             Restaurant
                                             Retail business
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1274.03 ACCESSORY PERMITTED USES.
   In a D-1 District, accessory uses, buildings or other structures customarily
incidental to any permitted or conditionally permitted uses may be established,
erected or constructed. Accessory uses may include the following and shall
conform to the regulations of Chapter 1296, Provisions Relating to All
Districts:
   (a)   Fences and walls six feet in height or less.
   (b)   Outdoor storage.
   (c)   Sheds or other utility-type buildings.
   (d)   Signs subject to Chapter 1292.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1274.04 CONDITIONAL PERMITTED USES.
   In a D-1 District, the following uses shall be permitted only if
specifically authorized by the Planning Commission in accordance with §
1254.08, Conditional Use Permit:
Residential Uses Public and       Commercial Uses
                 Semi-Public Uses
Residential  Public and                                                           Commercial
Uses         Semi-Public Uses                                                     Uses
Accessory
apartment
dwellings
when
combined                                                                          Bar or
with a                                                                            tavern
retail                                                                             
business.                                                                         Day care
Units must                                                                        facility
be on upper
floors or to
the back of
the          Public recreation uses
building.
                                                                                  Clubs
             Drive-through facility when accessory to a permitted use
Nursing      Garden center or greenhouse
home,        Light industrial in accordance with the performance standards of §
convalescent 1296.15
home and     Motor vehicle service and filling stations
assisted     Mixed uses
living       More than one principal building on property
facilities   Private recreational uses
             Restaurant, fast food
             Training centers
 
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1274.05 LOT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   The following development standards shall apply to lots located within the
D-1 District:
Minimum lot area              3/4 acre (32,670 square feet)
Maximum lot coverage          80% all uses
Minimum lot width at frontage 100 feet all uses
Minimum front yard setback    40 feet all uses
Minimum side yard setback     10 feet; 30 feet sum of side yard widths
                              20 feet for all uses
Minimum rear yard setback     40 feet if property abuts the West Fork of the
                              Mill Creek
Maximum building height       45 feet or 3 stories for principal structures
                              15 feet accessory structures
 
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1274.06 MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   Off-street Parking requirements shall be as regulated in
Chapter 1294, Off-Street Parking and Loading.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1274.07 SIGNAGE REQUIREMENTS.
   Signage requirements shall be as regulated in
Chapter 1292, Signs and Outdoor Advertising.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1274.08 LANDSCAPE AND BUFFER REQUIREMENTS.
   Landscape and buffer requirements shall be as regulated in
Chapter 1295, Screening and Landscaping.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
CHAPTER 1276: I-P INDUSTRIAL PARK DISTRICT
1276.01   Purpose.
1276.02   Principal permitted uses.
1276.03   Accessory permitted uses.
1276.04   Conditional permitted uses.
1276.05   Lot development standards.
1276.06   Minimum off-street parking requirements.
1276.07   Signage requirements.
1276.08   Landscape and buffer requirements.
§ 1276.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the I-P District is to provide for the development of the
properties along Springfield Pike to promote and to maximize the general and
economic welfare of Woodlawn and to create an environment that encourages
quality economic development, allowing a mixture of retail and office uses.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1276.02 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses are permitted as of right in the I-P District:
 
            Public
Residential and
Uses        Semi-  Commercial Uses
            Public
            Uses
                   Development and research facilities
            Public Distribution center
            and    Light industrial in accordance with the performance standards of §
None        semi-  1296.15
            public Professional, business or administrative offices
            uses   Storage warehouses
                   Truck transfer terminal
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1276.03 ACCESSORY PERMITTED USES.
   In an I-P District, accessory uses, buildings or other structures
customarily incidental to any permitted or conditionally permitted uses may be
established, erected or constructed. Accessory uses may include the following
and shall conform to the regulations of
Chapter 1296, Provisions Relating to All Districts:
   (a)   Fences and walls six feet in height or less.
   (b)   More than one principal building on property.
   (c)   Outdoor storage.
   (d)   Sheds or other utility-type buildings.
   (e)   Signs subject to
Chapter 1292.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1276.04 CONDITIONAL PERMITTED USES.
   In an I-P District, the following uses shall be permitted only if
specifically authorized by the Planning Commission in accordance with §
1254.08, Conditional Use Permit:
Residential Uses Public and Semi-Public Uses Commercial Uses
Residential Uses Public and Semi-Public Uses Commercial Uses
                                             Garden center or greenhouse
                                             Medical or dental laboratories
                                             Motor vehicle service station and
                                             body shops
                                             Retail business; if accessory and
                                             subordinate to the principal
None             None                        permitted use and occupying no
                                             more than 35% of the total
                                             building or lot
                                             Self storage warehouse facility
                                             Sexually oriented business
                                             Training center
                                             Mobile food vending operations
 
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013; Ord. 31-2024, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 1276.05 LOT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   The following development standards shall apply to lots located within the
I-P District:
Minimum lot area              1-1/2 acres (65,340 square feet)
Maximum lot coverage          80% all uses
Minimum lot width at frontage 100 feet all uses
                              40 feet all uses
Minimum front yard setback    50 feet for properties fronting on Glendale
                              Milford Road
Minimum side yard setback     25 feet; 50 feet sum of side yard widths
                              20 feet for all uses
Minimum rear yard setback     40 feet if property abuts the West Fork of the
                              Mill Creek
Maximum building height       75 feet for principal structures
                              25 feet accessory structures
 
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1276.06 MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   Off-street parking requirements shall be as regulated in
Chapter 1294, Off-Street Parking and Loading.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1276.07 SIGNAGE REQUIREMENTS.
   Signage requirements shall be as regulated in
Chapter 1292, Signs and Outdoor Advertising.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1276.08 LANDSCAPE AND BUFFER REQUIREMENTS.
   Landscape and buffer requirements shall be as regulated in
Chapter 1295, Screening and Landscaping.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
CHAPTER 1280: GMC GLENDALE MILFORD ROAD CORRIDOR OVERLAY DISTRICT
1280.01   Purpose.
1280.02   Principal permitted uses.
1280.03   Accessory permitted uses.
1280.04   Conditional permitted uses.
1280.05   Lot development standards.
1280.06   Minimum off-street parking requirements.
1280.07   Signage requirements.
1280.08   Landscape and buffer requirements
1280.09   Approval process.
1280.10   Design standards.
1280.11   Modifications to design standards.
§ 1280.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the Glendale-Milford Road Corridor Overlay District is to
provide an opportunity for a mixture of land uses along the Glendale-Milford
Road corridor by allowing development of a limited range of retail and service
commercial uses to compliment and serve the needs of the existing surrounding
and underlying I-P Industrial Park uses without threatening the integrity of
the corridor as a transportation route or threatening the composition of the
Industrial Park as an employment base for Woodlawn. The Overlay District is
intended to allow complimentary uses that will improve the mix of businesses
and services in Woodlawn, without creating negative impacts. Only lots of
record with frontage on Glendale-Milford Road are within the Glendale-Milford
Road Corridor Overlay District.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013; Am. Ord. 36-2014, passed 10-28-2014)
§ 1280.02 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses are permitted as of right in the GMC Overlay District:
 
Residential Public and
Uses        Semi-Public  Commercial Uses
            Uses
            Educational  Development and research facilities
            institutions
None        Public and   Distribution center
            semi-public  Light industrial in accordance with the performance standards of §
            uses         1296.15
                         Professional, business or administrative offices
 
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013; Ord. 05-2016, passed 3-29-2016)
§ 1280.03 ACCESSORY PERMITTED USES.
   In a GMC Overlay District, accessory uses, buildings or other structures
customarily incidental to any permitted or conditionally permitted uses may be
established, erected or constructed. Accessory uses may include the following
and shall conform to the regulations of
Chapter 1296, Provisions Relating to All Districts:
   (a)   Fences and walls six feet in height or less.
   (b)   Outdoor storage.
   (c)   Signs subject to
Chapter 1292.
   (d)   Sheds or other utility-type buildings.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1280.04 CONDITIONAL PERMITTED USES.
   In a GMC Overlay District, the following uses shall be permitted only if
specifically authorized by the Planning Commission in accordance with §
1254.08, Conditional Use Permits:
Residential Uses Public and Semi-Public Uses Commercial Uses
Residential Uses           Public and Semi-Public Commercial Uses
                           Uses
                                                  Retail showroom accessory
                                                  to a permitted use
                                                  Convenience retail
                                                  Convenience retail with
                                                  gasoline sales
                                                  Restaurant
Nursing home, convalescent                        Financial institution
home and assisted living   None                   Personal services
facilities                                        Motor vehicle service
                                                  station and filling station
                                                  including automated car
                                                  washes
                                                  Storage warehouses
                                                  Truck transfer terminal
                                                  Mobile food vending
                                                  operations
 
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013; Ord. 05-2016, passed 3-29-2016; Ord. 31-2024,
passed 12-10- 2024)
§ 1280.05 LOT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   The following development standards shall apply to lots located within the
GMC Overlay District:
Minimum lot area              1 acre (43,560 square feet)
Maximum lot coverage          80% all uses
Minimum lot width at frontage 100 feet all uses
                              40 feet all uses
Minimum front yard setback    50 feet for properties fronting on Glendale
                              Milford Road
Minimum side yard setback     25 feet; 50 feet sum of side yard widths
Minimum rear yard setback     20 feet
Maximum building height       75 feet for principal structures
                              25 feet accessory structures
 
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1280.06 MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   Off-Street parking requirements shall be as regulated in
Chapter 1294, Off-Street Parking and Loading.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1280.07 SIGNAGE REQUIREMENTS.
   Signage requirements shall be as regulated in
Chapter 1292, Signs and Outdoor Advertising.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1280.08 LANDSCAPE AND BUFFER REQUIREMENTS.
   Landscape and buffer requirements shall be as regulated in
Chapter 1295, Screening and Landscaping.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1280.09 APPROVAL PROCESS.
   Applications within the Glendale-Milford Road Corridor Overlay District for
uses other than principally permitted uses shall obtain conditional use
approval from the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall evaluate
the proposed uses based on the standards for conditional uses within §
1254.08, Conditional Use Permit. Planning Commission shall refer any
development plan within the GMC Overlay District to Council with a
recommendation for approval, approval with modifications or conditions, or
disapproval. A public hearing shall be scheduled by Council to hear the request
and render a decision.
   (a)   Application. These guidelines and regulations shall apply to all
properties located within the Glendale-Milford Road Corridor Overlay District
as identified on the Official Zoning Map of Woodlawn. The guidelines and
regulations shall be applied as follows:
      (1)   Any new development or redevelopment of property which occurs
within this overlay district that is not part of a Planned Unit Development (
Chapter 1288) shall conform to all of the standards in §
1280.10, Design Standards, as requirements, where applicable and follow the
processes and procedures of §
1254.12, Site Plan Review.
      (2)   Any new development or redevelopment which occurs within this
overlay district that is part of a Planned Unit Development (
Chapter 1288) shall follow all of the standards in §
1280.10, Design Standards, as guidelines.
   Where the standards and requirements identified in this chapter fall silent
on specific development standards or requirements, the underlying zoning
district shall provide such standard(s) or requirement(s).
   In instances of conflict between the regulations in this chapter and another
chapter in this Zoning Code, the uses, regulations and standards of this
chapter shall prevail.
   (b)   Development review. The review of any development or redevelopment of
properties within the Glendale-Milford Road Corridor Overlay District shall
occur as follows:
      (1)   Any new development, reuse or substantial redevelopment which
occurs within this overlay district that is not part of a Planned Unit
Development (
Chapter 1288) shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission to
assure that all design standards of §
1282.05, where applicable, are met. For the purposes of this chapter,
SUBSTANTIAL REDEVELOPMENT shall mean:
 
If the Square Foot of Building is: A Substantial Expansion is:
0 - 5,000                          50%
5,001 - 10,000                     40%
10,001 - 50,000                    30%
50,001 and larger                  20%
 
      (2)   Any new development or redevelopment which occurs within this
overlay district that is part of a Planned Unit Development shall be reviewed
for general compliance of all design standards of §
1282.05, where applicable, during the approval process specified by
Chapter 1288, Planned Unit Development. As part of a Planned Unit Development,
the regulations and standards in this chapter, with the exception of permitted
uses, shall serve as guidelines and not requirements.
      (3)   Any redevelopment that does not fall under §
1280.09(b)(1) or (b)(2) above shall be administratively reviewed and approved
by the Zoning Officer to assure that all of the requirements of this chapter,
where applicable, are met. The Zoning Officer may request the assistance of the
Planning Commission, if necessary, for additional review and input.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1280.10 DESIGN STANDARDS.
   The following design standards shall be clearly identified on drawings,
renderings, or a combination of both, submitted to the Municipality for review
and approval as per §
1280.09. Plans shall be drawn at a scale to adequately depict the proposed
development or redevelopment project. Site plans and elevations shall be
included and noted, as necessary, to accurately depict the proposed development
or redevelopment project.
   (a)   Site development standards.
      (1)   Lot coverage. Development on parcels shall be limited to 80%
coverage by impervious surfaces. Impervious surfaces shall include sidewalks,
off-street parking spaces, driveways, building footprints and other hardscape
that does not permit the absorption of storm water.
      (2)   Utilities, All on-site utilities shall be located underground.
      (3)   Driveways. A maximum of one driveway opening shall be permitted for
each property on each abutting street for every 250 linear feet of frontage.
For corner lots, the locations of the driveways shall be setback a minimum of
50 feet from the face of curb of the intersecting street or as otherwise
approved by the Municipal Engineer. If a driveway is not shared between parcels
the minimum setback from a property line shall be 20 feet.
      (4)   Cross easements. As properties develop or redevelop, efforts shall
be made to provide for cross easement access to adjoining properties and the
consolidation of curb cuts upon development or redevelopment to the fullest
extent possible.
      (5)   Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall comply with Chapter
1294, Off-Street Parking and Loading and the following regulations:
         A.   Off-street parking shall be located to the rear or side of the
property to the fullest extent possible.
         B.   Parking located between the building façade and the right-of-way
shall be separated from the sidewalk by a landscaped buffer strip (e.g. row of
hedges, knee wall, grass strip with plantings, etc.).
      (6)   Pedestrian access. Developed and redeveloped parcels shall include
the dedication of an easement to allow for sidewalk shift away from the street
and closer to the principal structure on the lot.
      (7)   Outdoor storage. Outdoor storage and service structures (dumpsters,
mechanical equipment, etc.) shall be regulated as established in
Chapter 1296, Provisions Relating to All Districts.
      (8)   Signage. Commercial signage shall be limited to advertising on-
premise businesses and shall comply with
Chapter 1292, Signage and Outdoor Advertising and the following regulations:
         A.   Ground-mounted or monument signage shall incorporate design
elements and/or materials of the principal building or structure.
         B.   Where multiple adjacent parcels are developed under one cohesive
development, one larger ground mounted sign may be permitted for the entire
development. Such sign shall replace the individual ground mounted signs for
each individual parcel.
         C.   At a minimum, all ground-mounted or monument signage shall be
landscaped at the base of the sign in an area equal to twice the total square
footage of all faces of the sign.
      (9)   Landscaping and screening. Landscaping and screening shall comply
with
Chapter 1295, Screening and Landscaping, and the following regulations:
         A.   All pervious areas of the site shall be adequately landscaped
with a mix of trees, shrubs, plants and/or grass and maintained in good
condition free of weeds and debris. Mulch beds without plant material shall not
be permitted.
         B.   Landscaping located continuously around the perimeter of off-
street parking areas shall be installed, with the exception of access drives
and areas where cross easements or cross access between properties occurs. Such
landscaped area shall be a minimum of four feet in width.
   (b)   Building design standards.
      (1)   Colors. Façade colors shall not include metallic, black or
fluorescent colors. Colors shall be limited to muted natural colors and earth
tones. Building trim may include brighter colors than the façade colors when
complementing the primary building color.
      (2)   Physical separations. Building or structures shall be physically
separated from any off- street parking area by planted areas (grass or other
landscaping) and a full depth, vertical barrier curb per Municipal Engineering
standards and
Chapters 1294, Off-Street Parking and
1295, Screening and Landscaping. Sidewalks shall be installed, where necessary,
to provide safe pedestrian access to and from the building from the sidewalk
and off-street parking areas.
      (3)   Building heights.
         A.   Principal buildings shall not exceed a height of 70 feet as
measured from the centerline of Glendale-Milford Road.
         B.   Accessory buildings shall not exceed a height of 25 feet as
measured from the building grade of the accessory building or structure.
      (4)   Facades.
         A.   No blank, uninterrupted façades shall be permitted where visible
from a right-of-way. The use of windows, doors and/or other architectural
features shall be required at regular intervals to break up a blank wall. The
use of false windows as an architectural feature may be permitted upon review
by the Planning Commission. Planting areas and landscaped beds may be permitted
in place of architectural features (e.g. 20 lineal feet of landscaping for
every 100 feet of building length) if the height of the landscape material is
at least half the height of the building or structure upon review and approval
of the Planning Commission.
         B.   Buildings with facades visible from a right-of-way and greater
than 100 feet in length shall incorporate recesses or projections of a minimum
of two feet in depth.
         C.   Building facades shall include a repeating pattern including no
less than three of the following elements: color change, texture change,
material change or the inclusion of architectural features no less than 36
inches in width such as offsets, bays, marquees, etc. At least one of these
elements shall repeat horizontally.
         D.   All sides of a building or structure that are visible from any
right-of-way or residentially zoned property shall be finished with the same
materials utilized on the front façade to provide a finished faced towards all
locations visible to the public.
         E.   The predominant exterior building material (greater than 60
percent) shall be brick, natural stone, tinted and textured concrete masonry
units or similar material. Vinyl, wood or metal cladding is not permitted with
the exception of minor trim.
         F.   Smooth face concrete block may only be used for buildings greater
than 20,000 square feet in floor area for no more than 20 percent of the
cladding and then, only in areas not visible to the public. Tilt up concrete
panels, mirrored glass or prefabricated steel panels shall not be permitted as
exterior materials.
      (5)   Rooflines. Rooflines shall have a change in height for at least
every 50 lineal feet in building length unless it is a single tenant building
that exceeds a length of 200 feet. If a single-tenant building exceeds 200 feet
the roofline shall change in height for at least every 75 feet for facades
visible from right-of- ways. Modifications in the roofline do not need to be
uniformly spaced but shall be proportional to the massing of the building.
      (6)   Building orientation. The primary building entrance shall be
oriented towards Glendale- Milford Road.
      (7)   Accessory structures. Accessory structures shall be constructed of
the same materials and colors as the principal building.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1280.11 MODIFICATIONS TO DESIGN STANDARDS.
   Modifications to the overlay design standards of this chapter, as they will
apply to an individual property, shall occur in one of two ways:
   (a)   If the new development or redevelopment is in a Planned Unit
Development, any modification shall be requested by the applicant as a part of
the Planned Unit Development process (
Chapter 1288).
   (b)   If the development or redevelopment is not in a Planned Unit
Development, any modification relating to the subject property or properties
shall be requested by the applicant, in writing, to the Planning Commission for
review and approval. The Planning Commission shall review the request for
modification with respect to the design guidelines established in this chapter
and as per the requirements of §
1254.12, Site Plan Review and only grant such modification if the applicant can
show to Planning Commission practical difficulties in the strict application of
the requirements of this chapter.
   No modification to the design guidelines as they relate to the subject
property for which the modification(s) were requested shall be construed to
apply to this chapter as a whole nor shall they be construed to apply to other
properties.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
CHAPTER 1282: SP SPRINGFIELD PIKE CORRIDOR DISTRICT
1282.01   Purpose.
1282.02   Application.
1282.03   Development review.
1282.04   Permitted and conditional uses.
1282.05   Design standards.
1282.06   Modifications to design standards.
§ 1282.01 PURPOSE.
   The Springfield Pike Corridor District is established to provide guidelines
and regulations to ensure that the site design, physical function and
appearance of the properties in this District reinforce the vision, goals and
objectives of the Woodlawn Comprehensive Plan as they relate to Springfield
Pike.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1282.02 APPLICATION.
   These guidelines and regulations shall apply to all properties located
within the Springfield Pike Corridor District as identified on the Official
Zoning Map of Woodlawn. The guidelines and regulations shall be applied as
follows:
   (a)   Any new development or redevelopment of property which occurs within
this district that is not part of a Planned Unit Development (Chapter 1288)
shall conform to all of the standards in §
1282.05, Design Standards, as requirements, where applicable and follow the
processes and procedures of §
1254.12, Site Plan Review.
   (b)   Any new development or redevelopment which occurs within this district
that is part of a Planned Unit Development (Chapter 1288) shall follow all of
the standards in §
1282.05, Design Standards, as guidelines.
   Where the standards and requirements identified in this chapter fall silent
on specific development standards or requirements, the underlying zoning
district shall provide such standard(s) or requirement(s).
   In instances of conflict between the regulations in this chapter and another
chapter in this Zoning Code, the uses, regulations and standards of this
chapter shall prevail.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1282.03 DEVELOPMENT REVIEW.
   The review of any development or redevelopment of properties within the
Springfield Pike Corridor District shall occur as follows:
   (a)   Any new development or substantial redevelopment which occurs within
this district that is not part of a Planned Unit Development (Chapter 1288)
shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission to assure that all
design standards of §
1282.05, where applicable, are met. For the purposes of this chapter,
SUBSTANTIAL REDEVELOPMENT shall mean 50% or greater enlargement or decrease in
the gross floor area or building size for the subject parcel(s).
   (b)   Any new development or redevelopment which occurs within this district
that is part of a Planned Unit Development shall be reviewed for general
compliance of all design standards of §
1282.05, where applicable, during the approval process specified by Chapter
1288, Planned Unit Development. As part of a Planned Unit Development, the
regulations and standards in this Chapter, with the exception of permitted
uses, shall serve as guidelines and not requirements.
   (c)   Any redevelopment that does not fall under §
1282.03(a) or (b) above shall be administratively reviewed and approved by the
Zoning Officer to assure that all of the requirements of this chapter, where
applicable, are met. The Zoning Officer may request the assistance of the
Planning Commission, if necessary, for additional review and input.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1282.04 PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted or considered as a conditionally
permitted use in the Springfield Pike District:
   (a)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted as of right in the
Springfield Pike District:
Residential Uses Public and Semi-Public Uses Commercial Uses
Residential Uses Public and Semi-Public Uses Commercial Uses
                                             Bar or tavern when located
                                             entirely within a completely
                                             enclosed and permanent structure
                                             Day care facility
                                             Development and research facility
                                             Financial institutions
None             Public and semi-public uses Medical and dental clinic
                                             Personal services
                                             Professional offices
                                             Restaurants when located entirely
                                             within a completely enclosed and
                                             permanent structure.
                                             Retail business
 
   (b)   Conditional uses. The following uses are permitted as conditional uses
in the Springfield Pike District and require the additional review of the
Planning Commission:
Residential Uses Public and Semi-Public Uses Commercial Uses
Residential Uses         Public and Semi-Public Uses   Commercial Uses
Assisted living facility                               Bar or tavern; indoor or
                                                       outdoor use or service
                                                       Funeral home
                         Light industrial; when
                         located in a completely
                         enclosed building with no
                         external impacts
                         Medical marijuana cultivation
                         facility, when such facility
                         is set back at least 200 feet
                         from Springdale Pike
                         Medical marijuana processing
                         facility, when such facility
                         is set back at least 200 feet
                         from Springfield Pike
                         Mixed uses in a single
                         building which may include
                         residential dwellings that
Attached single- family  shall not be located on the
dwellings                ground floor. Such mixed uses
                         shall not include uses not
                         permitted in this district.
                         Off-site uses. Off-site uses
                         shall include such uses where
                         a majority of sales or
                         service occurs off-site but
                         materials and equipment,
                         including company vehicles,
                         is stored overnight. This
                         shall include, but not be
                         limited to: landscaping
                         contractors, plumbing
                         contractors, paving
                         contractors, etc.
                         Restaurants; indoor or
                         outdoor use or service
                         Restaurant, fast food
 
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013; Ord. 13-2017, passed 6-27-2017)
§ 1282.05 DESIGN STANDARDS.
   The following design standards shall be clearly identified on drawings,
renderings, or a combination of both, submitted to the Municipality for review
and approval as per §§
1282.02 and
1282.03. Plans shall be drawn at a scale to adequately depict the proposed
development or redevelopment project. Site plans and elevations shall be
included and noted, as necessary, to accurately depict the proposed development
or redevelopment project.
   (a)   Site development standards. 
      (1)   Lot coverage. Development on parcels shall be limited to 60%
coverage by impervious surfaces. Impervious surfaces shall include sidewalks,
off-street parking spaces, driveways, building footprints and other hardscape
that does not permit the absorption of storm water.
      (2)   Minimum lot size and setbacks.
         A.   The minimum lot size for parcels in this district shall be 22,000
square feet.
         B.   Front yard. Setbacks for buildings shall be a minimum of 20 feet
from the public right-of-way.
         C.   Side yard setbacks shall be a minimum of 10 feet.
         D.   Rear yard setbacks shall be 20 feet.
      (3)   Utilities. All on site utilities shall be located underground.
      (4)   Driveways. A maximum of one driveway opening shall be permitted for
each property on each abutting street for every 250 linear feet of frontage.
For corner lots, the locations of the driveways shall be setback a minimum of
50 feet from the face of curb of the intersecting street or as otherwise
approved by the Municipal Engineer. If driveway is not shared between parcels
the minimum setback from a property line shall be 20 feet.
      (5)   Cross easements. As properties develop or redevelop, efforts shall
be made to provide for cross easement access to adjoining properties and the
consolidation of curb cuts upon development or redevelopment to the fullest
extent possible.
       (6)   Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall comply with
Chapter 1294, Off-Street Parking and Loading and the following regulations:
         A.   Off-street parking shall be located to the rear or side of the
property to the fullest extent possible.
         B.   Parking located between the building façade and the right-of-way
shall be separated from the sidewalk by a landscaped buffer strip (e.g. row of
hedges, knee wall, grass strip with plantings, etc.).
         C.   As properties develop or redevelop that are located on the
western side of Springfield Pike between Riddle Road and Grove Road, efforts
shall be made to provide for the sharing of off-street parking between parcels
to the fullest extent possible.
      (7)   Pedestrian access. Developed and redeveloped parcels shall include
the dedication of an easement to allow for sidewalk shift away from the street
and closer to the principal structure on the lot.
      (8)   Outdoor storage. Outdoor storage and service structures (dumpsters,
mechanical equipment, etc.) shall be regulated as established in
Chapter 1296, Provisions Relating to All Districts.
      (9)   Signage. Commercial signage shall be limited to advertising on-
premise businesses and shall comply with
Chapter 1292, Signage and Outdoor Advertising and the following regulations:
         A.   Ground-mounted or monument signage shall incorporate design
elements and/or materials of the principal building or structure.
         B.   Where multiple adjacent parcels are developed under one cohesive
development, one larger ground-mounted sign may be permitted for the entire
development. Such sign shall replace the individual ground mounted signs for
each individual parcel.
         C.   At a minimum, all ground-mounted or monument signage shall be
landscaped at the base of the sign in an area equal to twice the total square
footage of all faces of the sign.
      (10)   Landscaping and screening. Landscaping and screening shall comply
with
Chapter 1295, Screening and Landscaping, and the following regulations:
         A.   All pervious areas of the site shall be adequately landscaped
with a mix of trees, shrubs, plants and/or grass and maintained in good
condition free of weeds and debris. Mulch beds without plant material shall not
be permitted.
         B.   Landscaping located continuously around the perimeter of off-
street parking areas shall be installed, with the exception of access drives
and areas where cross easements or cross access between properties occurs. Such
landscaped area shall be a minimum of four feet in width.
   (b)   Building design standards.
      (1)   Colors. Façade colors shall not include metallic, black or
fluorescent colors. Colors shall be limited to muted natural colors and earth
tones. Building trim may include brighter colors than the façade colors when
complementing the primary building color.
      (2)   Physical separations, Building or structures shall be physically
separated from any off- street parking area by planted areas (grass or other
landscaping) and a full depth, vertical barrier curb per Municipal Engineering
standards and
Chapters 1294, Off-Street Parking and
1295, Screening and Landscaping. Sidewalks shall be installed, where necessary,
to provide safe pedestrian access to and from the building from the sidewalk
and off-street parking areas.
      (3)   Building heights.
         A.   Principal buildings shall not exceed a height of 45 feet as
measured from the centerline of Springfield Pike.
         B.   Accessory buildings shall not exceed a height of 15 feet as
measured from the building grade of the accessory building or structure.
      (4)   Facades.
         A.   No blank, uninterrupted façades shall be permitted where visible
from a right-of-way. The use of windows, doors and/or other architectural
features shall be required at regular intervals to break up a blank wall. The
use of false windows as an architectural feature may be permitted upon review
by the Planning Commission. Planting areas and landscaped beds may be permitted
in place of architectural features (e.g. 20 lineal feet of landscaping for
every 100 feet of building length) if the height of the landscape material is
at least half the height of the building or structure upon review and approval
of the Planning Commission.
         B.   Buildings with facades visible from a right-of-way and greater
than 100 feet in length shall incorporate recesses or projections of a minimum
of two feet in depth.
         C.   Building facades shall include a repeating pattern including no
less than three of the following elements: color change, texture change,
material change or the inclusion of architectural features no less than 36
inches in width such as offsets, bays, marquees, etc. At least one of these
elements shall repeat horizontally.
         D.   All sides of a building or structure that are visible from any
right-of-way or residentially zoned property shall be finished with the same
materials utilized on the front façade to provide a finished faced towards all
locations visible to the public.
         E.   The predominant exterior building material (greater than 60
percent) shall be brick, natural stone, tinted and textured concrete masonry
units or similar material. Vinyl, wood or metal cladding is not permitted with
the exception of minor trim.
         F.   Smooth face concrete block may only be used for buildings greater
than 20,000 square feet in floor area for no more than 20 percent of the
cladding and then, only in areas not visible to the public. Tilt up concrete
panels, mirrored glass or prefabricated steel panels shall not be permitted as
exterior materials.
      (5)   Rooflines. Rooflines shall have a change in height for at least
every 50 lineal feet in building length unless it is a single tenant building
that exceeds a length of 200 feet. If a single tenant building exceeds 200 feet
the roofline shall change in height for at least every 75 feet for facades
visible from right-of- ways. Modifications in the roofline do not need to be
uniformly spaced but shall be proportional to the massing of the building.
      (6)   Building orientation. The primary building entrance shall be
oriented towards Springfield Pike.
      (7)   Accessory structures. Accessory structures shall be constructed of
the same materials and colors as the principal building.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013; Ord. 09-2024, passed 6-25-2024)
§ 1282.06 MODIFICATIONS TO DESIGN STANDARDS.
   Modifications to the design standards of this chapter, as they will apply to
an individual property, shall occur in one of two ways:
      If the new development or redevelopment is in a Planned Unit Development,
any modification shall be requested by the applicant as a part of the Planned
Unit Development process (
Chapter 1288, Planned Unit Development).
   (b)   If the development or redevelopment is not in a Planned Unit
Development, any modification relating to the subject property or properties
shall be requested by the applicant, in writing, to the Planning Commission for
review and approval. The Planning Commission shall review the request for
modification with respect to the design guidelines established in this chapter
and as per the requirements of §
1254.12, Site Plan Review and only grant such modification if the applicant can
show to Planning Commission practical difficulties in the strict application of
the requirements of this chapter.
   No modification to the design guidelines as they relate to the subject
property for which the modification(s) were requested shall be construed to
apply to this chapter as a whole nor shall they be construed to apply to other
properties.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
CHAPTER 1288: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
1288.01   Purpose.
1288.02   Types of Planned Unit Developments and permitted uses.
1288.03   Required open space.
1288.04   Planned Unit Development process.
1288.05   Required contents of the Concept Plan.
1288.06   Conditions of approval of the Concept Plan.
1288.07   Increase in density.
1288.08   Planning Commission and Council Action on Concept Plan.
1288.09   Preliminary and Final Development Plan submission requirements.
1288.10   Preliminary and Final Development Plan approval process.
1288.11   Amendments to an Approved Planned Unit Development.
1288.12   Revocation.
1288.13   Filing fees.
§ 1288.01 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of the Planned Unit Development District to permit an
applicant, through consultation with the Planning Commission and Council, to
develop a site according to a plan which may supersede normal zoning
requirements of a particular zoning district(s) through an overlay process. The
uses approved within a Planned Unit Development must conform to the uses as
specified in the existing zoning district. Planned Unit Developments would
permit creative site planning and permit an applicant to incorporate such
amenities as common open space into the overall site design. The Council may
approve Planned Unit Development (PUD) zoning based on the guidelines and
procedures in this chapter.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1288.02 TYPES OF PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS AND PERMITTED USES.
   (a)   A Planned Unit Development may be approved within any zoning district,
provided that the use(s) approved in the development plan by Council for the
Planned Unit Development complies with those uses identified as permitted or
conditionally permitted within the existing zoning district. For example, an
applicant can request approval for a Planned Unit Development within an R-
2 Single-Family Medium- Density Residence District or I-P Industrial Park
District; the subsequent designation would be R-2-PUD or I-P-PUD and would
permit the uses in those respective districts.
   (b)   The Planned Unit Development shall be comprised of a parcel or parcels
of land not less than two contiguous acres in size.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1288.03 REQUIRED OPEN SPACE.
   Required open space in a Planned Unit Development shall be regulated as
follows:
   (a)   There shall be reserved a minimum land area of 20 percent of the
overall tract for use as open space.
   (b)   This open space may include such areas as: pedestrian walkways, park
land, open areas, drainage ways, greenbelts and other lands of essentially open
character. Preferred open space includes: woodland, stream corridors and other
naturally preserved areas.
   (c)   If common open space is provided, ownership of this common open space
shall be transferred to a legally established Homeowners Association, or deeded
with permanent restrictions for its preservation, or other method approved by
the Municipality, and the proper legal documents necessary for such transfer be
prepared by the owner(s) and approved by the Municipal Law Director.
   (d)   The common open space shall be usable by residents/occupants of the
Planned Unit Development and shall not consist of isolated or fragmented pieces
of land which would serve no useful purpose.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1288.04 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT PROCESS.
   The following procedures shall be followed in applying for rezoning to a PUD
District.
   (a)   Application submission. An applicant shall submit a complete
application requesting that the Zoning District Map be amended to rezone the
subject property as a PUD Overlay. Such applications shall be processed,
noticed, and heard in a manner prescribed in this chapter.
   (b)   Informal consultation. Applicants are encouraged to engage in informal
consultations with the Zoning Officer and Municipal Administrator prior to
preparing plans. No statement or representation by staff or Planning
Commission, however, shall be binding.
   (c)   Concept Plan. Concept Plan contents are established in §
1288.05, Required Contents of the Concept Plan.
   (d)   Preliminary and Final Development Plan. An applicant may submit a
Preliminary Development Plan, and subsequently submit a Final Development Plan
for any portion of the approved Preliminary Development Plan that the applicant
wishes to develop. The applicant may also submit a combined Preliminary and
Final Development Plan as identified in §
1288.09, Preliminary and Final Development Plan Procedure.
   The Planning Commission or Council may determine that the review of the
Planned Unit Development submission requires the assistance of engineers,
architects, planners or attorneys to assist in its evaluation of the
Preliminary or Final Development Plan. In such event, the Planning Commission
or Council may require that the applicant pay the fees of such persons so
retained to assist the Planning Commission or Council. By the submission of an
application for Preliminary or Final Development Plan approval, the applicant
agrees to pay such fees.
   (e)   Zoning Certificate. No Zoning Certificate shall be issued for any
property for which a rezoning is requested and no construction shall begin
until the Final Development Plan is approved as per the requirements in this
chapter.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1288.05 REQUIRED CONTENTS OF THE CONCEPT PLAN.
   The submission of a Concept Plan is required as the initial process for the
establishment of a Planned Unit Development. The applicant is encouraged to
engage in informal consultations with the Planning Commission prior to
preparing the Concept Plan, it being understood that no statement or
representation by Planning Commission members shall be binding upon the
Commission.
   The applicant shall prepare a Concept Plan and shall submit the number of
copies of this Concept Plan as specified by the Zoning Officer along with the
application for a change of Zoning District to the Planning Commission for
recommendation to Council for approval. One electronic copy in PDF format shall
also be submitted by the applicant.
   (a)   The Concept Plan shall contain:
      (1)   A base map of the property showing existing and proposed land use,
general topography and physical features and the following information:
         A.   Property boundaries;
         B.   Adjacent thoroughfares and access points;
         C.   Vehicular and pedestrian circulation;
         D.   Location of different land use areas;
         E.   Approximate locations of proposed buildings;
         F.   Density levels of each area;
         G.   Location of schools, parks or other community facility sites, if
any;
         H.   Setback and height requirements;
         I.   Proposed drainage;
         J.   General utility plan;
         K.   Parking layout;
         L.   Proposed sign plans; and
         M.   Other information as may be required by the Municipality for
review.
      (2)   Time schedule of projected development if construction is to extend
beyond a two-year time period.
      (3)   All necessary legal documentation relating to the transfer of
common open space, if proposed, to the legally established Homeowners
Association or protection of common open space, or other mechanism approved by
the Municipality.
   (b)   The Planning Commission shall study the application and Concept Plan
and shall hold a public hearing within 35 days of the time of application.
Following this public hearing, the Planning Commission shall make a report to
the Municipal Council within 35 days recommending approval or disapproval and
the reasons therefor. The Planning Commission may explicitly impose special
conditions relating to the planned unit development with regard to type and
extent of public improvements, maintenance of common open space, and any other
pertinent development characteristics as needed in making a determination. The
time period for review may be extended if agreed upon by the applicant.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1288.06 CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL OF THE CONCEPT PLAN.
   Upon receipt of the report of the Planning Commission, the Municipal Council
shall study and review the proposed concept plan and shall approve or
disapprove the application for rezoning on the basis of: (1) all application
submission requirements have been satisfied; and (2) finding that the following
specific conditions are met:
   (a)   That each individual section or phase of development, as well as the
total development, can exist as an independent unit capable of creating an
environment of sustained desirability and stability or that adequate assurance
will be provided that such objective will be attained.
   (b)   That the uses proposed will not be detrimental to present and
potential surrounding uses, but will have a beneficial effect which could not
be achieved under other zoning districts in these regulations.
   (c)   That the internal streets and thoroughfares proposed are suitable and
adequate to carry anticipated traffic.
   (d)   That the minimum open space area has been reserved, a means has been
established to maintain the area, and is either to be dedicated to the
Municipality, be transferred to a legally established Homeowners’ Association
or other legally established entity, or other mechanism approved by the
Municipality.
   (e)   That any part of a Planned Unit Development not used for structures,
parking and loading areas or streets shall be landscaped or designated as
natural open space.
   (f)   That the Planned Unit Development is in conformance with the Woodlawn
Master Plan, as may be amended from time to time.
   (g)   The development will not impose an undue burden on public services and
facilities such as fire and police protection.
   (h)   That the density of each individual phase of the Planned Unit
Development, as well as the density of the entire project shall not exceed the
maximum allowable density as permitted in the underlying districts, except as
provided for in §
1288.07, Increase in Density.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1288.07 INCREASE IN DENSITY.
   An increase in density of 15 percent may be permitted over the maximum
allowable density of the underlying zoning district(s) upon review and approval
by the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1288.08 PLANNING COMMISSION AND COUNCIL ACTION ON CONCEPT PLAN.
   Council shall have 45 days to hold a public hearing and consider the
recommendation of Planning Commission. The time frame for review shall begin
when it has been determined by the Zoning Officer that a complete application
has been submitted with the correct fee as established by Council.
   Action by the Planning Commission and the Council shall be as follows:
   (a)   If from the facts presented, the Council is unable to make the
necessary findings specified in §
1288.06, Conditions of Approval of the Concept Plan, the application shall be
denied or returned to the applicant for clarification. In taking action, the
Planning Commission and Council may deny the Concept Plan or may recommend
approval of said plan subject to specified amendments.
   If the application is approved by Council, the approval of the Concept Plan
shall be limited to the general acceptability of the land uses proposed,
density levels and their interrelationship, and shall not be construed to
endorse precise location of uses, configuration of parcels, or engineering
feasibility which are to be determined in subsequent preparation of preliminary
and final development plans.
   Approval of the Concept Plan shall constitute the approval of the creation
of a separate PUD Planned Unit Development Zoning District. The new zoning
designation shall incorporate the existing zoning classification (e.g. R-2-
PUD).
   (b)   At the time of adopting any ordinance establishing a PUD District, the
Council shall make appropriate arrangements with the applicant, which will
ensure the accomplishment of the public improvements and reservation of common
open space of the public improvements shown on the approved Concept Plan. The
developer shall post a bond in the amount determined by the Municipality to
ensure completion of the necessary improvements should the developer fail to
complete such improvements as agreed upon.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1288.09 PRELIMINARY AND FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS.
   Once the Concept Plan has been approved by the Planning Commission and
Council, Preliminary and Final Development Plans for each section of the
overall planned unit development landholding must each be reviewed and approved
by the Planning Commission prior to the issuance of any Zoning Certificate of
Compliance by the Zoning Officer.
   The Preliminary and Final Development Plans shall be in accordance with the
approved Concept Plan; shall be prepared for the applicant by a professionally
competent engineer, architect and/or landscape architect, based on a survey
prepared by a registered surveyor. Submissions shall be submitted in the number
of copies specified by the Zoning Officer including one electronic copy in PDF
format. Submission of the Preliminary and Final Development Plans shall include
the following as a minimum:
   (a)   Preliminary Development Plan.
      (1)   The general nature, location and objectives of the proposed
development.
      (2)   The boundaries of the project including a metes and bounds
description of the parcel and the acreage therein.
      (3)   The areas of the project to be used for each land use including
residential (number of units, size and density), commercial, office,
industrial, or other activities indicating the total square footage of each
use.
      (4)   An area map identifying adjacent property owners, existing land
uses, and existing zoning within 200 feet of the subject parcel.
      (5)   Existing contours at five foot intervals or less, accompanied by
the proposed grading plans.
      (6)   Site plan indicating existing: lot lines, building outlines and
locations, off-street parking and loading spaces, pedestrian walkways,
utilities, easement locations, floodplains, existing vegetation and vehicular
circulation.
      (7)   A site plan showing proposed: lot lines, preliminary building
plans, including floor plans, exterior elevations and material samples, land
uses, off-street parking and loading spaces, utilities, easement locations,
floodplains, vehicular circulation, proposed streets proposed sidewalks and
pedestrian ways, and common open spaces.
      (8)   Landscaping and buffering plans.
      (9)   A signage plan identifying the sizes and locations of all signage.
      (10)   Evidence that the development will not impose an undue burden on
public services and facilities such as fire and police protection.
      (11)   Specific engineering plans, including site grading, street
improvements, drainage and utility improvements and extensions as necessary.
      (12)   A document describing the proposed phasing program for the project
for all dwelling units, commercial or office structures, industrial,
recreational and other common facilities, landscaping and other open space
improvements.
      (13)   Evidence that the applicant has sufficient control over the tract
to affect the proposed plan, including a statement of all ownership and
beneficial interests in the tract of land and the proposed development.
      (14)   A traffic impact study, if determined necessary by the
Municipality.
   (b)   Final Development Plan.
      (1)   The areas to be developed and the areas to be devoted to open space
with accurate acreage for each use.
      (2)   Final grading plans, indicating cubic footage of cuts and fills.
      (3)   The interior roadway system, indicating existing and proposed
rights-of-way and easements and cross-sections of new or improved streets.
      (4)   Site plans, floor plans and elevations for all buildings.
Additional exterior detail drawings, materials specifications and paint colors
may be required if deemed necessary to understand the intent or scope of the
plan.
      (5)   Descriptions as to the type of buildings, square footages and use.
      (6)   The proposed common open space system and areas to be in common
ownership, if any.
      (7)   A detailed landscaping plan for all areas, indicating all existing
and proposed vegetation by species, size and caliper; dimensions and materials,
irrigation, and special lighting fixtures.
      (8)   Roadway, parking, and pedestrian lighting plans with lighting
fixture types, heights and designs.
      (9)   The location, size, height, material, lighting method (if any),
message, and design layout of all signage.
      (10)   The phasing plan for development, if any, as identified in the
Preliminary Development Plan.
      (11)   Any modification of the general plan data presented and approved
for the PUD applications as may be required by the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1288.10 PRELIMINARY AND FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN APPROVAL PROCESS.
   The following process shall be utilized to consider approval of the
Preliminary and Final Development Plans for a Planned Unit Development:
   (a)   Preliminary Development Plan approval.
      (1)   Planning Commission action. The following action shall be taken by
the Planning Commission on the Preliminary Development Plan within 35 days of
receipt of the complete preliminary development plan package:
         A.   The Planning Commission shall review the preliminary development
plan and accompanying documents and may request such review and comment by the
Zoning Officer, Municipal Engineer, Municipal Administrator and other agencies,
as may be necessary.
         B.   The Planning Commission shall approve, approve with conditions or
deny the Preliminary Development Plan as submitted. The Planning Commission
shall have the opportunity to table the hearing to provide time for the
applicant to resolve outstanding issues, if necessary.
      (2)   At a minimum, the Planning Commission consideration for action
shall include the following:
         A.   Whether the plan is consistent with the intent and purpose of
this chapter;
         B.   Whether the plan is consistent with the Concept Plan submitted
and approved by the Planning Commission and Council.
         C.   The relationship, beneficial or adverse, of the proposed
development to the adjacent properties and to the neighborhood in which it is
proposed to be established; and
         D.   Whether the overall development shall be adequately serviced by
present or planned utilities, roadways, and other public services
      (3)   Approval by the Planning Commission shall be formed as a
recommendation for approval, denial, or approval with modifications and the
reasons for such decision.
   (b)   Final Development Plan approval.
      (1)   Planning Commission action. The Planning Commission shall review
the Final Development Plan and approve, modify and approve, or deny the
application for final approval and transmit notice thereof to the applicant
within 35 days of receipt of the complete final development plan package.
         The Planning Commission shall give the final approval only upon
finding that the following requirements are met:
         A.   The design, size, and use are consistent with the Preliminary
Development Plan and with other applicable plans adopted by the Planning
Commission or Council.
         B.   The location, design, size, and uses will be adequately served by
existing or planned facilities and services.
         C.   The location, design, size and uses will result in an attractive,
healthful, efficient and stable environment for commerce and/or residential
development.
      (2)   The approval of the Planning Commission shall be documented and
entered into the plan for the area and become a permanent part of the Zoning
Officer's records.
      (3)   After approval of the Final Development Plan by the Planning
Commission, submission and recording of appropriate subdivision plats with
Hamilton County and building construction drawings shall be made. Building and
construction permits and certificates of occupancy shall be conditioned upon
adherence to the total development plan including landscaping, design
considerations, and the construction of necessary public improvements.
      (4)   Construction must commence in accordance with the approved Final
Development Plan within 12 months from Planning Commission approval of the
Final Development Plan. If construction has not begun within the 12-month
period, the PUD is voided and the zoning reverts back to the previous zoning
classification unless good cause can be shown by the applicant and an extension
of not more than six months is granted by the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1288.11 AMENDMENTS TO AN APPROVED PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.
   An approved Planned Unit Development Concept Plan, Preliminary or Final
Development Plan may be amended by following the procedures described in this
chapter. However, minor adjustments in the Preliminary or Final Development
Plans which become necessary because of field conditions, detailed engineering
data, topography or critical design criteria pertaining to drives, curb cuts,
retaining walls, swimming pools, tennis courts, fences, building locations and
building configurations, parking area locations or other similar project
particulars, may be authorized in writing by the Planning Commission. These
minor adjustments may be permitted, provided that they do not increase density,
decrease the number of parking spaces or allow buildings closer to residential
property lines. Changes determined to be major shall require review and
approval by the Municipal Council.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1288.12 REVOCATION.
   In the event of a failure to comply with the approved plan or any condition
of approval, including, but not limited to, failure to comply with the staged
development schedule, the Zoning Officer may, after notice, rescind, and revoke
such plan approval. Violation of the final approval of the Final Development
Plan for a PUD shall constitute violation of the Zoning Code.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1288.13 FILING FEES.
   The applicant requesting a PUD shall make a non-refundable payment to the
Municipality at the time of the initial application submittal in the form of a
PUD filing fee as adopted by Council.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
CHAPTER 1292: SIGNS AND OUTDOOR ADVERTISING
1292.01   Purpose
1292.02   Exceptions to chapter.
1292.03   General requirements.
1292.04   Measurement of signs.
1292.05   Signs in nonresidential districts.
1292.06   Signs in Residential Districts.
1292.07   Signs in a Planned Unit Development District.
1292.08   Political signs.
1292.09   Inflatable signs.
1292.10   Maintenance.
1292.11   Nonconforming signs.
1292.12   Variances.
1292.13   Signs in the right-of-way.
1292.14   Rights of municipality.
1292.15   Permits required; fee.
1292.16   Abandonment of sign.
§ 1292.01 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of these sign regulations to permit the use of signs as a
means of communication in the Municipality; to maintain and enhance the
Municipality's natural and manmade environment; to encourage an attractive and
healthy economic environment; to minimize the possible adverse effects of signs
on nearby public and private property; and to enable the fair and consistent
enforcement of these sign regulations.
   The purpose as stated above is based on the following findings concerning
signs:
   (a)   That excessive signs create dangerous traffic conditions, intrude on
motorist and pedestrian enjoyment of the natural and man-made beauty of the
Municipality, and as such are detrimental to the public health, safety and
general welfare of the Municipality.
   (b)   That business enterprises and other institutions located along public
and private streets have a need to identify themselves and their activities to
motorists and pedestrians by means of signs.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1292.02 EXCEPTIONS TO CHAPTER.
   Exceptions to this chapter shall be as follows:
   The provisions of this chapter, with the exception of the regulations
contained in §
1292.03(b) and (f) shall not apply to the following signs:
   (a)   Signs not more than two square feet in display area, on or over a show
window or door of a store or business establishment, announcing without display
or elaboration, only the name of the proprietor and the nature of the business.
   (b)   Signs not exceeding two square feet of display surface on a residence
building stating only the name of the occupants and/or the street address.
   (c)   Signs not exceeding ten square feet of display surface on a public
building or institutional building use giving the name and nature of the
occupancy and information as to the conditions of use or admission.
   (d)   Any other signs authorized by a department of the Municipality which
is not inconsistent with the authority of that department.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1292.03 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   Except as specifically provided in this chapter, only those signs which
identify, advertise or promote the use established or goods sold or services
rendered on the premises upon which the sign is located shall be permitted to
be constructed, maintained or continued in the Municipality. All other outdoor
advertising devices, including billboards, pennants and similar type device,
whether wind-propelled or motor-driven, shall be prohibited. Permitted signs
shall meet the following requirements:
   (a)   Traffic safety; ingress and egress. Notwithstanding any provision of
this chapter to the contrary, no sign shall be so located as to obstruct or
interfere with traffic or traffic visibility. No sign shall be so designed or
constructed as to resemble or imitate signs, devices or signals erected by the
Municipality for the regulation of traffic and parking. No sign shall be so
located as to obstruct or interfere with any ingress or egress to a building or
other premises required by the Building Code or this Zoning Code, or any window
or other opening in any building providing ventilation to such building.
   (b)   Building access and ventilation. No sign shall be so located as to
obstruct or interfere with any ingress or egress to a building or other
premises required by the Building Code or this Zoning Code, or any window or
other opening in any building providing ventilation to such building.
   (c)   Illuminated or animated signs. Signs may be illuminated by either
external or internal sources of light. No sign shall be permitted in the
Municipality, which:
      (1)   Rotates or which incorporates animation, moving parts, flashing
lights or changing colors.
      (2)   Flashes on and off or where displays change in any degree of
intensity. This regulation applies to signs located outside of buildings and to
window signs inside buildings which are meant to be seen from the outside.
However, a part of a sign which, by means of changes in copy or moving parts,
indicates time and/or temperature or other public information, shall be
excepted from this subsection.
      (3)   Illuminated signage that is not fully functioning as designed shall
be turned off until the sign is illuminated to a fully functional state. This
includes burnt out or broken bulbs, LED's or other lighting elements.
   (d)   Directional or informational signs. Small directional or informational
signs, and non-advertising signs such as “IN,” “OUT,” “REST ROOMS,” “REGULAR”
and “PREMIUM,” etc., shall be permitted with no limitation as to number,
provided that such a sign shall be limited to one square foot in face area and
are mounted on the wall, canopy or door of a building.
   A maximum of two signs per curb cut, not to exceed four signs per property,
may:
      (1)   Be up to four square feet individually.
      (2)   Be internally lighted.
      (3)   Not exceed four feet in height nor shall they obstruct the view of
drivers on or off the premises.
      (4)   Not be closer than five feet to any property line.
   Directional or informational signs shall be designed of similar materials or
colors of the building it is providing direction to or information for.
   (e)   Projecting signs. No sign, whether free- standing or attached to a
building or other structure, may project over the right-of-way of any public
street, sidewalk or other public right-of-way. Existing signs which encroach on
a right-of-way shall be removed.
   (f)   Illuminated signs near residential areas. All illuminated signs
located within 100 feet of any residential zone shall cease to be illuminated
at 10:00 p.m. or until the establishment is closed for business for the day,
whichever is later.
   (g)   Unsafe signs. Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the
contrary, the Building Commissioner or Zoning Officer shall make a periodic
inspection of all signs or other structures governed by this chapter, and if,
upon such inspection, the Building Commissioner or Zoning Officer determines
that any such sign is or has become defective or unsecurely mounted or
supported, so as to constitute a public or traffic hazard, the Building
Commissioner or Zoning Officer shall order such sign to be removed or repaired
so as to eliminate such hazard. The owner or person in control of such sign
shall bear the full cost of compliance with such order of the Building
Commissioner or Zoning Officer. If the Building Commissioner or Zoning Officer
determines that such sign is of immediate danger, he or she shall place or
cause to be placed signs or barriers indicating such danger. If the unsafe sign
in question is not removed within 30 days of notification by the Building
Commissioner or Zoning Officer, the Municipality may remove such sign in
question and assess the cost of removal to the County Property Tax Bill.
   (h)   Similar materials and design. Signs and their supports shall be
constructed of similar building materials or use similar colors to that of the
principal building to which the sign is related.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1292.04 MEASUREMENT OF SIGNS.
   The following standards shall be used to determine the area and height
measurements for all signs in the Municipality:
   (a)   The area of a sign shall be computed by means of the smallest square,
circle, rectangle, triangle, or combination thereof that will encompass the
exterior display limits of a sign. Frames and structural members not bearing
advertising matter or which are not an integral part of the sign message shall
not be included in the computation of surface area (See illustrations on
following page).
   (b)   The sign area for a sign with more than one face shall be computed by
adding together the area of all sign faces visible from any one point.
   (c)   In the case of irregularly shaped three dimensional signs the area of
the display surface shall be measured on the plane of the largest vertical
cross- section.
   (d)   The height of a sign shall be determined by measuring the vertical
distance between the top part of the sign to the elevation of the ground
beneath the sign prior to construction, excluding additional elevation added by
creation of berming or mounding. If the grade prior to construction cannot be
determined, the elevation of the base of the sign shall be computed using the
elevation of the nearest point of the crown of a public street or the grade of
the land at the principal entrance to the principal structure on the premises,
whichever is lower.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/400a1417679729aa03ba6ecffb49741da640bf15/
IMAGES/0-0-0-81.jpg]
 
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1292.05 SIGNS IN NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   The following provisions define the categories of signs permitted by this
chapter in nonresidential districts and set forth certain specific regulations
with respect to each category. Nonresidential Districts shall include the D-
1 Downtown District, the I-P Industrial Park District, Glendale Milford
Corridor Overlay District, the Springfield Pike Overlay District, the C- C
Civic Center District, and the O-S Open Space District.
   All other provisions of this shall apply to such categories, where
applicable.
   (a)   Wall signs. The owner or occupant of any commercial, business,
industrial or institutional use located in a nonresidential district may erect
and maintain, a wall sign, either illuminated or non- illuminated, for the
business or service that is being conducted in the building on which the sign
is posted.
      (1)   Such signs may be attached to the exterior walls or other vertical
surfaces of such buildings but may not extend beyond the parapet of such
building.
      (2)   The face of such signs shall be parallel to the face of the
building.
      (3)   The total permissible wall sign area on a building shall not exceed
10 percent of the front building face area. For example, if the front building
face was 1,200 square feet (80 feet in length by 15 feet in height), the total
permissible square footage for wall signs shall be 120 square feet.
      (4)   No portion of any wall sign shall project more than one foot beyond
the face of the building, nor extend beyond the end of the building face.
      (5)   No building shall have a sign or lettering painted directly on the
building surfaces.
      (6)   No building shall have a roof-mounted sign, except for signs
mounted on the face of a mansard roof.
      (7)   A property owner may allocate up to 50 percent of the allowable
total wall sign area to a building wall other than the front wall of the
building, however, in no case shall the total wall sign area for the entire
building exceed 10 percent of the front building face.
      (8)   No wall sign shall exceed 150 square feet in area.
      (9)   When there more is one building on a lot, the allowable sign area
may be distributed among the buildings so long as the maximum permitted sign
area is not exceeded.
   (b)   Ground signs. A ground sign shall be set on the ground or mounted on a
foundation which is set directly on or into the ground. Materials used for the
base of the sign should be similar in material or color to the principal
building on the lot.
      (1)   Height and setback - requirements for ground signs. No portion of
any ground sign may be closer than five feet to any property line. No portion
of any such sign may be closer than 15 feet to any street right-of-way. All
such signs shall be set back at least 20 feet from a radius at all lot corners.
No portion of any such sign shall exceed six feet in height.
   (c)   Distance between ground signs. No ground sign shall be closer than 50
feet to any other such sign. Distance shall be measured on a straight line
directly between such signs.
   (d)   Number of signs permitted. Every commercial, business or industrial
use or multiple development located in a nonresidential district, the road or
street frontage of whose premises measures 100 feet or more, may erect and
maintain one ground sign. As used in this section, “multiple development” means
a shopping center or other nonresidential development containing two or more
separate uses in one building or in a collection of buildings located on one
tract or parcel of real estate so as to give the visual impression of a unified
development. In the case of a use or multiple developments located on a corner
lot, the minimum frontage shall be computed by adding together the frontages on
each abutting street or road. Every commercial, business or industrial use or
multiple developments whose street frontage is less than 100 feet may erect a
sign which conforms to the regulations provided in §
1292.04(a) for professional signs.
   (e)   Number of ground signs permitted. Shall be as follows:
      (1)   Every commercial, business or industrial use or multiple
development located in a nonresidential zoning district may erect and maintain
one or more ground signs as follows:
 
Road Frontage    Number of Signs Permitted
0 to 400 feet    One sign
401 to 800 feet  Two signs
801 feet or more Three signs
 
      (2)   In the case of a user or multiple development located on a corner
lot, the aforesaid minimum frontage shall be computed by adding together the
frontages on each abutting street or road.
      (3)   If the premises upon which a ground sign is erected fronting on
more than one public street, other than a corner lot, the street frontage
nearest the sign(s) shall be used in determining the maximum number of
permitted signs on such streets.
   (f)   Display surface area for ground signs. The aggregate area of any
display surface of a ground sign may not exceed one square foot for each linear
foot of street frontage of the premises upon which such sign is located,
provided that in no event shall such sign have a single face area exceeding 80
square feet, nor shall the total area of all display surfaces exceed 160 square
feet for ground signs. If the premises upon which a ground sign is erected
front on more than one public street, other than a corner lot, the longest of
such frontages may be used in determining the maximum permitted sign area in
accordance with this subsection. However, in the case of a multiple
development, the permitted total aggregate area of display surfaces of a ground
sign shall include all of the display surfaces of any individual signs
identifying separate uses in such multiple developments which may be attached
to such ground sign. The allowable area of a ground sign may include a section
for changeable letters. Such area shall not exceed 50 percent of the sign area.
   (g)   Motor vehicle service stations and motor vehicle filling stations.
Motor vehicle service stations and filling stations may have, in addition to
the signs permitted and regulated in this section, an additional area for
display of gasoline prices, provided that such area does not total more than
sixteen square feet.
   (h)   Landscaping of signs. Any ground-mounted sign shall have landscaping
at the base of the sign according to the following standards:
      (1)   The minimum landscaped area shall be equal to the area of the sign
face.
      (2)   The landscaped area shall include all points of structural support
attachment to the ground.
      (3)   Where the required landscaped area is adjacent to a paved surface
accessible to vehicular traffic, a raised curb suitable to prevent the
encroachment of vehicles is required. The minimum horizontal distance between
the face of any required curb and any part of the sign is 36 inches.
      (4)   The landscaped area shall include live plantings that provide year
around coverage and shall be maintained at all times. The use of concrete,
asphalt or other paved surface inside the required landscaped area beneath the
sign is prohibited with the exception of the supports for the base of the sign.
      (5)   Landscaping shall include living plant material. The use of grass,
crushed rock, mulch or stone by itself shall not be considered landscaping. An
example of landscaping is identified in the illustration below:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/400a1417679729aa03ba6ecffb49741da640bf15/
IMAGES/0-0-0-83.jpg]
 
   (i)   Temporary signs and displays. Signs, banners, flags, streamers or
other display devices, including inflatable's, which are of a temporary nature
and which advertise or call attention to grand openings, special sales or other
temporary business promotions may be erected or installed only upon prior
approval of the Zoning Officer.
      (1)   All such signs and displays may be displayed for not more than 14
consecutive days, and 60 days shall elapse before another such sign or display
may be permitted.
      (2)   The Zoning Officer may withhold approval if it is determined that
the number, size or placement of such temporary signs or displays would be a
hazard to the public safety.
      (3)   The location of such signs shall be in accordance with §
1292.03(b).
      (4)   Such signs shall not be illuminated.
       (5)   Inflatable signs shall only be permitted as regulated in §
1292.09, Inflatable Signs.
      (6)   Portable signs on wheels or skids are not permitted.
   (j)   Real estate signs. Free-standing real estate signs advertising the
sale, rental or lease of the premises on which they are maintained shall be set
back at least five feet from the street right-of-way line. Such real estate
sign shall not exceed 20 square feet in a nonresidential district and, at the
seller's option, may be mounted flat against the building to which it pertains.
Such signs shall not be illuminated and shall be removed no more than seven
days after the closing on the property.
   (k)   Window signs. Signs pasted, painted or hung on windows or in the
window casement, whether on the interior or exterior of a building, shall not
cover more than 30% of each window area. This limited coverage will permit
interior visibility from the exterior of the building in order to promote
public safety. Signs are inclusive of advertisements, business name, or
informational type signs such as “Open”, “Closed” or “Now Hiring”.
   (l)   Contractor's signs. Signs announcing the names of contractors,
subcontractors, materials, suppliers or architects participating in the
construction or improvement of a building shall be permitted during the actual
construction period, provided that such signs shall be located only on the
parcel of land being improved and shall not exceed 80 square feet in area. Such
signs shall be at least 12 feet from all front property lines. Such signs shall
not be illuminated and shall be removed no more than seven days after
completion of the project.
   (m)   Signs permitted as a conditional use. The following signs may be
permitted within a nonresidential district following review and approval by the
Planning Commission using the standards established in
Chapter 1254 and the following regulations.
      (1)   Variable message signs.
         A.   The maximum surface display area shall not exceed 25 square feet.
         B.   No more than one sign per lot shall be permitted.
         C.   Maximum flashing rate shall not exceed 1 line in 4 seconds, 2
lines in 7 seconds, 3 or more lines in 10 seconds.
         D.   Running copy shall not be permitted.
         E.   Lighting shall be on a sensor that dims or reduces the intensity
of the light as it becomes darker outside.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1292.06 SIGNS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   The following provisions define the categories of signs permitted by this
chapter in residential districts and set forth certain specific regulations
with respect to each category. All other provisions of this chapter, which are
not by their nature inapplicable to any of the following categories of signs,
shall apply to such categories.
   (a)   Home occupation and professional signs. As used in this chapter, “home
occupation sign” or “professional sign” means a sign which is mounted flat
against a residential building or mounted upon or hung from a post or posts and
bears no message other than the name of the person or entity whose business,
occupation or professional practice is conducted upon the premises on which the
sign is erected, together with the name or specialty designation of such
occupation, business or professional practice. The aggregate area of the
display surface of such signs shall not exceed one square foot. The top of the
post- mounted signs, or any part thereof, may not exceed a height of six feet
above the grade level of the right-of- way line. Post-mounted signs may not be
closer than 15 feet from the edge of the pavement or curb of the street. A
maximum of one such non-illuminated sign shall be permitted per lot.
   (b)   Institutional or church signs. Any church, religious sect or
congregation, community center or similar semipublic, public or institutional
use may erect and maintain one sign not over 80 square feet in area on the same
premises upon which such use is located.
      (1)   In no case shall any one side of the sign face exceed 40 square
feet.
      (2)   If not attached flat against a building, such sign shall be at
least 12 feet from all front property lines.
      (3)   A maximum of one such sign shall be permitted per lot.
      (4)   The sign may be illuminated. However, such illumination shall be
turned off during evening hours to prevent light glare on surrounding
residential properties.
      (5)   Free-standing ground signs shall be of similar materials or colors
of the principal building on the lot.
   (c)   Real estate signs. Free-standing real estate or model home signs
advertising the sale, rental or lease of the premises on which they are
maintained shall be set back at least five feet from the street right- of-way
line. Such real estate sign shall not exceed six square feet in area in
residential and, at the seller's option, may be mounted flat against the
building to which it pertains. Such signs shall not be illuminated and shall be
removed no more than seven days after the closing of the property.
   (d)   Subdivision signs. Subdivision signs, each of which shall not exceed,
in the aggregate, 50 square feet in area of display surface, advertising the
sale of lots or houses in a new subdivision, may be erected and displayed in
such subdivision, provided that not more than one such sign facing on any one
street shall be permitted in any subdivision. Such signs shall not be
internally illuminated and shall be removed upon the sale of all the lots in
the subdivision.
   (e)   Contractor's signs. Signs announcing the names of contractors,
subcontractors, materials, suppliers or architects participating in the
construction or improvement of a building shall be permitted during the actual
construction period, provided that such signs shall be located only on the
parcel of land being improved and shall not exceed 24 square feet in area. Such
signs shall be at least 15 feet from all front property lines. Such signs shall
not be illuminated and shall be removed no more than seven days after the
closing of on the property.
   (f)   Temporary signs and displays. Signs, banners, flags, streamers or
other display devices, including inflatables, which are of a temporary nature
and which advertise or call attention to grand openings, special sales or other
temporary business promotions may be erected or installed only upon prior
approval of the Zoning Officer.
      (1)   All such signs and displays may be displayed for not more than 14
consecutive days, and 60 days shall elapse before another such sign or display
may be permitted.
      (2)   The Zoning Officer may withhold approval if it is determined that
the number, size or placement of such temporary signs or displays would be a
hazard to the public safety.
      (3)   The location of such signs shall be in accordance with §
1292.03(b).
      (4)   Such signs shall not be illuminated.
      (5)   Inflatable signs shall only be permitted as regulated in §
1292.09, Inflatable Signs.
      (6)   Portable signs on wheels or skids are not permitted.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1292.07 SIGNS IN A PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT.
   Signs in a Planned Unit Development District shall conform to the
regulations of the underlying or attached district unless a coordinated sign
plan is developed by the developer for the entire PUD site and is approved by
the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1292.08 POLITICAL SIGNS.
   Political signs shall be regulated as follows:
   (a)   Signs advertising support of or opposition to any issue, levy,
political party, political candidate, or write-in candidate shall be permitted
without application for a building.
   (b)   Size and location:
      (1)   Such non-illuminated signs shall not exceed 12 square feet in size
and no more than two such signs shall appear on any lot.
      (2)   Such signs shall be at least five feet from all property lines and
right-of-way.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1292.09 INFLATABLE SIGNS.
   Inflatable signs referenced in this section shall apply to all inflatable
structures, balloons and figures filled with air or other type gas where it
takes on a discernible shape. Inflatable signs may only be permitted if it
meets all of the following regulations:
   (a)   A temporary sign permit is required from the Zoning Officer. A fee as
determined by the Municipal Council may be required.
   (b)   The installer of the inflatable sign must be a properly registered and
licensed contractor and provide a certificate of insurance in the amount of one
million dollars ($1,000,000). The contractor, owner or agent shall accept full
responsibility for the imposed display load and devices securely anchoring the
sign to the ground.
   (c)   Only one inflatable sign is permitted per lot.
   (d)   Inflatable signs shall not exceed 30 feet in height.
   (e)   There shall be no text displayed on the inflatable sign.
   (f)   The inflatable sign shall not encroach over any public right-of-way or
across any property lines.
   (g)   The inflatable sign shall not be installed below or within 20 feet of
any electrical, phone, CATV or other overhead transmission lines.
   (h)   Inflatable signs shall not utilize more than 10% of the required off-
street parking spaces required for the business in which the inflatable sign is
erected.
   (i)   The inflatable sign shall not have motion caused by mechanical means
or by a varying supply of air or gas.
   (j)   The inflatable sign shall be securely mounted on the ground only. Roof
mounting is not permitted.
   (k)   Inflatable signs shall be made of a flame retardant material.
   (l)   Inflatable signs shall not be internally or externally illuminated.
   These inflatable sign regulations shall not apply to any inflatable type
device normally used for the entertainment of children including jumping
balloons, inflatable slides and similar type devices.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1292.10 MAINTENANCE.
   All signs in all districts, and the immediate surrounding premises, shall be
maintained by the owner thereof or his or her agent in a clean condition, free
and clear of all rubbish and weeds. Signs shall be maintained in proper working
order including lighting.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1292.11 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   All signs which do not conform to this chapter are hereby declared to be a
public nuisance, detrimental to the safety of the residents of the
Municipality.
   Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, whenever any
nonconforming sign or other device subject to these regulations collapses,
burns or is removed from its location, except for normal maintenance, such sign
or device shall not be replaced or reconstructed except in full compliance with
all applicable provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1292.12 VARIANCES.
   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the power to grant a variance from
any of the provisions of this chapter, but such power shall be limited to cases
of practical difficulties, and any such variance granted shall be upon terms
and conditions which are designed to promote the object and purpose of these
regulations. The Board may not grant any variance whose effect will be to
continue or to permit a hazard to public safety.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1292.13 SIGNS IN THE RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   The Municipality is not responsible for signs which have been previously
placed within the right-of- way of any street, highway, lane, avenue, road,
drive or public thoroughfare and which have to be removed because of any reason
whatsoever.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1292.14 RIGHTS OF MUNICIPALITY.
   The Municipality reserves the right to erect Municipality name signs and
traffic signs anywhere that the public health, safety and general welfare of
the Municipality are served. The Municipality may install temporary signs as
determined necessary by the Municipality.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1292.15 PERMITS REQUIRED; FEE.
   The following signs do not require a permit, but may be subject to the
provisions of this chapter:
   (a)   Governmental signs and signs erected by the government for control of
traffic and other regulatory purposes, street signs, warning signs, railroad
crossing signs, and signs of public service companies for the purpose of
safety.
   (b)   Flags of reasonable customary size and color, emblems and insignia of
any governmental agency, corporation, business, or political subdivision and
temporary displays of a patriotic, religious, charitable or civic character.
   (c)   Commemorative plaques placed by recognized historical agencies.
   (d)   Interior signs that can be viewed only by persons within such use.
   (e)   Noncommercial signs displaying messages, including but not limited to:
directional signs, house numbers, real estate signs, construction signs,
political signs, “now hiring”, “help wanted”, garage and yard sale signs. Such
signs shall not be located within the public right-of-way and are subject to
the provisions of this chapter.
   (f)   Window signs affixed to the inside of window.
   (g)   Signs required by a court of competent jurisdiction in the
Municipality of Woodlawn.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1292.16 ABANDONMENT OF SIGN.
   If any sign is abandoned for a period of at least six consecutive months in
any 12-month period, such sign shall be a nuisance affecting or endangering
surrounding property values and be detrimental to the public health, safety and
general welfare of the Municipality and shall be abated.
   Such sign shall be abated within 60 days of notification by the Zoning
Officer either by:
   (a)   Removing the sign in question. Removal includes the total disassembly
of the sign structure including the base, to the grade on which the sign was
erected. Any sign not removed within the specified 60-day time period may be
removed by the Municipality at the property owner's expense and assessed to
that property owner on the next County Property Tax Statement.
   (b)   Altering the sign and its structure so that it conforms to the
regulations and provisions of this Code.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
CHAPTER 1294: OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
1294.01   Purpose.
1294.02   Applicability.
1294.03   Number of off-street parking spaces.
1294.04   Design of parking spaces and aisles.
1294.05   Location and use of required parking spaces.
1294.06   Landscaping and screening for parking lots.
1294.07   Outdoor lighting for off-street parking and loading areas.
1294.08   Required number of off-street parking spaces.
1294.09   Off-street loading requirements.
1294.10   Commercial vehicle parking requirements.
§ 1294.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to prevent or alleviate the congestion of the
public street, to minimize any detrimental effects of parking lots on adjacent
properties, to enhance parking lots with landscape elements for improved
traffic circulation and visual amenities and to promote the safety and welfare
of the public. To accomplish this purpose minimum requirements are established,
while more landscaping may be included depending on site specific conditions.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1294.02 APPLICABILITY.
   (a)   Provision of spaces. When applicable in all districts, in connection
with every use, there shall be provided at the time any building or structure
is erected, enlarged or increased in capacity or has a change of use, off-
street parking spaces for motor vehicles in accordance with this chapter.
      (1)   New building or structure. The off- street parking and loading
requirements of this chapter shall apply to any application for a permit for
the erection of a new building.
      (2)   Alteration, expansion or change in use. For an alteration,
expansion or change of use of an existing building; or for an alteration,
development or change of land use that requires more parking; or for changes of
the capacity of an existing parking area or parking structure the off-street
parking and loading requirements of this chapter shall apply only to the area
of the alteration, addition or change of use.
   Such required space(s) shall be provided with vehicular access to a street
or alley. This space shall not thereafter be reduced or encroached upon in any
manner unless written approval is provided by the Planning Commission.
   Off-street parking spaces are not required for uses in any building existing
at the time of adoption of this Code where no off-street parking had been
provided previously, unless there is a change use or an enlargement of the
building or structure as identified above.
   (b)   Maintenance. The duty to provide and maintain all such areas shall be
the joint responsibilities of the owner, operator and lessee of the use for
which parking lots are required. Off-street parking areas shall be maintained
in good condition without holes and free of all trash, abandoned or junk
vehicles, weeds and other rubbish.
   (c)   Plan review. For any off-street parking area required under this
chapter a plan shall be submitted with the application for a Zoning Permit to
the Zoning Officer to review for compliance with these regulations and for any
other applicable regulations. Any such parking plan shall show the number of
parking spaces, the arrangement of parking aisles, the location of driveway
entrances, provisions for vehicular and pedestrian circulation, the location or
typical location of sidewalks, wheel stops, lighting and curbs on or adjacent
to the property, the location of utilities, barriers, shelters, and signs, the
location of landscaped areas and the types and location of vegetation to be
planted in them, typical cross-sections of pavement, storm water drainage
facilities, and any other relevant information requested by the Zoning Officer.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1294.03 NUMBER OF OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES.
   Except as otherwise provided in this section, off- street parking spaces for
each new principal use on a lot shall be provided according to the units of
measurement indicated for that use in §
1294.08, Required Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces.
   (a)   Computation of required spaces. The following provision shall govern
the computation of the number of off-street parking spaces required:
      (1)   Fractions. When determination of the number of required parking
spaces results in the requirement of a fractional space, any fraction 1/2 or
less shall be disregarded and any fraction over 1/2 shall require one parking
space.
      (2)   Bench seating calculation. In stadiums, sports arenas, churches and
other places of assembly in which patrons or spectators occupy benches, pews or
other similar seating facilities, each 24 inches of such seating facilities
shall be counted as one seat for the purpose of determining the requirement for
off- street parking facilities.
      (3)   Use of “Maximum”. When parking spaces are required on the basis of
the number of faculty, staff, students or employees, the maximum number present
at any one time shall govern. The “maximum number” shall be the same as the
“maximum occupancy” as identified on the Building Permit or as identified by
the Fire Chief.
      (4)   Interpretation. For uses not expressly listed in §
1294.08, parking spaces shall be provided on the same basis as required for the
most similar and restrictive listed use as determined by the Zoning Officer for
that specific use based on the intended use, the location of such use and the
expected patronage by individuals operating motor vehicles.
      (5)   Floor area defined. For the purposes of applying “floor area,”
floor area shall be the sum of the gross leasable horizontal area of all floors
of a building.
   (b)   Spaces for the handicapped. Parking spaces for handicapped individuals
shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of the Ohio Building Code
and Ohio R.C. § 3781.111.
   (c)   Shared parking. Shared or joint use of up to 50% of required parking
spaces may be permitted for two or more uses located on the same parcel or
adjacent parcels provided that the developer can demonstrate to the Zoning
Officer that the uses will not substantially overlap in hours of operation or
in demand for the shared spaces. This shall be guaranteed by a written
agreement from the owner or between the owners involved and all future owners
or assigns which shall be submitted with the required plan. Shared parking
spaces shall be located no more than 300 feet from the uses they are intended
to serve. For shopping centers, parking requirements may be located on
adjoining parcels if the parking requirements for the entire shopping center
are met, the total number of required parking spaces are located within 300
feet from the uses they are intended to serve, and there is a recorded
agreement from the owner or between the owners involved and all future owners
or assigns which shall be submitted with the required plan.
   (d)   Maximum number of parking spaces permitted. In order to prevent
excessive lot coverage, the artificial increase in air temperature, and surface
water runoff, no minimum off-street parking space requirement in §
1294.08, Required Number of Off- Street Parking Spaces. shall be exceeded by
more than 15 percent unless good cause can be shown by the applicant and
approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals. Single-Family Dwellings, Two-Family
Dwellings and accessory apartments are exempt from this provision.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1294.04 DESIGN OF PARKING SPACES AND AISLES.
   Each required parking space shall meet the minimum dimensional requirements
set out in as established below.
   (a)   Aisles and stall dimensions. 
      (1)   Each required parking space shall have direct and unrestricted
access to an aisle of the minimum width and stall dimensions as identified in
Figure 1294.04(A)(1) and Figure 1294.04(A)(2):
   Figure 1294.04(A)(1)
   Parking Stall and Aisle Dimensions
 
A         B           C         D               E        F
                                                         Bay Width (Center to
Parking               Length of Aisle Width     Width of Center Width of Two-
Angle (in Stall Width Stall                     Access   Row Bay with Aisle
degrees)                                        Drive    Between
                                One-Way Two-Way          One-Way Two-Way
30-53     9 ft.       18 ft.    13 ft.  20 ft.  20 ft.   42 ft.  49 ft.
54-75     9 ft.       19 ft.    18 ft.  22 ft.  20 ft.   52 ft.  56 ft.
76-90     9 ft.       19 ft.    22 ft.  24 ft.  20 ft.   60 ft.  62 ft.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/400a1417679729aa03ba6ecffb49741da640bf15/
IMAGES/0-0-0-85.jpg]
 
   Figure 1294.04(A)(2)
 
      (2)   Where continuous curbs are used, the paved area of the parking
stall length may be reduced by two and one-half feet, provided that the vehicle
overhang will not encroach on pedestrian circulation or the required setback
for screening and desirable plant growth. Where wheel stops are used, the paved
area of the parking stall length required shall not be reduced. If the wheel
stop or continuous curb is located adjacent to a sidewalk, the sidewalk shall
be constructed to a minimum dimension of five and one- half feet to provide a
clear sidewalk area of not less than three feet for pedestrian access.
   (b)   Access. All parking spaces shall be entered and exited directly from
parking aisles arranged perpendicular to access drives wherever possible.
Parking spaces shall not be permitted along access drives or within thirty feet
of the right-of-way or easement line (and at greater distances as may be
required by the Planning Commission depending on the traffic generation and
parking lot size). Parking spaces shall not be located within eight feet of the
curb or pavement edge of such restricted access drive area. The parking setback
areas along the entry drive, as required in this section, must be a pervious
surface consisting of grass or other landscaping material excluding pavement,
gravel or other rock material.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/400a1417679729aa03ba6ecffb49741da640bf15/
IMAGES/0-0-0-87.jpg]
 
   (c)   Maneuverability areas. In order to promote adequate and safe
maneuverability, the following provisions shall be followed:
      (1)   Turn-around area. Where more than three parking spaces are served
by a single driveway, a turn-around area shall be provided, or other provision
shall be made, to permit cars to exit the parking lot or garage without backing
onto any street or sidewalk.
      (2)   Back-up area. Each parking space shall be provided with a
sufficient back-up area to permit egress in one maneuver, consisting of one
backward and one forward movement.
   (d)   Surface and drainage. Every off-street parking lot shall be surfaced
with an asphaltic or Portland cement binder pavement providing an all- weather,
durable, and dustless surface. Individual stalls shall be graded to drain so as
to dispose of all surface water within the parking area in accordance with the
subdivision regulations. No surface water from parking areas shall accumulate
or drain over a public sidewalk. Interior landscaped areas may be used for
surface drainage. The use of pervious asphalt or pavers for nonresidential use
is encouraged to prevent surface water runoff. Pervious asphalt or pavers for
nonresidential use shall be approved by the Planning Commission prior to
installation.
   (e)   Lighting. Fixed lighting shall comply with the provisions contained in
§
1294.07 and be so arranged to prevent direct glare of beams onto any public or
private property or street.
   (f)   Wheel stops and continuous curbs. Wheel stops or continuous curbs
shall be provided, located, and designed to protect required screening,
landscaping and pedestrian ways from damage or encroachment of vehicles and to
provide necessary traffic control in the parking area.
      (1)   Wheel stops. Each wheel stop shall be a singular block of
reinforced concrete, stone, or other durable material six inches in height, six
inches in width, and eight feet in length. Wheel stops shall be placed as shown
below and securely attached to the ground and may be used only at the end of
parking stalls.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/400a1417679729aa03ba6ecffb49741da640bf15/
IMAGES/0-0-0-89.jpg]
 
      (2)   Continuous curbs. Continuous curbs shall be made of asphalt,
concrete, or block stone, and shall be a minimum of six inches in height and
six inches in width. They shall form a non- interrupted edge around all
landscaped areas adjacent to parking and turn-around areas which are not
protected by wheel stops.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/400a1417679729aa03ba6ecffb49741da640bf15/
IMAGES/0-0-0-91.jpg]
 
      (3)   Placement. The wheel stop or continuous curb shall be located a
minimum of four feet from any structures, buildings, walls, or plant material,
excluding ground cover to prevent a vehicle from driving onto the landscape
area or hitting any structure or plant material at the edge of the parking
area. The mature size of the plant material shall be specified to determine if
the landscape meets the setback requirements.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/400a1417679729aa03ba6ecffb49741da640bf15/
IMAGES/0-0-0-93.jpg]
 
   (g)   Slope. No area of any parking lot, excluding entry drives, shall have
a slope in excess of 7%. Entry drives or drives that connect parking areas
shall not have a slope in excess of 10%.
   (h)   Striping. All nonresidential parking areas shall be striped between
stalls to clearly identify each parking space.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1294.05 LOCATION AND USE OF REQUIRED PARKING SPACES.
   The location and use of required off-street parking spaces shall be governed
as follows:
   (a)   Off-street parking. Required off-street parking spaces for any use
shall be located on the same parcel as the use they are intended to serve,
except where these regulations allow shared parking between uses on different
lots pursuant to §
1294.03(c).
   (b)   Residential parking.
      (1)   On any residential use parcel or residential district, no off-
street parking area, maneuvering area for parking spaces, or loading area shall
be located within any required front yard. This restriction shall not apply to
driveways providing access from the street to the required parking area located
outside of the required front yard, nor is it intended to prohibit parking of
vehicles on such drive serving a detached dwelling. Within ten feet of the
right-of-way, the maximum width of the driveway shall be 24 feet in a Single-
Family District.
      (2)   No residential parking area or garage shall be utilized for more
than one commercial vehicle owned or normally operated by a resident of the
premises and such vehicle shall not exceed one and one-half tons capacity.
      (3)   The width of off-street parking for single-family detached
residential uses shall be limited to the width of the garage or carport. If no
garage or carport exists, the width of the off-street parking area shall be
limited to the 12 feet. Additional off-street parking may be permitted in the
side yard on a paved area if screened from adjacent properties and approved by
the Planning Commission.
      (4)   Existing off-street parking in residential areas legally existing
at the time of adoption of these regulations that do not conform to these
regulations can remain until:
         A.   The existing dwelling is expanded by 20% or more in gross floor
area inclusive of carport or garage addition; or
         B.   The dwelling is damaged to an extent of greater than 33% of its
reproduction value.
   Under such circumstances, all off-street parking shall conform to these
regulations.
   (c)   Boats, trailers, recreational vehicles and mobile home units.
      (1)   No person shall occupy any boat, camping vehicle, mobile home or
trailer on any premises in the Municipality.
      (2)   The parking of a boat, camping vehicle, mobile home or trailer in
an accessory private garage or other accessory building or rear yard shall be
permitted at any time, provided that no living quarters shall be maintained and
no business shall be conducted in such vehicle while it is parked or stored,
and provided, further, that no front or side yard shall be occupied by such
boat, camping vehicle, mobile home or trailer for more than ten calendar days
in one year. If such unit is temporarily parked in the side yard, it shall not
be parked any closer than the required front yard setback or front building
line, whichever is greater.
      (3)   In addition, in any district, the wheels or any similar
transporting devices of any boat, camping vehicle, mobile home or trailer shall
not be removed except for repairs, nor shall such vehicle or similar facility
be otherwise permanently fixed to the ground in a manner that would prevent the
ready removal of such vehicle or similar facility.
      (4)   The occupancy of a mobile home or office unit providing temporary
or emergency residential or office space as a result of fire, flood or similar
calamity is permitted for a reasonable length of time while the permanent
residence or office facility is repaired. Trailers or similar temporary
structures required at a construction site for use by the contractor are
permitted, but only during actual construction. They shall not be used for
storage prior to construction or remain after completion of the project.
      (5)   All units shall be appropriately licensed at all times if required
by the State of Ohio.
      (6)   All boats, trailers, recreational vehicles and mobile home units
shall be appropriately screened from adjacent properties. Screening shall be
approved by the Planning Commission and shall conform to the regulations
established in §
1295.05, Landscaping and Screen Standards.
   (d)   Parking of inoperable or abandoned vehicles. The parking or storage of
inoperable or abandoned vehicles is prohibited outdoors in all districts and as
further provided in this section. The location and duration or temporary
parking or storage of an unlicensed operable vehicle may be approved by the
Zoning Officer through the issuance of a Temporary Zoning Permit on the basis
of the adequacy of the parcel size, condition of the vehicle, visibility from
other properties and absence of undue adverse impact on adjacent property or on
the area as a whole.
   (e)   Commercial vehicles. No commercial motor vehicle exceeding two tons in
rated capacity may be parked in any residential district for longer than 72
consecutive hours unless that commercial vehicle is performing construction or
service work, at which point it shall be removed immediately upon the
completion of work.
   (f)   Traffic patterns. All parking garages and parking lots shall be
located and designed to encourage minimal routing of traffic along public
rights-of-way contiguous to blocks that contain primary education facilities or
recreation sites designed for children or which have over 50% of their frontage
developed with single- or two-family dwellings.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1294.06 LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING FOR PARKING LOTS.
   (a)   Applicability. The following shall govern the landscaping and
screening of parking lots in the Municipality:
      (1)   Scope. Where new or expanded off- street parking spaces for motor
vehicles are created, the regulations and standards of this section shall
apply.
      (2)   Alteration or expansion. Where an existing parking lot containing
less than 20 contiguous parking spaces is expanded and thereby contains 20 or
more contiguous parking spaces, landscaping and screening for the entire
parking area shall be provided and not merely to the extent of its expansion.
      (3)   Maintenance. The duty to provide and maintain landscaping or
screening for all such areas shall be the responsibility of the owner or agent
of public record of the use for which parking lots are required. Landscaped
areas shall be healthy, maintained in good condition and free of all trash,
weeds and other rubbish.
   The Municipality reserves the right to maintain the landscaping or screen if
the owner or his or her agent fails to do so within six months of notification
by the Zoning Officer. The Municipality reserves the right to assess the cost
of maintenance to the property tax bill for the subject property.
   (b)   Total landscaping required. The total landscaping and screening
required for parking lots is 22 square feet per parking and stacking space.
Interior and streetscape landscaping count toward the minimum square feet of
landscaping required per parking space.
   (c)   Screening and interior landscaping standards. Screening and interior
landscaping shall comply with the following standards:
      (1)   Design.
         A.   Interior landscape areas shall be peninsular or island types.
This shall include landscaped parking islands or peninsulas, natural or
landscaped detention basins located in the front or side yards, and the
required streetscape landscaping area.
         B.   Boundary screening areas shall not be counted as landscape areas
for purposes of this section.
         C.   Screening for off-street parking lots shall be required when the
parking lot is located within the front yard in order to soften the visual
impact of the parking lot and parked vehicles. Screening shall follow the
requirements of Sections 1295.05, Landscaping and Screen Standards and 1295.06,
Screening and Buffering Required. With the exception of trees, screening
materials are recommended to be between three and one-half and four and one-
half feet in height.
      (2)   Location. All parking spaces must be at least within 125 feet of a
landscaped area.
      (3)   Minimum area. The minimum landscape area shall be 100 square feet
with a minimum width and length of ten feet.
      (4)   Surface. Any landscape area provided for under this section shall
not contain bare soil. Any ground area shall be covered with stones, mulch,
vegetative ground cover, or other surface permeable by water.
      (5)   Retention basins. Natural or landscaped detention basins may count
toward minimum square footage landscaping requirements when the basins are in
the front or side yards. Retention basins are encouraged to be designed as rain
gardens which naturally filter surface runoff water prior to transmitting it
into the ground. Rain gardens shall follow the general design guidelines
established in the handbook, Rain Garden Guidelines for Southwest Ohio
published by the Ohio State University Extension Office and shall be reviewed
and approved by the Municipal Engineer.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/400a1417679729aa03ba6ecffb49741da640bf15/
IMAGES/0-0-0-95.jpg]
 
      (6)   Traffic visibility. No landscaping shall obscure visibility at
vehicular intersections with the parking area or other areas where clear
visibility is necessary to assure safe circulation. Where safe visibility is
impaired, canopy trees shall have branches removed from the trunk at least five
feet above the ground and shrubs or ground cover shall not exceed two feet in
height. Evergreen trees and understory trees that would impair visibility for
safe circulation shall not be planted in these areas.
   (d)   Determination of interior landscape requirements. The landscape
requirements shall be computed as follows:
      (1)   Interior landscape area requirement. Determine the landscape area
by multiplying the landscape area requirement of 22 sq. ft. per parking and
stacking space by the total number of parking spaces on the lot.
      (2)   Planting requirements. To determine the minimum number of canopy
trees, use the rate of one canopy tree for each ten parking spaces for retail
uses and two canopy trees for each ten parking spaces for non-retail uses. Any
fractional number of trees shall be calculated to the next highest whole
number. To determine the total number of required shrubs, multiply the total
number of required canopy trees by three. One canopy tree may substitute for
three shrubs. Trees and shrubs do not have to be equally spaced, but may be
grouped.
   (e)   Overlap. When any portion of the parcel is subject to more than one
set of landscape or buffer requirements as set forth in this or any other
chapter, the most stringent requirement shall control. The most stringent
requirements shall be defined as those which require the highest fence, wall or
screen or, if no fence, wall or screen is required, the requirements with the
greatest quantity of landscaping.
   (f)   Credit. Existing trees and shrubs, fences, walls or berms on a parcel
may be used to meet the requirements if they meet the standards established in
this chapter and are approved as credit by the Planning Commission.
   (g)   Plant installation and maintenance standards. All new plant material
as part of the requirements for this chapter shall be in accordance with
Chapter 1295 Screening and Landscaping.
   (h)   Modifications. In the event that the unusual topography or elevation
of a development site, the size of the parcel to be developed, the extent of
expansion or redevelopment of the site or parking area is deemed to be
insignificant, or the presence of existing buffers on adjacent developed
property would make strict adherence to the requirements of this chapter serve
no meaningful purpose or would make it physically impossible to install and
maintain the required landscaping, the Planning Commission may, upon proper
application by the property owner, and upon making findings of fact, modify the
requirements of this chapter provided the existing or resulting landscape
features of the development site comply with the spirit and intent of this
chapter, Chapter 1295 and other related chapters.
   (i)   Authority. The Planning Commission has the authority to review and
approve any proposed landscape modifications.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1294.07 OUTDOOR LIGHTING FOR OFF- STREET PARKING AND LOADING AREAS.
   The following restrictions shall apply to any outdoor lighting located in
any district or parcels where there are nonresidential off-street parking
spaces.
   (a)   Lighting plan required. A lighting plan is required for any off-street
parking and loading area lighting. The following information shall be
submitted, as a minimum, in order to effectively evaluate the proposed
lighting:
      (1)   Pole height or mounting height of lighting fixture;
      (2)   Type of luminaries;
      (2)   Site coverage;
      (4)   Uniformity including the maximum, average and minimum footcandles;
      (5)   Intensity at property line in footcandles.
   (b)   Height. All outdoor lighting shall be designed, located, and mounted
at heights no greater than 16 feet above grade for non-cutoff lights and 32
feet above grade for cutoff lights. A greater height may be authorized in any
district by a Variance approved pursuant to, Chapter 1254. Cutoff and non-
cutoff lights are illustrated below:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/400a1417679729aa03ba6ecffb49741da640bf15/
IMAGES/0-0-0-97.jpg]
 
   (c)   Illumination. All outdoor lighting shall be designed and located with
a maximum illumination of 1.0 footcandles as measured at the property line.
   (d)   Shielding. All outdoor lighting for nonresidential uses shall be
located, screened, or shielded so that adjacent lots located in residential
districts are not directly illuminated.
   (e)   Color and glare. No outdoor lighting shall be of such an intensity or
color distortion as to cause glare or to impair the vision of drivers or
pedestrians.
   (f)   Location. Outdoor lighting need not comply with the yard requirements
of this Code, except that no such light shall obstruct sight triangles as
defined in §
1296.04, Obstructions to Traffic Visibility on Corner Lots.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1294.08 REQUIRED NUMBER OF OFF- STREET PARKING SPACES.
The following minimum number of parking spaces shall be provided on the same
lot as the use or building they are intended to serve, or may be provided on
adjacent lots subject to other provisions of this Section. This Section is also
subject to §
1294.03(d), Maximum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Permitted.
SCHEDULE OF OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
SCHEDULE OF OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
RESIDENTIAL USES                        FORMULA
                                        One space for apartment in addition to
Accessory apartment                     the requirement for the single family
                                        dwelling
Assisted living, nursing, convalescent  One space per six residents plus one
home, and continuing care facility      space per employee
Bed and breakfast                       Two spaces for owner plus one space for
                                        each guest room
Day care, child (in-home)               See single-family detached dwelling
                                        One space for every resident room plus
Group home                              one space for every 400 square feet of
                                        gross floor area, excluding resident
                                        rooms
                                        One and one-half spaces for each
                                        dwelling unit for up to two bedrooms
Multi-family dwelling                   Two spaces for each dwelling unit for
                                        three or more bedrooms
                                        One space for each five dwelling units
                                        for visitor parking
Single-family attached and single-      Two spaces for up to three bedrooms
family detached dwelling                Three spaces for four or more bedrooms
Two-family dwelling                     Two spaces for up to three bedrooms
                                        Three spaces for four or more bedrooms
COMMERCIAL USES                         FORMULA
                                        One space for each three seats or one
Banquet, or meeting halls               space per 75 square feet of net banquet
                                        or meeting floor area where fixed
                                        seating is not available
                                        One space for every three seats or one
Bar or tavern                           space for each 100 square feet of floor
                                        area, whichever is greater
Car wash, automated                     Five stacking spaces for each automated
                                        car wash lane
Car wash, self-service                  Four stacking spaces for each stall
                                        plus two drying spaces for each stall
                                        One space for each three seats or one
Commercial entertainment                space for each 100 square feet of floor
                                        area
                                        One space per 200 square feet of net
Convenience store (with gas pumps)      floor area plus one space per pump plus
                                        one space per employee
Day care facility                       One space per four children of licensed
                                        capacity plus one space per employee
                                        One space per 1,500 square feet of
Distribution center                     gross floor area plus one space per
                                        facility vehicle
                                        Five stacking spaces per drive through
                                        lane plus one space per 100 square feet
                                        of gross floor area if entirely drive-
Drive-in or drive-through facility      through. If drive-in facility, one
                                        space for each ordering space plus one
                                        space per 100 square feet of gross
                                        floor area
Financial institution (drive-in service One space per 400 square feet of net
window)                                 floor area plus four stacking spaces
                                        for each drive-in service window
                                        One space per 75 square feet of parlor
Funeral home or mortuary                or chapel space or one per five seats,
                                        whichever is greater, but not less than
                                        20 spaces
Hotel or motel                          See motel or hotel
Mixed uses                              The sum of spaces of each use reduced
                                        by 15%
                                        One space per each two fuel pumps plus
                                        three spaces per service bay (excluding
Motor vehicle filling station (without  the bay) plus one space per vehicle
convenience retail)                     used in operation of the service and
                                        one space for each 50 square feet of
                                        attendant area
                                        Three spaces per service bay (excluding
                                        the bay) plus one space per vehicle
Motor vehicle service station           used in operation of the service and
                                        one space for each 50 square feet of
                                        waiting room area
                                        Three spaces per service bay (excluding
Motor vehicle service station and body  the bay) plus one space per vehicle
shop                                    used in operation of the service and
                                        one space for each 50 square feet of
                                        waiting room area
                                        One space per lodging unit plus one
Motel or hotel                          space for each 100 square feet of
                                        meeting area and/or restaurant space or
                                        bar/cocktail lounge
                                        Three parking spaces for the first
                                        1,000 square feet or fraction thereof,
Office (excluding medical)              plus one space per 400 square feet of
                                        net floor area in excess of 1,000
                                        square feet
                                        Six spaces plus one space per 200
Office, medical/dental clinic           square feet of net floor space in
                                        excess of 1,000 square feet
                                        Two spaces for the first 2,000 square
Outside storage                         feet plus one space for each additional
                                        2,000 square feet
Personal services establishments        One space per 300 square feet of gross
                                        floor area
                                        One space for each 50 square feet of
                                        pool area
                                        One space for each 100 square feet of
                                        outdoor playground area
Recreation uses, private                Five spaces for each trail head
                                        Six spaces for each tennis, racquet
                                        ball or handball court
                                        Ten spaces for each basketball court
                                        Twenty spaces for each baseball,
                                        softball or soccer field
                                        One space for each 50 square feet of
                                        pool area
                                        One space for each 100 square feet of
                                        outdoor playground area
Recreation uses, public                 Five spaces for each trail head
                                        Six spaces for each tennis, racquet
                                        ball or handball court
                                        Ten spaces for each basketball court
                                        Twenty spaces for each baseball,
                                        softball or soccer field
Restaurant                              One space per 100 square feet of gross
                                        floor area
Restaurant drive-in                     Five stacking spaces per lane
                                        One space per 75 square feet of gross
Restaurant, fast food                   floor area plus five stacking spaces
                                        for each drive-through window
Retail business                         One space per 250 square feet of net
                                        floor area
Self-storage warehouse facility         Three spaces plus one space per 100
                                        individual storage units
                                        One space per 1,500 square feet of
Truck transfer terminal                 gross floor area plus one space per
                                        facility vehicle
                                        One space per 2,000 square feet of
Warehouse, storage                      warehouse floor area plus additional
                                        space for office area as per office
                                        requirements
PUBLIC AND SEMI-PUBLIC USES             FORMULA
                                        One space per 250 square feet of net
Government buildings                    floor area or one space per four
                                        patrons, whichever is greater
                                        One space per employee on maximum shift
Government storage yard                 plus one space per facility vehicle
                                        plus one space per 250 square feet net
                                        floor area
Hospital                                One parking space per bed
Library                                 One space per 400 square feet of net
                                        floor area
Religious place of worship              One space per eight seats or bench
                                        seating in the main assembly area
                                        One space for each three seats in any
School, elementary (K-6)                auditorium, or one space for each
                                        classroom, whichever is greater
                                        One space for each three seats in any
School, junior high/middle school       auditorium, or one space for each
                                        classroom, whichever is greater
School, senior high                     One space per employee plus 12 visitor
                                        spaces, plus one space per six students
School, vocational/professional         One space per employee plus one space
                                        per two registered student capacity
Telecommunication towers                One space
University or College                   One space per two employees plus one
                                        space per four students
RECREATIONAL, CULTURAL AND              FORMULA
ENTERTAINMENT USES
Athletic/play field                     Ten spaces per acre
                                        One space for each 50 square feet of
Club, private                           net floor area used for assembly, game
                                        room, dancing or dining, plus one for
                                        each sleeping room
Community (recreation) center           One space per 200 square feet of net
                                        floor area
                                        Four spaces for each hole plus one
Golf course                             space for 100 square feet of net floor
                                        area in any cocktail lounge, bar, or
                                        similar facility
Museum                                  One space per 400 square feet of net
                                        floor area
Outdoor drama theater (not drive-in)    One space for each three seats
Parks, playgrounds                      Four spaces per acre
                                        Eight spaces for each indoor tennis
Tennis or racquet clubs, and similar    court; five spaces for each outdoor
recreation facilities                   tennis court; five spaces for each
                                        racquet ball and/or handball court
Recreation center, internal             One space per 250 square feet of net
                                        floor area
Swim facility                           One parking space for each 50 square
                                        feet of pool area plus one per employee
OTHER USES                              FORMULA
Farm market                             One space per 150 square feet of net
                                        floor area
                                        One space per 1,000 square feet of net
Kennel, commercial                      floor area plus one space per employee
                                        plus one drop-off space per 20 kennel
                                        spaces
                                        One space per 250 square feet of indoor
                                        net floor area plus one space per 1,000
Nursery, greenhouse                     square feet of net outdoor sales/
                                        display areas plus one space for each
                                        1.5 employees
Stable                                  One space per four stalls plus one
                                        space per employee
                                        Three parking spaces for the first 750
                                        square feet or fraction thereof, plus
Veterinarian facility                   one space for each 300 square feet of
                                        net floor area in excess of 750 square
                                        feet
 
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1294.09 OFF-STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Scope of application. Every building or structure erected and occupied
for retail, industrial or other uses involving the receipt or distribution of
materials or merchandise by vehicle shall provide a permanently maintained
space for standing, loading and unloading services in order to avoid undue
interference with public use of the streets, alleys, or required parking areas.
Such off-street loading areas shall comply with the following standards in this
section.
   (b)   Number of off-street loading spaces required. Off-street loading
spaces shall be provided for commercial, and industrial uses in accordance with
the table below. Loading spaces shall not conflict with or overlap with the
area used for parking.
 
Gross Floor                          Number of Required Loading Spaces
Area of Structure (in square feet)
0 - 10,000                           0
10,000 - 50,000                      1
50,001 - 100,000                     2
100,001 - 200,000                    3
200,001 - 400,000                    4
Each additional 200,000 over 400,000 1
 
   (c)   General standards. Every loading space shall be designed, constructed,
and maintained in accordance with the standards and requirements set forth
below.
      (1)   Location of required loading spaces. Loading spaces shall be
located on the same lot as the building or structure to which they are
accessory. No loading space shall be located in any required front yard, nor
shall it permit any vehicle to extend into any front yard or across any lot
line of a more restrictive district while being loaded or unloaded. No such
space shall be closer than 50 feet to any other lot located in any Residence
District, unless wholly within a completely enclosed building.
      (2)   Dimensions. No required loading space shall be less than 12 feet in
width or 35 feet in length or have a vertical clearance of less than 14 feet.
      (3)   Access. Loading spaces shall be designed and arranged to provide
access to a street or alley in a manner that will create the least possible
interference with traffic movement and parking lot circulation. Access to and
from loading spaces shall be approved by the Zoning Officer.
      (4)   Surface. All loading spaces shall be graded and provided with a
durable and dustless hard surface of asphalt, Portland cement, concrete, or
other suitable materials capable of withstanding 1,000 pounds per square inch
(psi).
      (5)   Drainage. Individual stalls shall be graded to drain so as to
dispose of all surface water within the parking area in accordance with the
subdivision regulations. No surface water from parking areas shall accumulate
or drain over a public sidewalk.
      (6)   Screening. All operations, material, and vehicles within any
loading space that are visible from public streets or from residential uses
shall be screened. The screening material, upon installation, shall be at least
six feet in height, 100 percent opaque, and shall meet the requirements for
screening as set forth in Chapter 1295, Screening and Landscaping.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1294.10 COMMERCIAL VEHICLE PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   This section shall be applicable to all uses where commercial and fleet
vehicles are parked.
   (a)   Minimum setbacks. Any vehicular storage yard shall be located behind
the minimum front yard setback or the front building line for the site,
whichever is greater.
   (b)   Screening. All vehicular storage yards that are visible from public
roads or residential districts shall be screened. The screening material shall
be at least six feet in height and 100 percent opaque, upon installation, and
shall meet the requirements for screening as set forth in Chapter 1295.
   (c)   Contractor equipment. Contractor equipment shall not be parked or
stored on site as to be visible from the public right-of-way.
   (d)   Stored vehicles. Vehicles that are not moved daily or which will not
be moved for a period of more than 48 hours shall be parked so that they are
not visible from the public right-of-way.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
CHAPTER 1295: SCREENING AND LANDSCAPING
1295.01   Intent.
1295.02   Applicability.
1295.03   General requirements for submission.
1295.04   Approval.
1295.05   Landscaping and screen standards.
1295.06   Screening and buffering required.
1295.07   Screening requirements.
1295.08   Modification.
1295.09   Clear sight distance at street and access drive intersections.
1295.10   Screening for service structures.
§ 1295.01 INTENT.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards involving the
development of land to provide attractive views from roads and adjacent
properties; to screen from view visually undesirable uses; to require screening
between incompatible land uses and to protect the health, safety and welfare of
the community through the reduction of noise, air and visual pollution, and
headlight glare.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards involving the
development of land to:
   (a)   Provide attractive views from roads and adjacent properties on a year-
round basis;
   (b)   To screen from view visually undesirable uses on a year-round basis;
   (c)   To require screening between incompatible land uses on a year-round
basis; and
   (d)   To protect the health, safety and welfare of the community through the
reduction of noise, air and visual pollution, and artificial light glare on a
year- round basis.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1295.02 APPLICABILITY.
   This section shall apply to new property development and any collective
substantial expansion of existing structures, except for individual single-
family dwellings and two-family dwellings (duplexes). Substantial expansion of
existing structures shall be defined as an increase of the existing structure
by 20 percent or more.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1295.03 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR SUBMISSION.
   Any property to which this section applies shall submit a landscaping plan
to the Planning Commission as part of the Site Plan Review process required in
Chapter 1254. Screening plans shall be prepared by a nursery and/or certified
by a design professional practicing within their areas of competence. The site
plan shall contain the following information:
   (a)   Plans must be at a reasonable scale to indicate all types of proposed
landscaping improvements at a minimum of 1" = 20' and shall include the
following minimum information:
      (1)   North arrow and scale.
      (2)   The name of applicant/owner.
      (3)   The name, address and phone number of the person or firm
responsible for the preparation of the buffering plans.
      (4)   The dates the plans are submitted or revised.
      (5)   All existing and proposed buildings and other structures, paved
areas, planted areas, utility poles, fire hydrants, light standards, signs,
fences and other permanent features to be added and/or retained on the site.
      (6)   All existing plant material to be removed or retained and all new
landscaping materials to be installed.
      (7)   All existing and proposed streets, sidewalks, curbs and gutters,
railroad tracks, drainage ditches and other public or semi-public improvements
within and immediately adjacent to the site.
       (8)   All property lines and easements.
      (9)   Any other information which is deemed appropriate by the Zoning
Officer.
   (b)   Details shall be shown for the planting of the types of trees, shrubs
and ground cover within the screening or landscaped area.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1295.04 APPROVAL.
   (a)   No site or development plan required under this Zoning Code shall
receive final approval unless a landscaping plan has been submitted and
approved.
   (b)   No Determination of Permissible Use Certificate shall be issued unless
the following criteria are fully satisfied with regard to the approved
landscape plan:
      (1)   Such plan has been fully implemented on the site; or
      (2)   Such plan, because of seasonal conditions, cannot be implemented
immediately, but has been guaranteed by a postponed improvement agreement
between the developer and the Municipality.
   (c)   The Zoning Officer may request the review and approval of the Planning
Commission at any time.
   (d)   The Municipality reserves the right to request the review a
landscaping plan by a landscape architect registered in the State of Ohio. In
such case, the Municipality shall notify the applicant of its intent and that
all costs associated with the review of the plan shall be passed on to the
applicant.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1295.05 LANDSCAPING AND SCREEN STANDARDS.
   (a)   Maintenance of landscaping and screening. All landscaping materials
shall be installed and maintained according to accepted nursery industry
procedures. The owner of the property shall be responsible for the continued
property maintenance of all landscaping materials, and shall keep them in a
proper, neat and orderly appearance, free from refuse and debris at all times
and shall remove all noxious, invasive or poison type plants. All unhealthy or
dead plant material shall be replaced within one year, or by the next planting
period, whichever comes first. Violation of these installation and maintenance
provisions shall be grounds for the Building Official to refuse an occupancy
permit, require replacement of the landscape material or institute legal
proceedings to enforce the provisions of this section.
   (b)   Screening establishment. Once a screen has been approved by the
Planning Commission and established by the owner, it may not be used, disturbed
or altered for any purpose that would decrease its effectiveness.
   (c)   Quality and installation. All specifications for the quality and
installation of trees and shrubs shall be in accordance with the most recent
edition of
American Standards for Nursery Stock published by the American Association of
Nurserymen. Trees shall be identified on the approved Street Tree List located
in Appendix F of the Woodlawn Subdivision Regulations. In addition:
      (1)   All plant material shall be free from disease and damage.
      (2)   All plant material shall be planted in a manner that is not
intrusive to utilities, pavement, pedestrian traffic or vehicular traffic.
      (3)   All required plant material shall be planted within one year or by
the next planting season, as outlined in the latest edition of American
Standards for Nursery Stock, after all construction activity in the area of the
new planting has ceased.
   (d)   Size.
      (1)   Canopy trees shall be deciduous trees with a minimum of 12 feet
overall height or a minimum caliper of 2-1/2 inches when installed, and have an
expected height of at least 35 feet at maturity.
      (2)   Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of five feet in height when
installed.
      (3)   Understory trees shall be a minimum of five feet in height in clump
form or 1-1/2 inch caliper in single stem form when installed.
      (4)   Shrubs shall be at least 18 inches in height or 24 inches in spread
when installed.
   (e)   Screens. The objective of providing a screen is to visually hide
whatever is behind the screen. The screen shall be 100% opaque. The following
standards for each screening material shall be required.
      (1)   Plant material height requirements. When plant material is used as
screening it shall meet all height requirements in accordance with this
chapter. Height requirements will be considered met when plants are selected
whose height at maturity meet such requirements as certified by a licensed
landscape architect or certified horticulturist.
      (2)   Planting requirements. To be counted towards screening
requirements, evergreen trees and evergreen shrubs shall be planted close
enough to fulfill the objective as defined in this section. Recommended spacing
to achieve this is as follows:
         A.   Spreading evergreen trees should be planted eight feet on center.
Narrow evergreen trees should be planted four feet on center. Designation of
evergreen trees as spreading or narrow shall be certified by a licensed
landscape architect or certified horticulturist.
         B.   Evergreen shrubs should be planted at a maximum of four feet on
center.
      (3)   Combination of materials. Plant material may be used in conjunction
with fences, walls and berms but the overall effect shall be a continuous 100%
opaque screen at maturity. Plants may be planted in rows or be staggered, but
the overall effect shall be a 100% opaque screen.
      (4)   Fences and walls. Natural screening (plantings, berming, etc.) is
preferred, however fences or walls can be used, where appropriate, to create an
effective screen between incompatible uses.
         A.   Fences or walls used to fulfill screening requirements shall be
detailed on the landscaping plan. They are to be of weather-proof materials.
This includes pressure treating, staining or painting of lumber if it is not
redwood or cedar and using aluminum or galvanized hardware. Chain link fences
with or without wooded or synthetic slat material shall not be permitted to
satisfy screening requirements.
         B.   Fences or walls to be used as screens shall be approved by the
Planning Commission during review of the landscape plan and shall be in
conformance with regulations as established in §
1296.24, Fences, Walls and Hedges.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1295.06 SCREENING AND BUFFERING REQUIRED.
   In order to provide protective screening and buffers for residential areas
adjacent to nonresidential areas or for off-street parking lots located in the
front yard or are adjacent to public rights-of-way, the Planning Commission
shall require a wall, fence or greenbelt to be provided by the nonresidential
property owner in accordance with the screening requirements set forth in §
1295.07, Screening Requirements. The Planning Commission shall also use the
following criteria to evaluate proposed screening requirements:
   (a)   Screening areas shall be provided for the purpose of minimizing the
conflict between incompatible land uses and improving the aesthetic and
functional quality of new development.
   (b)   Where vegetative and/or topographic conditions that provide a natural
screening and buffer exist prior to development of properties in question,
every effort shall be made to retain such conditions. In such cases, additional
screening may not be required, provided that provision is made for maintenance
of such areas.
   (c)   The Planning Commission may waive the requirement for a wall, fence or
greenbelt if equivalent screening is provided by existing or planned parks,
parkways, recreation areas or by topography or other natural conditions.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1295.07 SCREENING REQUIREMENTS.
 
WHEN...                   IS PROPOSED TO ABUT...     A MINIMUM SCREEN OF...
Any commercial            Any residential zone or
                          land use                   Evergreen trees planted at
Any office land           Any residential zone or    the boundary at a standard
                          land use                   of one tree per 25 feet of
                                                     linear distance and an
                                                     opaque fence shall be
                                                     installed six feet in
                                                     height and placed at the
                                                     nonresidential property
                                                     line. The area between
                          Any residential, office or such fence and the
Any industrial            commercial zone or land    property line shall be
                          use                        treated with plantings to
                                                     form a permanent
                                                     landscaped area. Such
                                                     buffer area shall be a
                                                     minimum of 15 feet in
                                                     width.

Any multiple-family land  Any R-S, R-Z, R-3 or R-4,  A screen as specified in
use                       zone or land use           Figure 1295(a).
Any institutional land    Any residential zone or    A screen as specified in
use                       land use                   Figure 1295(a).
Any nonresidential use or Any public right-of-way    A streetscape as specified
parking lot                                          in Figure 1295(b).
 
   Figure 1295.07(a) - Boundary Screen
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/400a1417679729aa03ba6ecffb49741da640bf15/
IMAGES/0-0-0-99.jpg]
 
   Figure 1295.07(b) - Streetscape
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/400a1417679729aa03ba6ecffb49741da640bf15/
IMAGES/0-0-0-101.jpg]
 
   Figure 1295(c) - Springfield Pike Streetscape
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/400a1417679729aa03ba6ecffb49741da640bf15/
IMAGES/0-0-0-103.jpg]
 
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1295.08 MODIFICATION.
   The Planning Commission shall have the authority to modify any of the
aforementioned requirements in this chapter, in considering an individual site
with respect to changes in elevation, environmental impact, durability of plant
material, aesthetic appeal, and any other factor that will develop a compatible
buffer or screen with the surrounding neighborhood at the time of application.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1295.09 CLEAR SIGHT DISTANCE AT STREET AND ACCESS DRIVE INTERSECTIONS.
   (a)   Purpose. To ensure that landscape materials do not constitute a
driving hazard, a clear sight triangle will be observed at all street and
access drive intersections.
   (b)   Definition. A “clear sight triangle” is the triangular area formed by
a diagonal line connecting two points located on intersecting lines of a right-
of- way, easement of access, or pavement edge of an access drive, each point
being 20 feet from the intersecting lines. See illustration in §
1295.09(d), Restrictions Within Clear Sight Triangles.
   (c)   Design. The entire area of the clear sight triangle should be designed
as illustrated in §
1295.09(d), Restrictions Within Clear Sight Triangles, to provide the driver of
the vehicle entering the intersection with an unobstructed view to all points
nine feet above the roadway along the centerline. The recommended distance
depends upon the design speed of the higher-order street and therefore is
greater for arterial streets than for collectors.
   (d)   Restrictions within clear sight triangles.
      (1)   Within the sight triangle no landscape material with a mature
height greater than 12 inches shall be permitted with the exception of trees
which conform to the following standards. Trees shall be permitted within the
sight triangles as long as, except during early growth stages, only the tree
trunk (no limbs, leaves, etc.) is visible between the ground and nine feet
above the ground, or otherwise does not present a traffic visibility hazard.
Restrictions shall not apply to the following:
         A.   Existing natural grades which, by reason of natural topography,
rise 12 or more inches above the level of the center of the adjacent
intersection;
         B.   Fire hydrants, public utility poles, street markers, governmental
signs, and traffic control devices.
      (2)   The restrictions contained in this section shall also apply to any
areas outside the clear sight distance triangle that fall within the sight
distance requirements of the Municipal Engineer.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/400a1417679729aa03ba6ecffb49741da640bf15/
IMAGES/0-0-0-105.jpg]
 
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1295.10 SCREENING FOR SERVICE STRUCTURES.
   Service structures shall include but not be limited to: loading docks,
propane tanks, and dumpsters, electrical transformers, above-ground utility
vaults and other equipment or elements providing service to a building or a
site. The screening height shall be based upon the tallest of the structures
but in no case shall the screening be required to exceed eight feet in height.
   (a)   Location of screening. A continuous planting of evergreen, fence or
wall must enclose any service structure on all sides, unless such structure
must be frequently moved or accessed. In such cases, screening may not be
required on the side of the service structure where frequent service is
occurring.
A fully closable gate shall effectively screen the service structure at the
point of service or access.
   (b)   Curbs to protect screening material. Whenever screening material is
placed around any dumpster, trash disposal unit or waste collection unit which
is emptied or removed mechanically on a regular basis, a curb to contain the
placement of the container shall be provided within the screening material. The
curbing shall be at least one foot from the material and shall be designed to
prevent possible damage to the screening when the container is moved or
emptied.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
CHAPTER 1296: PROVISIONS RELATING TO ALL DISTRICTS
1296.01   Conversion of dwellings
1296.02   Rear dwellings.
1296.03   Accessory uses in Residential Districts (“R” Districts).
1296.04   Obstructions to traffic visibility on corner lots.
1296.05   Computation of yards or parking areas.
1296.06   Off-street parking and loading.
1296.07   Encroaching garage doors.
1296.08   Essential services.
1296.09   Unsafe buildings.
1296.10   Parking and occupancy of boats, camping vehicles, mobile homes and
trailers.
1296.11   Green belts.
1296.12   Swimming pools.
1296.13   Sexually oriented businesses.
1296.14   Motor vehicle service and filling station.
1296.15   Performance standards.
1296.16   Lots of record.
1296.17   Exceptions to height limitations.
1296.18   Frontage and yard modifications.
1296.19   Projections into yards.
1296.20   Number of principal buildings on a lot.
1296.21   Regulations for drive-in, drive- through, or carry-out eating and
drinking establishments.
1296.22   Home occupations.
1296.23   Dumpsters and trash-handling areas.
1296.24   Fences, walls and hedges.
1296.25   Satellite dishes.
1296.26   Outdoor bulk storage and display in Commercial and Industrial
Districts.
1296.27   Outdoor storage in residential areas.
1296.28   Junk storage.
1296.29   Portable storage units.
1296.30   Medical marijuana cultivation facilities, processing facilities, and
dispensaries.
1296.31   Prohibition against short term rentals.
1296.32   Regulations for the keeping of chickens in residential areas.
1296.33   Regulations for mobile food vendors.
§ 1296.01 CONVERSION OF DWELLINGS.
   The conversion of any building into a dwelling, or the conversion of any
dwelling so as to accommodate an increased number of dwelling units or
families, shall be permitted only within a district in which a new building for
a similar occupancy would be permitted under this Zoning Code, and only when
the resulting occupancy will comply with the requirements governing new
construction in such district, with respect to minimum lot size, lot area per
dwelling unit, percentage of lot coverage, dimensions of yards and other open
spaces and off-street parking. Each conversion shall be subject to such further
requirements as may be specified in this Zoning Code with the regulations
applying to such district.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1296.02 REAR DWELLINGS.
   No building in the rear of a principal building on the same lot shall be
used for residential dwelling purposes unless it conforms to all the yard and
other open space and off-street parking requirements of this Zoning Code. For
the purpose of determining the front yard in such cases, the rear line of the
required rear yard for the principal building in front shall be considered the
front lot line for the building in the rear. In addition, there shall be
provided for any such rear dwelling an unoccupied and unobstructed access way,
not less than 20 feet wide, to a public street, for each dwelling unit in a
dwelling, or an access way not less than 50 feet wide for three or more
dwelling units. (See §§ 1252.05 and 1296.19.)
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1296.03 ACCESSORY USES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS (“R” DISTRICTS).
   (a)   Generally. An accessory building in an “R” District may be erected
detached from the principal building. Except as provided in §
1296.19, no accessory building shall be erected in any required court or yard,
except in a rear yard. An accessory building of 100 square feet or less may be
placed in any required rear yard in any residential district, provided it is
located not less than five feet from all rear and side property lines.
Accessory buildings or structures shall not exceed 600 square feet in size.
   (b)   Front setback. No accessory use or structure in any “R” District,
except an off-street parking area subject to
Chapter 1294, shall be permitted nearer to any front lot line than 50 feet or
any closer than the front building line of the principal building if the
building is greater than 50 feet from the front property line, unless such use
or structure is contained within or constitutes an integral part of the main
building.
   (c)   Side and rear setback. In any “R” District, accessory buildings and
uses shall not be less than five feet from all rear and side property lines.
   (d)   Accessory building without principal building. In any “R” District, no
accessory building or structure shall be erected or constructed prior to the
erection or construction of the principal or main building.
   (e)   Carports. In any “R” District, a carport may be constructed or erected
as an accessory structure to an existing residential structure, provided that a
request for a permit to construct or erect such carport shall be submitted to
the Zoning Officer. Carports are not subject to the same side yard setback
requirements as may be stipulated in this Zoning Code for garages, provided
that fire separation requirements of the Ohio Fire Code are met. Because a
carport is not enclosed on its sides, a solid fence or hedge shall be required
to prevent visibility from an adjacent side yard.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1296.04 OBSTRUCTIONS TO TRAFFIC VISIBILITY ON CORNER LOTS.
   In any district, on any corner lot, no fence, structure or planting shall be
erected or maintained which interferes with traffic visibility across the
corner as regulated in §
1295.09, Clear Sight Distance at Street and Access Drive Intersections.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1296.05 COMPUTATION OF YARDS OR PARKING AREAS.
   No part of a yard, court, parking area or other space, provided for any
building or structure for the purpose of complying with this Zoning Code, shall
be included as part of the yard, court, parking area or other space required
under this Zoning Code for another building or structure.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1296.06 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.
   In every district, spaces for off-street parking and loading shall be
provided in accordance with
Chapter 1294, Off-Street Parking and Loading.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1296.07 ENCROACHING GARAGE DOORS.
   Every garage building or portion of a main building used for garage purposes
shall be so equipped that the doors, when open or being opened, will not
project beyond any lot line of the lot on which such building is located.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1296.08 ESSENTIAL SERVICES.
   Essential services, as defined in
Chapter 1253, Definitions, shall be permitted as authorized and requested by
law.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1296.09 UNSAFE BUILDINGS.
   Nothing in this Zoning Code shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to
a safe condition of any part of any building or structure declared unsafe by
proper authority, however, such improvements must conform to nonconforming
regulations.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1296.10 PARKING AND OCCUPANCY OF BOATS, CAMPING VEHICLES, MOBILE HOMES AND
TRAILERS.
   (a)   In any “R” District placing a boat, camping vehicle, trailer, or
mobile home shall be prohibited, except that one trailer (as defined in
Chapter 1253) or one boat may be parked or stored in a garage or other
accessory building or rear yard in any Residential District.
   (b)   No occupancy for human habitation shall be maintained or business
conducted therein while such trailer or boat is so parked or stored.
   (c)   The wheels or any similar transporting devices of any such trailer
permitted within any Residential District shall not be removed, nor shall any
trailer be temporarily or permanently affixed to the ground or attached to
something having a temporary or permanent location on the ground.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1296.11 GREEN BELTS.
   (a)   Buffers between districts. Green belts may be required as buffers
between different zoning districts. Where required, such green belts shall be
maintained as landscaped yards by the property owner when a property containing
a green belt is developed.
   (b)   Landscaping. Landscaping for all green belts shall be approved by the
Planning Commission.
   (c)   Maintenance. All green belts shall be maintained. No person shall fail
to maintain the green belt landscaping and other features in accordance with
the approved landscaping plan.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1296.12 SWIMMING POOLS.
   (a)   Defined types. As used in this Zoning Code, “swimming pool” means a
permanently constructed or portable water-filled enclosure, having a depth of
more than 18 inches below the level of the surrounding land or an above surface
enclosure having a depth of more than 30 inches, designed, used and maintained
for swimming or bathing purposes. A swimming pool may be of three types:
      (1)   Private. Exclusively for the use of the residents or tenants of the
property and their guests, at no charge;
      (2)   Semipublic. A pool operated for profit; or
      (3)   Public. A pool operated for the use and benefit of the general
public wherein a nominal admission fee may be charged, but only by the
Municipality or a nonprofit corporation.
   (b)   Distance requirements.
      (1)   A private pool, if accessory to a residential use, may be located
anywhere on the premises except in a required front yard, provided it is
located not closer than ten feet to any property line of the property on which
it is located, and provided, further, that pump and filter installations shall
be located not closer than 15 feet to any property line.
      (2)   Semipublic and public pools shall conform to the building setback
requirements of the district in which they are located.
   (c)   Fencing.
      (1)   Private pools. A private swimming pool shall be walled or fenced
with a 60-inch minimum height barrier, and any gate giving access to the
swimming pool shall be a minimum of 60 inches in height and have a self-
closing, self-locking latch, all for the purpose of preventing uncontrolled
access from the street or from adjacent properties.
      (2)   Semipublic and public pools. A semipublic or public pool shall be
walled or fenced with an eight-foot minimum height barrier, and shall have a
self-closing, self-locking latch, all for the purpose of preventing
uncontrolled access from the street or from adjacent properties.. The barrier
shall not exceed ten feet in any Residence District or 15 feet in a
nonresidential district.
   (d)   Drainage. Adequate provisions for drainage shall be made, subject to
approval by the Municipal Engineer, provided that all of the Municipal
Engineer's fees shall be paid by the applicant.
   (e)   Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate the pool area shall be so
arranged to direct the light away from adjoining properties.
   (f)   Permits required. No person shall construct or install a swimming pool
or make any alteration thereon or to the appurtenances thereof without
submitting an application and plans therefor to the Building Commissioner and
acquiring a permit before construction starts. Any semipublic or public pool
which sells concessions shall obtain a permit from the County Health
Department. Concessions may be sold in a noncommercial district only by
conditional use permit approval. They shall be consumed onsite and shall only
be sold to members and guests.
   (g)   Other requirements. Semipublic and public pools shall provide adequate
parking and restroom facilities and shall meet other standards determined by
the Building Commissioner to be necessary to ensure adequate safety and health.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1296.13 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.
   A sexually oriented business is a conditional use within the I-P District. A
conditional use for such facilities shall not be approved unless the general
standards set forth in §
1254.08, Conditional Use Permits, and the following minimum conditions are
complied with:
   (a)   Minimum location requirements. No sexually oriented business shall be
established within 1,000 feet of:
      (1)   Any Residential (R) District; or
      (2)   Any public, private, governmental or commercial library, school,
teaching facility, park, recreational facility, religious place of worship,
child day care facility, day care facility, playground or swimming pool; or
      (3)   Any other sexually oriented business.
   (b)   Prohibited public display. No advertisements, displays or other
promotional materials shall be shown or exhibited so as to be visible to the
public from pedestrian sidewalks or walkways, or from other public or semi-
public areas.
   (c)   Public view to be prevented. All building openings, entries, windows,
etc. for sexually oriented businesses shall be located, covered, or serviced in
such a manner as to prevent a view into the interior from any public or semi-
public areas, sidewalk or street. For new construction, the building shall be
oriented so as to minimize any possibility of viewing the interior from any
public or semi-public areas.
   (d)   External audio and visual impact. No screens, loudspeakers or sound
equipment shall be used for motion picture theaters (enclosed or drive-in) that
can be seen or discerned by the public from public or semi-public areas.
   (e)   Interior design. The interior of any adult book store shall be lighted
and constructed in such a manner that every portion thereof (except restroom
facilities) is readily visible to the clerk or supervisory personnel from the
facility’s counter or other regular work station.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1296.14 MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE AND FILLING STATION.
   In addition to the other relevant District regulations, service stations and
filling stations shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission during Site Plan
Review as required by §
1254.12, Site Plan Review, and shall be further regulated using the standards
and regulations that follow.
   (a)   Lot area and frontage. The lot shall have an area of not less than
32,670 square feet, and at least one street frontage of not less than 150 feet.
   (b)   Location of entrances. No motor vehicle service or filling station
shall have an entrance or exit for vehicles if located on the same side of the
street and within 50 feet of a Residence District, nor shall any part of such
automobile service station or filling station have an entrance or exit for
vehicles within 200 feet, along the same side of a street, of any school,
public park, cemetery, church, hospital, public library or institution for
dependents or for children, except where such property is in another block or
on another street onto which the lot in question does not abut.
   (c)   Location of facility equipment. Gasoline pumps, compressed air
connections, vacuum cleaners and similar equipment shall be erected not closer
than 30 feet to any right-of-way or property line. A canopy over the pumps may
be located no closer than 30 feet to any right-of-way or property line, as
measured from the overhang of the canopy.
   (d)   Yards. Each service or filling station structure shall have a minimum
setback of at least 40 feet from all right-of-way lines except as modified
here.
   (e)   Outside storage. No outside storage shall be permitted for filling or
service stations unless the outside storage area is enclosed with masonry walls
or a permanent solid fence. Large outside displays, such as racks of tires,
bagged mulch, soft drinks and windshield wiper fluid, are prohibited. Small
displays on pump islands for motor oil, wiper blades and the like shall be
permitted.
   (f)   Canopy lighting. Light fixtures mounted on or under canopies or bays
shall be of full cut off design, unless indirect lighting is used whereby light
is directed upward and then reflected down from the ceiling of the structure.
   (g)   Driveways. All plans for access and egress to service and filling
stations shall be approved by the Zoning Officer, who shall ascertain that all
driveways used to provide accessibility to these uses shall be located and
arranged to minimize traffic congestion in conformity with the following:
      (1)   Lot with frontage less than or equal to 150 feet. Not more than one
driveway shall be permitted on a lot with a frontage less than or equal to 150
feet. Such driveway shall have a maximum curb cut width of 30 feet.
      (2)   Lot with frontage in excess of 150 feet. Each lot with a frontage
in excess of 150 feet may have two driveways, provided that they are so located
and constructed as to provide safety to pedestrians and motorists using such
property, and provided, further, that there shall be a minimum of 50 feet of
unbroken curb between successive driveways on the same or adjoining land uses.
      (3)   Minimum distance from intersections. In all cases, the minimum
distance of driveways from street intersections shall be 50 feet, measured from
the nearest side of the driveway to the nearest right-of- way line of the
intersecting street.
   (h)   Rental trailers and trucks. If rental trailers and/or rental trucks
are stored on the premises, as provided for or regulated in this Zoning Code, a
minimum lot area of 12,000 square feet, in addition to the minimum lot size
required in §
1296.14(a), above, shall be devoted exclusively to the service station use, and
there shall be provided, behind the main or principal building or structure, an
enclosure for fully enclosing the storage of rental trailers and trucks on such
premises. Such enclosure shall be a wall not more than 15 feet in height or
lower than six feet, provided that no trailers or trucks shall exceed the
height of the enclosure. Such provisions shall be subject to approval by the
Planning Commission.
   (i)   Accessory buildings. No accessory building or structure shall be
permitted except for the storage of rental trailers and rental trucks as
provided for in subsection (h) hereof. A canopy structure, car wash structure
or dumpster enclosure may be permitted if allowed within the district.
   (j)   Parking. No vehicle shall be parked within the required front yard of
a motor vehicle service station or filling station, except a vehicle actually
being served at the pump island in which are located the operating gasoline
pumps or as a customer within the store. No person who is the operator of such
a service station or filling station or any employee of such person shall
permit any vehicle to stand out of doors on such property for more than 48
hours.
   (k)   Signs. Signs shall be subject to Chapter 1292, Signs and Outdoor
Advertising. Use of building fascias and fascias of free-standing canopies over
pump islands for identification signs or signage that lists merchandise for
sale and prices thereof, when such signage exceeds the sign display areas
stipulated in Chapter 1292, shall be permitted only when such signage is
approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
   (l)   Paving and curbing. The entire lot, other than the area landscaped,
shall be paved with a permanent surface of concrete or asphalt with a raised
concrete curb of not less than six inches in height except for driveway
openings. Sidewalks, as required by Municipal regulations, shall be installed,
and all landscaping shall be approved by the Planning Commission. All driveway
approaches, including those within the public right-of-way, shall have a six-
inch-high concrete curb.
   (m)   Abandonment.
      (1)   If a motor vehicle service station or filling station is abandoned,
such station shall be presumed to be a nuisance affecting or endangering
surrounding property values and detrimental to the public health, safety,
convenience, comfort or property, or the general welfare of the community, and
shall be abated. As used in this section, “abandoned” means a failure to
operate such service station or filling station for at least six consecutive
months in any 18-month period.
      (2)   Whenever the Zoning Officer finds any motor vehicle service station
or filling station to be abandoned, he or she shall give notice in the same
manner as service of summons in civil cases, or by certified return receipt
mail addressed to the owner of record of the premises at his or her last known
address or to the address to which tax bills are sent, or by a combination of
such methods, to abate such abandoned condition within 60 days, either by: (a)
placing the station in operation in accordance with this Zoning Code and other
applicable laws and regulations of the Municipality; (b) by adapting and using
the building or structure for another permitted use in the district in which it
is located; or (c) by razing the station, removing the pumps and signs,
abandoning underground storage tanks in accordance with accepted safe practice
as prescribed by the National Fire Protection Association in Appendix C to
N.F.P.A. No. 30, under the supervision of the Municipal Fire Chief or other
designated official, and filling the depression to the grade level of the lot.
However, if the station is in operation at the time notice is given and remains
in operation for 90 consecutive days thereafter, this paragraph shall not
apply. If a national emergency is declared, which emergency would curtail the
operation of motor vehicles, or if Council determines that there exists a state
of general economic depression, this paragraph shall not apply.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1296.15 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   (a)   General requirements. No land or structure in any district shall be
used or occupied in any manner so as to create any dangerous, injurious,
noxious or otherwise objectionable fire, explosion or other hazard; noise or
vibration; smoke; dust; odor or other form of air pollution; heat; cold;
dampness; electrical interference; or other substance, condition or element
(referred to herein as “dangerous or objectionable elements”), in such a manner
or in such an amount as to adversely affect the adjoining premises or
surrounding area, provided that any use permitted or not prohibited by this
Zoning Code may be established and maintained if it conforms to this section at
the point of the determination of its existence.
   (b)   Nonconforming uses. Certain uses established before the effective date
of this Zoning Code and nonconforming as to performance standards, shall be
given a reasonable time in which to conform with this section, as determined by
the Planning Commission.
   (c)   Existing and new uses.
      (1)   Investigation by Zoning Officer. Whenever it is alleged that a use
of land or structure creates or is likely to create or otherwise produce
dangerous and objectionable elements, the Zoning Officer shall make a
preliminary investigation of the matter and shall forward its report, together
with all preliminary findings and evidence, to Planning Commission. If the
Commission concurs in the allegation that dangerous or objectionable elements
exist or are likely to be created, it shall request Council to authorize the
employment of a competent specialist or testing laboratory for the purpose of
determining the nature and extent of such dangerous or objectionable elements
and of practical means of remedying such condition.
      (2)   Determination of existence. The determination of the existence of
any dangerous and objectionable elements shall be made at the location of the
use creating the same and at any points where the existence of such elements
may be more apparent. However, the measurements necessary for enforcement of
performance standards shall be taken, in any “I” District, at the boundary of
such District, or at any point within an adjacent nonindustrial district.
      (3)   Enforcement. Upon receipt of the findings and recommendations of
such specialist or laboratory, the Commission may approve, partially approve or
disapprove the measure recommended therein and instruct the Zoning Officer to
proceed with the enforcement of measures in accordance with Chapter 1254,
Administration and Enforcement.
      (4)   Costs of investigation. The Municipality shall bear the costs of
various tests, consultant fees or other investigations which are required in
this section, provided that the owner of the property under investigation shall
reimburse the Municipality for all such expenses if the operation or use of
such property is found to be in violation of this section by the Commission, or
if contested, by a court of competent jurisdiction. Such reimbursement shall be
made within 30 days from the date of a final Planning Commission ruling or
court judgment.
      (5)   Continued compliance. Any use authorized under this section shall
comply continually herewith and shall remedy any additional dangerous or
objectionable elements which may develop in the course of its operation.
      (6)   The following minimum performance standards shall apply to all uses
in the Municipality:
         A.   Fire and explosion hazards. All activities including storage,
involving flammable or explosive materials, shall include the provision of
adequate safety devices against the hazard of fire and explosion. All standards
enforced by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration shall be adhered
to. Burning of waste materials in open fire is prohibited, as enforced by the
Ohio Environmental Protection Agency.
         B.   Air pollution. No emission of air pollutants shall be permitted
which violate the Clean Air Act Amendment, as amended from time to time, as
enforced by the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency.
         C.   Glare and heat. Any operation producing intense light or heat,
such as high temperature processes like combustion, welding or otherwise, shall
be performed within an enclosed building and shall not be visible beyond any
lot line bounding the property whereon the use is conducted.
         D.   Dust and erosion. Dust or silt shall be minimized through
landscaping, paving or other adequate means in a manner as to prevent their
transfer by wind or water to points off of the lot in objectionable quantities.
         E.   Liquid or solid wastes. No discharge at any point into any public
sewer, private sewage disposal system, or stream, or into the ground, of any
materials of such nature or temperature as can contaminate any water supply or
interfere with bacterial processes in sewage treatment shall be permitted. The
standards of the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency shall apply.
         F.   Vibrations and noise. No uses shall be located and no equipment
shall be installed in such a way as to produce intense, earth-shaking
vibrations which are discernable without instruments at or beyond the property
lines of the subject premises.
         G.   Odors. No use shall be operated so as to produce the continuous,
frequent, or repetitive emission of odors or odor causing substances in such
concentrations as to be readily perceptible at any point or beyond the lot line
of the property on which the use is located. The applicable standards of the
Ohio Environmental Protection Agency shall be adhered to.
         H.   Electrical interference. No use shall operate so as to produce an
electrical interference with adjacent properties.
         I.   Light and glare. All areas containing outdoor lighting, including
but not limited to floodlighting, security lighting, canopy or parking lot
lighting shall be regulated as follows:
            1.   Exterior lights shall be fully shielded to prevent the
visibility of the light bulb from adjacent properties. Furthermore, all
external lighting shall be so designed and situated so as not to cause glare on
adjacent properties.
            2.   Compliance shall be achieved by utilizing fixture shielding,
directional control designed into fixtures, fixture location, fixture height,
fixture aim or a combination of these or other factors to mitigate light glare
and trespass.
            3.   Light fixtures mounted on or under canopies or bays shall be
of full cut off design, unless indirect lighting is used whereby light is
directed upward and then reflected down from the ceiling of the structure.
            4.   Any lawful lighting fixtures located within the Municipality
at the effective date of this Zoning Code which does not conform to the
provisions of this section may continue, provided the lighting remains in
conformance with the provisions of this section.
            5.   Nothing in this section shall relieve the owner or beneficial
user of legal nonconforming lighting, or the owner of the property on which the
legal nonconforming lighting is located, from the provisions of this section
regarding safety, maintenance, and repair. Normal maintenance, including
replacing light bulbs, cleaning, or routine repair of legal nonconforming light
fixtures, shall not be deemed to be a condition which triggers a loss of lawful
status described below, unless such maintenance increases the nonconforming
aspects of the lighting.
            6.   Legal nonconforming status shall terminate under the following
conditions:
               a.   If a light fixture is no longer used for a period of six
months it shall be deemed abandoned and shall not thereafter be reestablished;
or
               b.   If a lighting fixture is structurally altered such that its
nonconforming aspects increase; or
               c.   If a lighting fixture is relocated, replaced, or moved in
any way; or the lighting fixture is damaged beyond repair.
   Upon the event of any of the aforementioned, the lighting fixture(s) shall
be immediately brought into compliance with this section, or the lighting
fixture(s) shall be removed.
            7.   Lighting found by the Municipality to create a public safety
or nuisance can be ordered removed or altered at any time upon a complaint
filed by the Zoning Officer. Such complaint will be heard before the Planning
Commission at a regularly scheduled meeting for review and a recommendation to
Council. Council shall make a final determination regarding the complaint at a
regularly scheduled meeting.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1296.16 LOTS OF RECORD.
   (a)   Permitted dwellings. In any district where dwellings are permitted, a
single-family detached dwelling may be erected on any lot of official record on
the effective date of this Zoning Code, irrespective of its area or width,
provided that the applicable yard and other open space requirements are
complied with, and provided, further, that:
      (1)   In areas presently platted for lots less than 50 feet wide, a
building site is taken to be a combination of lots to make at least a 50-foot
wide building site.
      (2)   Where an isolated lot less than 50 feet wide cannot be combined
with another lot to make a minimum 50-foot wide building site, all house plans
shall be approved by the Planning Commission.
      (3)   Plans for any house for a building site which does not meet zoning
requirements for that area shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for
approval. The Commission shall consider architecture, spacing relative to
adjacent improvements or potential adjacent improvements, pleasing presentation
on the lot, and parking provisions.
   (b)   Minimum yards. In no case shall the width of any side yard be less
than five feet, provided that on a corner lot, the width of the side yard
adjoining the side street lot line shall not be less than eight feet, or 20
percent of the frontage, whichever is greater. In no case shall the depth of
the rear yard be less than tem feet. Front, side or rear yard encroachments as
specified in §
1296.18 shall be prohibited in the case of substandard lots of record.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1296.17 EXCEPTIONS TO HEIGHT LIMITATIONS.
   (a)   The height limitations stipulated elsewhere in this Zoning Code shall
not apply to the following:
      (1)   Farm buildings, architectural features, etc. Barns, silos or other
farm buildings or structures on farms; church spires, belfries, cupolas and
domes; monuments; water towers; fire and hose towers; observation towers;
chimneys; smokestacks and flag poles on parapet walls extending not more than
four feet above the limiting height of the building, may exceed the height
limitations set forth in this Zoning Code, provided that none of the structures
set forth in this paragraph is higher than 75 feet from ground level, unless on
a building higher than 70 feet, in which case they cannot exceed 90 feet from
ground level.
      (2)   Radio and television transmitters or receiving towers, masts and
antennae. All such structures that exceed 300 feet in elevation above ground
level shall be located in an Industrial District, shall not be closer than 300
feet to any other district, shall be in as inconspicuous a location as possible
and shall be approved by the Planning Commission, provided that the tower, mast
or aerial is of a safe design and meets all the criteria set forth in this
paragraph. No other antennae shall exceed 35 feet above ground level in “R”
Districts, and 75 feet in all other districts, except television satellite dish
antennae, which shall not be higher than ten feet above ground level. All such
antennae shall be subject to the accessory use regulations applicable to the
district in which they occur.
      (3)   Places of public assembly. Places of public assembly in churches,
schools and other permitted public and semipublic buildings may exceed the
height limitations set forth in this Zoning Code, provided that such places of
assembly are located on the first floor of such buildings, and provided,
further, that for each three feet by which the height of such a building
exceeds the maximum height otherwise permitted in the district, its side and
rear yards shall be increased in width or depth by an additional one foot over
the side and rear yards required for the highest building otherwise permitted
in the district.
      (4)   Elevator penthouses, water tanks, etc. Elevator penthouses, water
tanks, monitors and scenery lofts may exceed the height limitations set forth
in this Zoning Code, provided that no linear dimension of any such structure
exceeds 50 percent of the corresponding street lot line frontage. Towers,
monuments, cooling towers or other structures may exceed the height limitations
set forth in this Zoning Code where a greater height is required.
   (b)   Minimum requirements. All structures above the heights otherwise
permitted in the district in which they are located shall not occupy more than
25 percent of the area of the lot and shall be not less than 50 feet in all
parts from every lot line.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1296.18 FRONTAGE AND YARD MODIFICATIONS.
   (a)   Buildings on through lots. Buildings on through lots shall conform to
the front yard requirements for each street. In the case of reversed frontage,
an accessory building shall not extend beyond the setback line of the rear
street.
   (b)   Frontage modifications. In the case of curvilinear streets and cul-de-
sacs, the Board of Zoning Appeals may authorize a reduction of the otherwise
specified frontage or lot width in “R” Districts along the front property line,
provided that:
      (1)   The lot width at the building line shall equal the frontage or lot
width required in the district where located;
      (2)   The front lot line shall not be less than 30 feet in any event; and
      (3)   Such reduction of frontage shall not result in a reduction of the
required lot area.
   (c)   Average depth of front yards. In any “R” District, where the average
depth of at least two existing front yards on lots within 100 feet of the lot
in question and within the same block front is less than the least front yard
depth prescribed elsewhere in this Zoning Code, the required depth of the front
yard on such lot shall be modified. In such cases, the depth of the front yard
shall not be less than the average depth of the existing front yards on the two
lots immediately adjoining, or, in the case of a corner lot, the depth of the
front yard on the lot immediately adjoining. However, the depth of a front yard
on any lot shall be at least ten feet.
   (d)   Computation of rear and side yards. In computing the depth of a rear
yard or the width of a side yard, where the rear or side yard abuts an alley,
one-half of the width of the alley may be included as a portion of the required
rear or side yard, as the case may be.
   (e)   Side yard modifications. Each side yard, where required, shall be
increased in width by one foot for each 15 feet or fraction thereof by which
the length of the side wall of a building exceeds 50 feet. This pertains only
to the adjacent sides.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1296.19 PROJECTIONS INTO YARDS.
   (a)   Architectural features. Certain architectural features may be
permitted to project into required yards or courts as follows:
      (1)   Certain architectural features may project into any required front
yard or into any required side yard adjoining a side street lot line.
      (2)   Cornices, canopies, eaves or other architectural features may
project a distance not exceeding two feet, six inches.
      (3)   Fire escapes may project a distance not exceeding four feet, six
inches.
      (4)   Bay windows, balconies, uncovered porches and chimneys may project
a distance not exceeding three feet, provided that such features do not occupy,
in the aggregate, more than one-third of the length of the building wall on
which they are located.
   (b)   Interior side yards. Subject to the limitations set forth in paragraph
(a)(1) hereof, the features described in subsection (a) hereof may project into
any required side yard adjoining an interior side lot line a distance not to
exceed one-fifth of the required least width of such side yard, but not more
than three feet in any case.
   (c)   Rear yards. Subject to the limitations in subsection (b) hereof, the
features named therein may project into any required rear yard the same
distances they are permitted to project into a front yard.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1296.20 NUMBER OF PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS ON A LOT.
   Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be located on
a lot as herein identified. There shall not be more than one principal building
on a lot. Where properties are used for institutional, commercial, industrial
or multiple family purposes, more than one principal building may be located on
the lot, subject to Site Plan Review, §
1254.12. In such instance, all buildings shall conform to all yard and open
space requirements at the perimeter of the lot for the district in which the
lot is located.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1296.21 REGULATIONS FOR DRIVE-IN, DRIVE-THROUGH, OR CARRY-OUT EATING AND
DRINKING ESTABLISHMENTS.
   In addition to the other relevant District regulations, drive-in, drive-
through or carry-out eating and drinking establishments shall be reviewed by
the Planning Commission during Site Plan Review, as required by §
1254.12, and shall be further regulated as follows:
   (a)   The location must be located on an arterial road; said road must be
adequate to carry the additional traffic generated by the establishment. The
Municipality may require the applicant to commission the preparation of a
traffic impact study by a qualified traffic engineer to determine the adequacy
of the roadway.
   (b)   A minimum of five stacking spaces per drive-thru lane shall be
required.
      (1)   Such waiting areas shall not obstruct off-street parking spaces or
internal circulation on site.
      (2)   Waiting spaces shall be situated in such a manner that vehicles
using the drive-through or drive-in facilities are traveling in a continuous
forward motion.
      (3)   A bypass lane shall be required to permit unimpeded circulation
around a drive-through lane. A bypass lane shall not include parking spaces.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/400a1417679729aa03ba6ecffb49741da640bf15/
IMAGES/0-0-0-107.jpg]
 
   (c)   Exterior lighting, including illuminated signage, shall be so shielded
or directed that the light intensity or brightness shall not extend beyond the
subject property line, to be determined by the submission of a photometric
lighting plan.
   (d)   A solid fence or wall four to six feet in height shall be constructed
where any off-street parking area is located, adjacent to a dwelling unit or
any residentially zoned parcel of land. An evergreen hedge maintained in good
condition may be substituted for the required fence or wall, provided however,
that the evergreen hedge provides an opaque screen to prevent the glare of
headlights onto adjoining properties and provided that the Planning Commission
approves such.
   (e)   Speakers used for taking orders shall not be able to be heard from
adjacent property.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1296.22 HOME OCCUPATIONS.
   Home occupations shall be subject to the following conditions in addition to
use regulations in various districts:
   (a)   No person, other than members of the family residing on the premises
shall be engaged in such home occupation.
   (b)   The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly
incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its
occupants, and not more than 25 percent of the floor area of the dwelling unit
shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation.
   (c)   The external appearance of the structure in which the use is conducted
shall not be altered. Furthermore, no external alteration, construction or
reconstruction of premises to accommodate the use shall be permitted.
   (d)   One non-illuminated sign of not more than one square feet in area,
attached flat against the building, shall be permitted.
   (e)   The home occupation may increase parking and traffic flow by no more
than one vehicle at a time.
   (f)   There shall be no outside storage of any kind related to the home
occupational use and only commodities made on the premises may be sold on the
premises. No display of the products shall be visible from the street.
   (g)   No expansion of existing off-street parking shall be permitted.
Furthermore, no additional parking burden, due to the home occupational use,
shall be created.
   (h)   No equipment, process, materials or chemicals shall be used which
create offensive noises, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, heat, glare, x-rays,
radiation or electrical disturbances detectable to normal senses off the
premises. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall
create visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers or
other audio appliances used off the premises, or cause fluctuation in line
voltage off the premises. No equipment, process, or storage associated with a
home occupation shall create any fire or explosion hazard, or involve the
storage or use of hazardous materials in any concentration greater than that
which would normally be found in a dwelling containing no home occupation.
   (i)   The neighborhood shall not be adversely affected by said home
occupation.
   (j)   A home occupation shall comply with all Federal, State, County and
Municipal regulations that are pertinent to its operation in addition to those
contained in this section.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1296.23 DUMPSTERS AND TRASH- HANDLING AREAS.
   The following requirements shall apply to all dumpsters, trash handling
areas, and related service entrances in non-single-family developments:
   (a)   Setbacks. Dumpsters, trash handling areas and related screening, shall
be located in compliance with the same minimum setbacks as a main building as
determined by the zone district in which such structure is constructed. The
dumpster(s) shall be located on a concrete pad constructed of sufficient
strength for the dumpsters and vehicles that will empty the dumpsters. A curb
of a minimum of six inches in height shall be located between the dumpsters and
fence to prevent damage to the fence.
   (b)   Location of screen. Any such dumpster or trash-handling area shall be
screened on three sides by a fence or wall from the view from public streets
and any abutting properties located in a residential, office, or commercial
district. If the access to the dumpsters is visible from the public right-of-
way, a gate shall be installed that fully screens the dumpsters.
   (c)   Height and construction of screen.
      (1)   Any fence or wall required under this section shall have a height
no greater than seven feet and no less than five feet.
      (2)   Any wall shall be constructed in a durable fashion of brick, stone,
or other masonry materials with no greater than 25% of the wall surface left
open.
      (3)   Any fence shall be constructed in a durable fashion of wood posts
and/or planks with minimum diameter or width of three inches and with no
greater than 25% of the fence surface left open between posts and/or planks.
      (4)   Fence, wall and gate materials shall be of a similar material or
painted similarly to the main building.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/400a1417679729aa03ba6ecffb49741da640bf15/
IMAGES/0-0-0-109.jpg]
 
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1296.24 FENCES, WALLS AND HEDGES.
   Fences, walls, and hedges are permitted in all Districts, subject to the
following conditions:
   (a)   Location.
      (1)   No fence, wall, or hedge utilized for enclosure purposes shall be
closer to any public street than 20 feet from the front property line.
      (2)   The property owner shall assume responsibility for determining the
legal, proper placement of the fence, wall or hedge upon their property.
      (3)   Ornamental fences, hedges and walls which are not intended to be an
enclosure and which do not exceed four feet in height and which have an
aggregate length in any one direction of 15 feet, shall be permitted in yards
adjacent to street rights-of-way, except as further restricted on corner lots
by §
1296.04, Visibility Across Corner Lots. Decorative fences, such as, but not
limited to, split rail, architectural post and picket and wrought metal, may be
located closer to the front lot line with the specific approval of the Planning
Commission.
   (b)   Height. 
      (1)   Residential districts.
         A.   On interior side or rear lot lines, fences, walls or hedges shall
not exceed six feet in height.
         B.   On interior side or rear lot lines, fences, walls, and hedges may
be up to eight feet in height with approval from the Planning Commission.
      (2)   Business and industrial districts.
         A.   On interior side or rear lot lines, fences and walls shall not
exceed ten feet in height.
   (c)   Materials.
      (1)   Fences shall not contain an electric charge.
      (2)   Barbed wire, razor wire, or any other type of anti-climbing wire
shall only be permitted, upon approval of the Planning Commission, in the
industrial district.
      (3)   Materials used for fences shall be of traditional fencing materials
(wrought iron, chain link, pressure treated lumber, cedar, redwood, PVC, etc.)
and shall be constructed of weather resistant materials or treated so that they
are weather resistant.
      (4)   Decorative or ornamental fences located in any front yard shall be
at most 50 percent opaque. Split rail, chain link, wrought iron and picket
fences are types of fences with opacity of at most, 50 percent.
      (5)   The finished or most decorative side of the fence shall face away
from the property erecting the fence.
   (d)   Maintenance. The fence, wall or hedge and the property surrounding
both sides of the fence, wall or hedge shall be properly maintained at all
times.
   (e)   Certificate required. Fences and walls shall require a Zoning
Certificate.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1296.25 SATELLITE DISHES.
   Satellite dishes, where permitted as an accessory use, are subject to the
following conditions:
   (a)   Zoning Certificate; when required. A Zoning Certificate is required
for the erection or installation of satellite dishes except as identified
below.
      (1)   Digital satellite dishes (DSS) and satellite dishes three feet or
less in diameter shall be permitted to be placed on any dwelling or building in
any district and shall not require a Zoning Certificate. However, the satellite
dish shall be placed in the most inconspicuous place that permits reception on
the property.
      (2)   Satellite dishes exceeding three feet in diameter shall require a
Zoning Certificate.
   (b)   Submission requirements for dishes requiring a Zoning Certificate. No
person, firm or corporation shall undertake the construction, erection or
installation of any non-exempt satellite dish (see subsection (a) above)
without a Zoning Certificate issued in accordance with the provisions of this
section. In addition to the requirements of this section, the application for
such Certificate shall include the following:
      (1)   A description of the type and size of satellite dish proposed;
      (2)   A plot plan of the lot, premises, or parcel of land showing the
location of the proposed satellite dish and all other buildings and structures
thereon;
      (3)   Plans depicting the specifications and elevations of the proposed
location, to include satisfactory screening and landscaping for ground- mounted
structures;
      (4)   Details of the method of assembly and construction of the proposed
satellite dish;
      (5)   A statement indicating that the satellite dish shall be placed in
the most inconspicuous place that permits reception on the property.
   (c)   Location.
      (1)   Ground-mounted satellite dishes shall be set back from the rear or
side property line a minimum equal to the measurement of the height of the
dish. However, in no case, shall the ground- mounted satellite dish be located
closer than three feet to the property line.
      (2)   Satellite dishes shall be prohibited in the front yard of the
property on which it is located unless no other placement is possible to
achieve a signal.
   (d)   Height and size.
      (1)   For exempt satellite dishes, the maximum diameter shall not exceed
three feet.
      (2)   For non-exempt satellite dishes, the maximum height of any ground-
mounted satellite dish shall not exceed ten feet above the finished grade and
its diameter shall not exceed 12 feet.
      (3)   The maximum height of any roof- mounted satellite dish shall not
exceed the roof height it is mounted on by more than four feet.
   (e)   Landscaping, materials and maintenance.
      (1)   The satellite dish apparatus, where mounted to the ground, shall be
screened with shrubbery and/or landscaped if visible from the public right-of-
way.
      (2)   The satellite dish shall be of one color and shall not contain any
advertising other than that of the manufacturer or system.
      (3)   The satellite dish apparatus shall be properly maintained to
prevent both unsightly and unsafe conditions.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1296.26 OUTDOOR BULK STORAGE AND DISPLAY IN COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL
DISTRICTS.
   The following regulations shall apply to outdoor bulk storage or displays in
commercial and industrial districts:
   (a)   The outdoor storage or display of bulk goods including retail and
seasonal items such as firewood, landscaping materials and mulch shall be
controlled by the following regulations:
      (1)   The outdoor storage or display of merchandise, inventory or
materials shall not interfere with required off-street parking or the safe and
unobstructed use of vehicular or pedestrian accessways or walkways or block any
natural drainage.
      (2)   The outdoor storage of merchandise, inventory or materials shall
not be located in any required yard area within the lot nor shall it be visible
from the public right-of-way.
      (3)   Outdoor storage areas shall be required to be fully screened with
an opaque fence or wall not to exceed six feet in height. Such fence shall be
constructed out of a material that is similar in nature to the principal
structure on the lot or painted in similar color of the principal structure on
the lot.
      (4)   All permitted outdoor storage or display shall be maintained in a
neat and orderly fashion.
      (5)   As part of an outdoor display, only a sample of materials, to
properly identify the merchandise for sale on the premises, shall be permitted.
The remaining materials, if not stored indoors, shall be considered outdoor
storage, subject to the regulations of this section.
      (6)   Outdoor storage or display locations shall be approved by the
Zoning Officer upon the application of the record owner of the property.
   (b)   Applications for outdoor storage or display areas shall be on a form
provided by the Zoning Officer and shall be submitted with a site plan
depicting the location of the said storage or display areas with supporting
documentation indicating the impact of the storage or display area on the
property as a whole. The Zoning Officer may request the specific review and
approval of the Planning Commission on any application. The review and approval
of the Board of Zoning Appeals may be requested by any applicant whose
application has been rejected or modified by the Zoning Officer or Planning
Commission, which request must be made in writing and must be made within 30
days of such rejection or modification.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1296.27 OUTDOOR STORAGE IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS.
   The outdoor storage of materials in a residential district shall not be
permitted in the front yard for more than 48 hours. Outdoor storage shall be
located behind the front building line of the dwelling and shall be stored in
an orderly manner (e.g. stacked) and shall remain free of stagnant water and
vermin. The Municipality may require the screening of items stored outdoors.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1296.28 JUNK STORAGE.
   The accumulation and/or storage of junk vehicles, disabled or inoperative
machinery and equipment, dismantled parts of vehicles, machinery or equipment,
discarded appliances and furnishings, other junk and debris, shall be
prohibited except when stored within a completely enclosed building or
structure.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1296.29 PORTABLE STORAGE UNITS.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of these regulations is to regulate the use and
location of portable storage units. These units are typically known by the
names: PODS (Portable On Demand Storage Units), SAM (Store and Move), SmartBox
USA, and UNITS. These types of units are typically used for moving, temporary
storage during construction and other purposes as may be listed below.
   (b)   Definition. For the purposes of this section, the term “portable
storage unit” shall mean any enclosed unit of durable construction or material,
typically eight feet in width by eight feet in height by 16 feet long, designed
for temporary storage, which are transported by truck and left on site or are
filled and removed and stored at a central location.
   (c)   General regulations. Portable storage units may be permitted as a
temporary use in any zoning district as follows:
      (1)   Location and timeframe.
         A.   Temporary use for new construction. Portable storage units are to
be removed within three days after use of the unit is no longer necessary or
when construction is complete, whichever is sooner.
         B.   Moving and relocating in residential districts.
            1.   If used by an occupant of a property for moving or relocating,
a portable storage unit shall only be located on a paved surface on the
property for a period of not more than seven days or for a period of 14 total
days in any 365-day period.
            2.   Portable storage units shall not be located any closer to an
adjacent property than the required minimum side or rear yard setback for
accessory uses in the district the unit is located.
         C.   Other districts.
            1.   Portable storage units shall not be permitted in any non-
residential districts for temporary or permanent on site storage unless
expressly permitted by the Planning Commission.
            2.   When permitted, a portable storage unit shall be located on a
paved surface on the property for a period of not more than seven days or for a
period of 14 total days in any 365-day period.
            3.   Portable storage units shall not be located any closer to an
adjacent parcel than the required minimum side or rear yard setback for
accessory uses in the district that the unit is located.
      (2)   Prohibitions.
         A.   No portable storage unit shall be used for human or animal
occupation.
         B.   Portable storage units larger than those identified in §
1296.29(b), Definition, shall be prohibited in the Municipality unless
expressly permitted by the Planning Commission.
         C.   Only one portable storage unit shall be permitted on the property
at any time.
         D.   No portable storage unit shall be located in a public right-of-
way.
         E.   No electrical or plumbing service shall be connected to or
provide in the portable storage unit.
      (3)   Public nuisance. The placement of any portable storage unit shall
be located in such a manner on any property as not to create a public nuisance
such as creating a motor vehicle visibility issue.
      (4)   Permit required. Any portable storage unit shall require a
Temporary Use permit to be issued by the Zoning Officer. The permit fee shall
be as established by the Municipal Council and shall be good for the period
specified on the permit.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1296.30 MEDICAL MARIJUANA CULTIVATION FACILITIES, PROCESSING FACILITIES, AND
DISPENSARIES.
   Medical marijuana cultivation facilities and processing facilities shall be
conditional uses in the districts so designated in this Zoning Code. Medical
marijuana dispensaries are prohibited in all zoning districts in the Village.
(Ord. 13-2017, passed 6-27-2017)
§ 1296.31 PROHIBITION AGAINST SHORT TERM RENTALS.
   Short term rentals are prohibited in all zoning districts. Excepting hotels,
motels, and bed and breakfast establishments, no dwelling unit, structure or
other lodging unit shall be rented, leased, or otherwise let to any individual,
corporation or other entity for compensation for lodging, sleeping or other
overnight accommodation for less than 30 consecutive days in any zoning
district.
(Ord. 31-2024, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 1296.32 REGULATIONS FOR THE KEEPING OF CHICKENS IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS.
   The keeping of chickens shall be permitted on single-family residential
properties in the Village, subject to the following:
   (a)   Only female chickens (hens) are permitted. roosters are prohibited.
   (b)   For properties less than 1 acre, no more than 6 chickens are permitted
per property. For properties 1 acre and larger, no more than 12 chickens are
permitted per property.
   (c)   All chicken coops must be constructed no closer than 20 feet to the
side and rear property lines and must be screened from view from adjacent
properties and the right-of- way with a combination of fencing and landscaping.
   (d)   Chicken coops shall meet the accessary use standards for residential
district, except unless a more stringent standard is provided in this section.
No chicken coop shall exceed 100 square feet or 10 feet in height. The
materials used in making a coop shall be the accessory use standards. The use
of scrap, waste board, sheet metal or similar material is prohibited. Coops
shall be well-maintained, and secure from rodents, wild birds, and predators.
   (e)   Chickens shall be confined to a chicken coop, chicken run, or
otherwise contained on the owner's property at all times.
   (f)   No person shall keep or raise chickens in such a manner as to create
nuisance due to excessive noise, improper care, maintenance, or sanitation
conditions.
(Ord. 31-2024, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 1296.33 REGULATIONS FOR MOBILE FOOD VENDORS.
   Mobile food vendors shall be permitted to operate as a conditional permitted
use as provided in this section only in the following zoning districts: "I-P"
Industrial Park District and "GMC" Glendale-Milford Road Corridor Overlay
District.
   (a)   Each operator of a mobile food vending operation shall obtain
conditional use approval, renewal on an annual basis. The application for
conditional use approval shall include the following information:
      (1)   Narrative describing the operation and hours of operation.
      (2)   A copy of the required licenses from the State of Ohio and Hamilton
County for mobile food truck operations.
      (3)   Site plan, including total area of the property on which the mobile
food vending operation is proposed to be placed, the specific location of the
mobile food vending unit, the location of all existing buildings or
improvements, location of all existing curb cuts, driving lanes, off-street
parking and loading areas, including the number of spaces, and angles of
stalls.
      (4)   If the applicant is not the owner of the property in which the
mobile food vending operation is to be conducted, written permission from the
owner to operate the mobile food vending operation on the property.
   (b)   Site restrictions. No mobile food vending operation shall be permitted
in the public right-of-way or in driveway aisles, no parking zones, loading
areas, or parking lanes, nor may mobile food vending operations impede the on-
site circulation of motor vehicles. The placement of a mobile food vending
operation may not reduce the number of necessary parking spots on a site below
the minimum requirements of the Zoning Code.
   (c)   All food trucks, food trailers, pedi- food carts, or pushcarts used
for a mobile food vending operation must be in good condition, free from
damage, rust, peeling paint, etc.
   (d)   Hours of operation. Mobile food vending operations are permissible
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. on weekdays and weekends.
   (e)   Music or sound. The use of any sound amplification device is
prohibited.
   (f)   Signs. An A-frame menu board is permitted to be placed by the mobile
food vending operations within the vending area during hours of operation.
   (g)   Electric service connections. Electric service connection to an on-
site approved outlet is permitted provided that no wiring or cables are run
beyond the vending area or pose any danger to the patrons or public.
   (h)   Site restrictions. Square footage for one mobile food vendor per site
shall be a minimum of 5,000 square feet of net lot area.
(Ord. 31-2024, passed 12-10-2024)
CHAPTER 1297: CELLULAR OR WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS
1297.01   Purpose.
1297.02   Definitions.
1297.03   Application procedure.
1297.04   Use regulations.
1297.05   Standards for approval for cellular or wireless communications
antenna and towers.
1297.06   Maintenance.
1297.07   Removal.
1297.08   Miscellaneous.
§ 1297.01 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of these regulations as set out herein in this
Chapter 1297 and known as “Cellular or Wireless Communications Systems” to:
   (a)   Accommodate the need for cellular or wireless communications towers
and facilities for the provision of personal wireless services while regulating
their location and number in the Municipality;
   (b)   Minimize adverse visual effects of communications towers and support
structures through proper siting, design and screening;
   (c)   Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from communications
towers and support structure failure; and
   (d)   Encourage the joint use of any new and existing communications towers
and support structure to reduce the number of such structures needed in the
future.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1297.02 DEFINITIONS.
   The following definitions shall apply to this section:
   (a)   “Personal wireless services” means commercial mobile services,
unlicensed wireless services and common carrier wireless exchange access
services, including cellular services.
   (b)   “Cellular communication services” means personal communication
accessed by means of cellular equipment and services.
   (c)   “Cellular or wireless communications antenna” shall mean any structure
or device used to receive or transmit electromagnetic waves between cellular
phones, pagers, commercial mobile services, wireless services and ground wired
communication systems such as panels, microwave dishes, and omni- directional
antennas such as ships and other equipment utilized to serve personal
communication services. Not included in this definition: AM, FM, Ham Radio and
Television Broadcasting antenna.
   (d)   “Cellular or wireless communications site” shall mean a tract, lot or
parcel of land that contains the cellular or wireless communications tower,
antenna, support structure(s), parking and any other uses associated with a and
ancillary to cellular or wireless communications transmission.
   (e)   “Cellular of wireless communications support structure” shall mean any
building or structure, including equipment shelter, guy wire anchors, accessory
to but not necessary for the proper functioning or the cellular or wireless
communications antenna or tower.
   (f)   “Cellular or wireless communication, height of” shall mean the height
from the base of the structure, at grade, to its top; including any antenna
located thereon. Grade shall be determined as the elevation of the natural or
existing topography to the ground level prior to construction of the tower.
   (g)   “Micro antenna” shall mean any cellular or wireless communication
antennas which consist solely of the antenna and which do not have any
supporting structures other than brackets, including micro cells. Micro
antennas shall be equal to or less than five feet in height and with an area of
not more than 580 square inches.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1297.03 APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   Any company or individual wishing to place a cellular or wireless
communications antenna or tower within the Municipality, must attend an
application conference with the Building Commissioner or his assignees. At this
conference, the applicant must submit:
   (a)   A preliminary site plan depicting the proposed site to scale; and
   (b)   A rendering of the proposed tower in relation to the existing site.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1297.04 USE REGULATIONS.
   The following use regulations shall apply to cellular or wireless
communication antennas and towers.
   (a)   A cellular or wireless communication site may be permitted in the
Industrial Park Zoning District subject to the requirements set forth herein.
   (b)   Cellular or wireless communications sites in the Industrial Park
Zoning District shall not be located any closer to any residential zoning
district than as follows:
      (1)   Cellular or wireless communication towers less than 100 feet in
height shall be located no closer than 100 feet to any residential zoning
district.
      (2)   For any cellular or wireless communication tower exceeding 100 feet
in height, the tower may not be located closer to any residential zoning
district than a distance equal to 100 feet plus one foot for each foot of
height that the tower exceeds 100 feet.
   (c)   A cellular or wireless communications antenna may be mounted to an
existing structure, such as a communications tower (whether said tower is for
cellular or wireless purposes or not), smoke stack, water tower or other tall
structures in the Industrial Park Zoning District or in another zoning district
if a permit has been granted. Communication antenna may only be placed on the
top of buildings that are no less than 35 feet in height.
   (d)   Micro antennas not exceeding five feet in height may be attached to
any existing building located in an area described in the preceding section and
shall not be subject to the setback requirements or other cellular or wireless
communication towers provided it is placed on the roof of an existing building.
   (e)   All other uses accessory to the cellular or wireless communications
antenna and towers including, but not limited to business offices, maintenance
depots, and materials and vehicle storage, are prohibited from the site unless
otherwise permitted in the zoning district in which the cellular or wireless
communications antenna and/or tower is located.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1297.05 STANDARDS FOR APPROVAL FOR CELLULAR OR WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS
ANTENNA AND TOWERS.
   The following standards shall apply to all cellular of wireless
communications antennas and towers. The Municipality may deny application to
construct a new cellular or wireless communications tower if the applicant has
not made a good faith effort to mount the antenna on existing structures.
   (a)   Tower placement. The cellular or wireless communications company shall
demonstrate, using the latest technological facts, why the antenna or tower
must be placed in Woodlawn in order to serve its necessary function in the
company's grid system. Part of this demonstration shall include a drawing
showing the boundaries of the area around the proposed location which would
probably also permit the antenna to function properly in the company's grid
system. Said location shall be within the Industrial Park Zoning District.
   (c)   Co-location. If the communications company proposes to build a
cellular or wireless communications tower (as opposed to mounting the antenna
on an existing structure), it is required to demonstrate that is has contacted
the owners of nearby tall structures within the allowable zone, asked for
permission to install the cellular communications on those structures, and was
denied for either non- economic reasons or that a clearly unreasonable economic
demand was made by the owner, based on prevailing market values. “Tall
structures” shall include, but not be limited to: smoke stacks, water towers,
buildings over 35 feet in height, antenna support structures or other cellular
or wireless communication towers.
   (c)   Antenna/tower height. The applicant shall demonstrate that the
antenna/tower is no higher than necessary to function satisfactorily and to
accommodate the co-location requirements as set out in subsection (b). No
antenna that is taller than the necessary height shall be approved. The maximum
height of the antennae/tower permitted shall be 185 feet.
   (d)   Setbacks from the base of tower. If a new cellular or wireless
communications tower is to be constructed in the Industrial Park Zoning
District, the minimum distance between the base of the tower or any guy wire
anchors and any property line which abuts a zoning district other than a
residential district shall be no closer than the greater of the following:
      (1)   Forty percent of the tower height;
      (2)   The minimum setback in the underlying zoning district; or
      (3)   Fifty feet.
   (e)   Cellular or wireless communications tower safety. All cellular or
wireless communications towers shall be fitted with anti-climbing devices as
approved by the manufactures. Furthermore, the applicant shall demonstrate that
the proposed cellular or wireless communications tower and its antenna are safe
and that the surrounding properties will not be negatively affected by tower
failure, falling ice or other debris, electromagnetic fields or radio frequency
interference. However, if a specific safety issue in question is determined to
be regulated by either FCC Regulations or applicable Building Code Regulations;
and, the operation or construction is in compliance with such regulations, then
this requirement for safety shall be deemed to have been met.
   Subsequent to the installation of a cellular or wireless communications
tower site, if it is determined by the Municipal Council, upon presentation of
proper and sufficient documentation, and after a public hearing, that the
operation of a cellular or wireless communications tower is inherently
dangerous or is a demonstrable health hazard, the cellular or wireless
communication tower shall be declared to be a nuisance and all operation shall
cease. The tower or antenna shall also be removed as provided under §
1297.07. However, no order of removal shall be made if it is inconsistent with
existing FCC Regulations.
   (f)   Fencing. A fence shall be required around the cellular or wireless
communications tower and its support structure(s), unless the antenna is
mounted on an existing structure. The fence shall be a minimum of eight feet in
height and shall be erected to prevent access to non-authorized personnel.
   (g)   Landscaping. Landscaping with proper drainage in compliance with a
plan approved by the Building Commission shall be provided to screen as much of
the support structure and equipment shelter ground level features as is
possible. In addition, existing vegetation on or around the site shall be
preserved to the greatest extent possible. No exposed dirt shall be permitted.
   (h)   Limiting the number of cellular or wireless communications towers. In
order to reduce the number of antenna support structures needed in the
Municipality in the future, the owner of an existing cellular or wireless
communications tower shall not unreasonably deny a request to accommodate other
uses, including other cellular or wireless communications companies, and the
antenna of local police, fire, and ambulance departments. The owner of the
existing cellular or wireless communications tower may request reasonable
compensation for the use of the tower.
   For the purposes of encouraging co-location of cellular or wireless antenna
and other uses, cellular or wireless communication towers shall be designed,
engineered, and constructed as follows: unless waived for good cause to
minimize impact on adjoining property by Building Commissioner. There shall be
no towers 30 feet or more unless there are two or more users.
      (1)   Towers less than 75 feet tall shall be designed, engineered and
constructed to support antennas installed by two or more cellular or wireless
communication service users; and
      (2)   Towers more than 75 feet in height but less than 150 feet shall be
designed, engineered and constructed to support antennas installed by three or
more cellular or wireless communication service users; and
      (3)   Towers 150 feet in height or taller shall be designed, engineered
and constructed to support antennas installed by four or more cellular or
wireless communication service users.
   As used in paragraphs (1), (2) and (3) above, the term “users” shall include
the antennas of police, fire, and ambulance departments. In addition, an
applicant must demonstrate that the area acquired by lease or otherwise
acquired for the use and construction of the cellular tower and accessory
structures is sufficient in size to accommodate any additional structures that
may be required if additional users are added to the tower.
   (i)   Licensing. The communications company must demonstrate to the
Municipality that it is licensed by the Federal Communications Commission
(FCC). The owner of the tower must also annually provide to the Municipality
prior to January 31 of each year, a list of all users of the tower and each
user shall provide the Municipality with a copy of each users license with the
FCC. No permits will be granted to any applicant unless proof of current FCC
license for the proposed use of the tower is provided.
   (j)   Required parking. If the cellular or wireless communications site is
fully automated, adequate parking shall be required for maintenance workers. If
the site is not fully automated, the number of required parking spaces shall be
equal the number of employees working on the largest shift. All parking
specifications and requirements shall be consistent with the applicable parking
requirements as established in the Zoning Code.
   (k)   Appearance. Cellular or wireless communications towers under 185 feet
in height shall be painted silver or have a galvanized finish retained in order
to reduce visual impact. Cellular or wireless communications towers shall meet
all Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) regulations. No cellular or wireless
communications towers may be artificially lighted except when required by the
FAA. Furthermore, no cellular or wireless communication tower or antenna and
accessory buildings and structures shall contain any signage. All utility lines
serving the towers shall be underground.
   (l)   Site plan required. A full site plan shall be required for all
proposed cellular or wireless communications sites, except antenna to be placed
on existing structures, at a reasonable scale, but not smaller than 1 inch to
50 feet (1"=50'), indicating, as a minimum, the following:
      (1)   The total area of the site.
      (2)   The existing zoning of the property in question and of all adjacent
properties.
      (3)   All public and private right-of-way and easement lines located on
or adjacent to the property which is proposed to be continued, created,
relocated or abandoned.
      (4)   Existing topography with a maximum of two-foot contours intervals.
      (5)   The proposed finished grade of the development shown by contours
not exceeding two- foot intervals.
      (6)   The locations of all existing buildings and structures and the
proposed location of the cellular or wireless communications tower and all
cellular or wireless communications support structures including dimensions,
height, and where applicable, the gross floor area of the buildings.
      (7)   The locations and dimensions of all curb cuts, driving lanes, off-
street parking and loading areas including the number of spaces, grades,
surfacing materials, drainage plans and illumination of the facility.
      (8)   All existing and proposed sidewalks and open areas on the site.
      (9)   The location of all proposed fences, screening and walls.
         (10)   The location of all existing and proposed streets.
         (11)   All existing and proposed utilities including types and grades.
         (12)   The schedule of any phasing of the project.
         (13)   Documentation which shows all buildings and structures on
adjacent lots and any additional lot which has a lot line within 100 feet of
the lot on which the cellular tower is proposed to be located. The approximate
elevation of the highest point of each building or structure shall be noted.
Applicant may identify any additional features in the area (such as existing
screening, fences and topography) which may be helpful in considering the
impact of the proposed tower on nearby property.
         (14)   Any other information as may be required to determine the
conformance with this Zoning Code. For cellular or wireless communications
antenna to be placed on an existing structure, the applicant shall submit such
information as required by the Zoning Inspector to ensure compliance with the
applicable provisions of this section.
         (15)   Applicant shall maintain and demonstrate adequate liability
insurance on the structure and shall hold harmless the Municipality of Woodlawn
from any and all liability that may arise for the use of the structure.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1297.06 MAINTENANCE.
   Any owner of property used as a cellular or wireless communications site
shall maintain such property and all structures in good condition and free from
trash, outdoor storage, weeds and other debris. Any owner of a cellular or
wireless communications tower shall be required to notify the Building
Commissioner of its intent in writing within 30 days of its cessation of
business, its discontinuance of service, or transfer of ownership.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1297.07 REMOVAL.
   Any owner of property used as a cellular or wireless communications site
shall provide the Municipality of Woodlawn with a performance bond for the
removal of a cellular or wireless communications tower that has discontinued
use.
   Any cellular or wireless communications tower that has discontinued its
service for a period of 12 continuous months or more is hereby determined to be
a nuisance. A tower declared to be a nuisance must be removed, along with all
accessory structures related thereto. “Discontinued” shall mean that the
structure has not been properly maintained, has been abandoned, become
obsolete, is unused or has ceased the daily activities or operations which had
occurred.
   Whenever, upon inspection it shall appear that a cellular or wireless
communications tower has been abandoned or its use discontinued, the Municipal
Manager or a designated representative shall notify, either by personal
delivery or by certified mail, the owner of the property on which the tower is
located that the tower must be taken down and removed within 90 days. The
Building Commissioner or a designated representative, in addition to any other
citations, notices, penalties or remedies provided by law or ordinance, is
authorized to proceed in a manner consistent with and pursuant to Ohio R.C.
715.26 and 715.261 to maintain the public health, safety and welfare and to
recover costs as appropriate.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1297.08 MISCELLANEOUS.
   (a)   No cellular or wireless communications tower shall be permitted on any
lot on which any nonconforming building or structure is located nor on which
any nonconforming use or activity is occurring without first obtaining a
variance from the Zoning Board of Appeals.
   (b)   No cellular or wireless communications tower shall be constructed,
replaced, or altered without first obtaining the applicable building permit.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
CHAPTER 1298: NONCONFORMITIES
1298.01   Existing nonconforming uses, lots and structures.
1298.02   Discontinuance of nonconforming buildings, structures and uses.
1298.03   Enlargement or extension and alteration of nonconforming buildings,
structures and uses.
1298.04   Nonconforming uses and related equipment.
1298.05   Restoration of damaged or destroyed buildings and structures.
1298.06   Continuation of violations not sanctioned.
§ 1298.01 EXISTING NONCONFORMING USES, LOTS AND STRUCTURES.
   (a)   The lawful use of a dwelling, building or structure, a parcel or lot,
or the use of any land or premises as lawfully existing on the effective date
of this Zoning Code may be continued, although such dwelling, building,
structure, parcel or lot, or use does not conform to this Zoning Code.
   (b)   If no structural alterations are made to an existing nonconforming
structure or building, a nonconforming use of a building or premises may be
changed to another nonconforming use of a more restricted classification,
subject to approval by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
   (c)   Whenever a nonconforming use has been changed to a more restricted use
or to a conforming use, such use shall not thereafter be changed to a less
restrictive use, including the former use, or another nonconforming use.
   (d)   Whenever the use of a building or premises becomes nonconforming
through a change in this Zoning Code or district boundaries, such use may be
continued unless it is specifically restricted by another section of this
Zoning Code enacted for the health, safety and welfare of the Municipality. If
no structural alterations are made, it may be changed to another nonconforming
use of a more restricted classification, subject to approval by the Board of
Zoning Appeals.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1298.02 DISCONTINUANCE OF NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES.
   If a nonconforming use of a building, structure or use of a premises is
discontinued for one year, the use of such building or premises shall
thereafter conform to a use permitted in the district in which it is located.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1298.03 ENLARGEMENT OR EXTENSION AND ALTERATION OF NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS,
STRUCTURES AND USES.
   No existing building, structure or premises devoted to a use not permitted
by this Zoning Code in the district in which such building or premises is
located, shall be enlarged or extended, unless such use is changed to a use
permitted in the district in which such building or premises is located.
   The moving, reconstruction, extension, enlargement, or alteration of
nonconforming buildings or structures shall be as follows:
   (a)   Alterations. Alterations within the building footprint are permitted
if the alteration conforms to off-street parking, loading, landscaping and
maneuvering standards of this Zoning Code.
   For the purposes of this chapter, “alteration” shall mean any change or
rearrangement in the supporting members of an existing building, such as
bearing walls, columns, beams, girders, or interior partitions, as well as any
change in doors, windows, means of ingress and egress, or any enlargement to or
reduction of a building or structure, whether horizontally or vertically, or
the moving of a building or structure from one location to another.
    (b)   Enlargement. The enlargement of nonconforming structures is
permissible in the front, side and rear yards if:
      (1)   Such enlargement does not encroach into a required yard setback and
if such enlargement does not further encroach closer to a lot line than the
existing nonconforming structure.
      (2)   The enlargement of the structure shall not exceed the height of the
existing structure and shall conform to off-street parking, loading,
landscaping and maneuvering standards of this Zoning Code.
      (3)   No enlargement shall cause additional nonconformities with respect
to other lot development standards in the district the lot is located.
      (4)   The total of all enlargements of a nonconforming structure or
building shall not exceed 100 percent of the gross floor area of the
nonconforming structure prior to enlargement.
      (5)   If the enlargement of a nonconforming structure is proposed to
encroach into a required yard, a variance is required by the Board of Zoning
Appeals.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/400a1417679729aa03ba6ecffb49741da640bf15/
IMAGES/0-0-0-111.jpg]
 
      (6)   Any expansion of a nonconforming use shall be within a fully
enclosed building or structure.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1298.04 NONCONFORMING USES AND RELATED EQUIPMENT.
   (a)   Any equipment, motor vehicle or machinery that is considered by the
Municipality to be part of the nonconforming use, building or structure may not
be increased in number, size or type unless a variance is requested and
approved through the Board of Zoning Appeals.
   (b)   Replacement equipment, in equal number, size and type, shall be
permitted if the equipment, motor vehicle or machinery being replaced has been
moved permanently off site upon delivery of the replacement equipment.
Replacement shall not require a variance process.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1298.05 RESTORATION OF DAMAGED OR DESTROYED BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.
   A nonconforming building that is partially destroyed or damaged (exclusive
of the foundation), to an extent of less than 33 percent of its reproduction
value at the time of the damage, by fire, flood, earthquake, explosion, war,
riot, act of God or act of the public enemy, may be restored, and the use of
the building may be resumed in accordance with this chapter, provided that the
restoration and resumption shall take place within one year of the time of such
damage or destruction.
   In the event that any nonconforming building or structure is voluntarily
destroyed or dismantled, to the extent of more than 33 percent of the fair
market value of such structure, exclusive of foundation, it shall not be
rebuilt, restored, or reoccupied for any use unless it conforms to all
regulations of this Zoning Code.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1298.06 CONTINUATION OF VIOLATIONS NOT SANCTIONED.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted as authorization for or
approval of the continuance of the use of a building, structure or use of
premises in violation of zoning regulations in effect on the effective date of
this Zoning Code.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
CHAPTER 1299: VIOLATIONS, REMEDIES AND FEES
1299.01   Violation.
1299.02   Notice of violation.
1299.03   Remedies.
1299.04   Fees.
§ 1299.01 VIOLATION.
   Any building that is or is proposed to be located, erected, constructed,
reconstructed, enlarged, changed, maintained or used, or any land that is or is
proposed to be used in violation of this Code or any amendment or supplement
thereto, the Municipal Council, the Municipal Solicitor, Zoning Officer, or any
adjacent or neighboring property owner who would be specifically damaged by
such violation may, initiate appropriate action to prevent such activity from
proceeding in violation to this Code.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1299.02 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   The notice of any violation of the Zoning Code shall be as follows:
   (a)   Whenever the Zoning Officer determines that there is a violation of
any provision of this Zoning Code, a notice of such violation shall be issued.
Such notice shall:
      (1)   Be in writing;
      (2)   Identify the violation;
      (3)   Include a statement of the reason or reasons why the violation
order is being issued and refer to the section of this Zoning Code being
violated;
      (4)   State the time by which the violation shall be corrected; and
      (5)   Contain a statement of right of appeal or to request variance, if
applicable.
   (b)   Service of notice of the violation shall be as follows:
      (1)   By personal delivery to the person or persons responsible, or by
leaving the notice at the usual place of residence of the owner with a person
of 16 years or older; or
      (2)   By Certified Mail, and first class mail simultaneously, addressed
to the person or persons responsible at a last known address. Service shall be
deemed complete when the fact of the mailing is entered of record, provided
that the First Class mail envelope is not returned by the Postal Authorities
with an endorsement showing failure of delivery; or
      (3)   By posting a copy of the notice form in a conspicuous place on the
premises found in violation.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1299.03 REMEDIES.
   The following remedies shall apply to violations of the Zoning Code:
   (a)   Prohibitions.
      (1)   No person shall fail or refuse to comply with an order issued by
the Zoning Inspector. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day
upon which a violation occurs or continues from the date the order was issued.
      (2)   No person shall construct, modify, alter, use or occupy any
structure or property in violation of the Zoning Code. A separate offense shall
be deemed committed each day upon which a violation occurs or continues.
   (b)   Penalties.
      (1)   Whosoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor of
the first degree for each offense.
      (2)   If within one year of the date of the offense the offender has been
convicted, of or pleads guilty, to another violation of this section, the
offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   Civil remedies. The Municipality, the Municipal Council on behalf of
the Municipality or any officer designated by the Municipal Council on behalf
of the Municipality may, in addition to the criminal remedies provided in this
Zoning Code, file suit for injunction against any violation of this Zoning
Code, or if the violation has caused damages to the Municipality for a judgment
for damages and any person, property owner or occupant of property who can show
that the person, property owner or occupant of property has suffered harm or
whose property has suffered harm as a result of violations of this Zoning Code
may file suit for injunction or damages to the fullest extent provided by the
law.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 1299.04 FEES.
   The fees for all applicant costs incurred in this chapter shall be
established by Municipal Council. Furthermore, no plan shall be accepted for
filing and processing, as provided in this chapter, unless and until a filing
fee is paid to the Municipality. A schedule of fees, as adopted by the
Municipal Council, shall be posted in the administrative offices of the
Village.
   The applicant shall be responsible for the expenses incurred by the
Municipality in reviewing the plan or any modifications to the plan. If fees
are in addition to filing fees, such expenses may include items such as the
cost of professional services including expenses and legal fees in connection
with reviewing the plan, prepared reports, the publication and mailing of
public notice in connection therewith, and any other reasonable expenses
directly attributable thereon.
   At the time of submitting a site plan to the Planning Commission for
consideration, the applicant shall make a deposit in the office of the
Municipal Clerk in the amount equal to the estimated cost of the Municipality’s
expenses.
(Ord. 17-2013, passed 9-24-2013)
PART FOURTEEN: BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE
TITLE TWO: Building Standards
         
Chap. 1420.   Hamilton County, Ohio Building Code.
         
Chap. 1422.   Ohio Basic Building Code.
         
Chap. 1424.   National Electrical Code.
         
Chap. 1426.   Residential Code of Ohio.
TITLE FOUR - Building Administration
         
Chap. 1440.   Building Department.
         
Chap. 1442.   Board of Building Appeals.
         
Chap. 1444.   Building Permits and Fees.
TITLE SIX - Miscellaneous Building Regulations
         
Chap. 1460.   Excavations.
         
Chap. 1462.   Fences.
         
Chap. 1464.   Fire Extinguishers. (Repealed)
         
Chap. 1466.   Flood Damage Prevention.
         
Chap. 1468.   Unsafe Buildings.
         
Chap. 1470.   Vacant Properties.
         
Chap. 1472.   Certificate of Rental License.
TITLE EIGHT - Housing
         
Chap. 1480.   International Property Maintenance Code.
TITLE TWO: BUILDING CODES
CHAPTER 1420: HAMILTON COUNTY, OHIO BUILDING CODE
1420.01   July, 1993, edition adopted.
1420.02   Purpose.
1420.03   File and distribution copies.
1420.04   Conflict of laws.
1420.05   Building Official.
1420.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Adoption of technical codes by reference - see Ohio R.C. 731.231
   Ohio Basic Building Code - see B. & H . Ch.
1422
   Administration and enforcement by Building Commissioner/Inspector - see B. &
H.
1440.02
   Building permits - see B. & H.
Ch. 1444
   Construction in flood hazard areas - see B. & H.
Ch. 1466
   Unsafe buildings - see B. & H.
Ch. 1468
§ 1420.01 JULY, 1993, EDITION ADOPTED.
   Pursuant to Ohio R.C. 731.231, there is hereby adopted by and for the
Village the Hamilton County, Ohio Building Code, being particularly the July,
1993, edition thereof, save and except such portions thereof as may be
hereinafter amended or deleted.
§ 1420.02 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the Hamilton County, Ohio Building Code, as adopted in §
1420.01, is to provide construction and material specifications for
nonindustrialized and detached one, two and three- family dwellings.
§ 1420.03 FILE AND DISTRIBUTION COPIES.
   At least one copy of the Hamilton County, Ohio Building Code, as adopted in
§
1420.01, shall be on file with the Clerk of Council for inspection by the
public. At least one copy shall also be on file in the County Law Library. In
addition, the Clerk of Council shall keep copies available for distribution to
the public, at cost.
§ 1420.04 CONFLICT OF LAWS.
   In the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of the Hamilton
County, Ohio Building Code, as adopted in §
1420.01, and a provision of any other standard technical code adopted by the
Village, the stricter standard shall control. In the event of a conflict
between any of the provisions of such Code and a Village ordinance, resolution,
rule or regulation, the Village ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation shall
control. In the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of such Code
and a State law, the State law shall control.
§ 1420.05 BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   Wherever the words “Building Official” appear in the Hamilton County, Ohio
Building Code, as adopted in §
1420.01, they shall be construed to mean the Building Commissioner/Inspector of
the Village or his or her authorized representative.
§ 1420.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   The Hamilton County, Ohio Building Code contains its own penalties.
CHAPTER 1422: OHIO BASIC BUILDING CODE
1422.01   1979 edition adopted.
1422.02   Purpose.
1422.03   Application.
1422.04   Compliance; violations.
1422.05   Change of use; maintenance.
1422.06   Enforcement.
1422.07   File and distribution copies.
1422.08   Conflict of laws.
1422.99   Penalty; equitable remedies.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar State law
   Removal of unsafe structures - see Ohio R.C. 715.26(B), 715.261
   Power to enact further and additional regulations - see Ohio R.C. 3781.12
   Enforcement - see Ohio R.C. 3781.03, 3781.031, 3781.10(E), 3781.102, 3781.19
   Final jurisdiction - see Ohio R.C. 3781.04
   Application - see Ohio R.C. 3781.06, 3781.10(A), 3781.11(A)
   Dead bolt locks in apartment buildings - see Ohio R.C. 3781.103
   Smoke detection system for apartments and condominiums - see Ohio R.C.
3781.104; OAC 4101:2-89
   Use of public buildings by handicapped persons - see Ohio R.C. 3781.111
   Energy conservation - see Ohio R.C. 3781.181; OAC 4101:2-20-01 et seq.
   Safety glazing - see Ohio R.C. 3781.51 et seq.
   Submission of plans - see Ohio R.C. 3791.04
   Abandoned service stations - see Ohio R.C. 3791.11 et seq.
   Safety standards for refuse containers - see Ohio R.C. 3791.21; OAC 4101:2-
88-01 et seq.
   Administration and enforcement by Building Commissioner/Inspector - see B. &
H.
1440.02
§ 1422.01 1979 EDITION ADOPTED.
   (a)   Pursuant to Ohio R.C. 731.231, there is hereby adopted by and for the
Village the Ohio Basic Building Code (OBBC), as adopted by the Ohio Board of
Building Standards, Department of Industrial Relations, being particularly the
1979 edition thereof, as amended through the January, 1994, Issue, as published
in Division 4101:2 of the Ohio Administrative Code (OAC), save and except such
portions thereof as may be hereinafter amended or deleted.
   (b)   The International National Building Code, 1990, eleventh edition, as
well as the BOCA National Mechanical Code, 1990, seventh edition, as published
by Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc., and as
amended by Chapter 4101:2-1 through 4101:2-51 of the Ohio Administrative Code,
are incorporated herein as fully as if set out at length.
§ 1422.02 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the Ohio Basic Building Code, as adopted in §
1422.01, is to:
   a.   Provide uniform minimum standards and requirements for the erection,
construction, repair, alteration and maintenance of buildings, including
construction of industrialized units, such standards relating to the
conservation of energy, safety and sanitation of buildings for their intended
use and occupancy;
   b.   Formulate such standards and requirements, so far as is practical, in
terms of performance objectives, so as to make adequate performance for the use
intended the test of acceptability;
   c.   Permit, to the fullest extent feasible, the use of materials and
technical methods, devices and improvements, including the use of
industrialized units, which tend to reduce the cost of construction and
erection without affecting minimum requirements for the health, safety and
security of the occupants or users of buildings or industrialized units and
without preferential treatment of types or classes of materials or products or
methods of construction; and
   d.   Encourage, so far as may be practical, the standardization of
construction practices, methods, equipment, material and techniques, including
methods employed to produce industrialized units.
(OAC 4101:2-1-05)
§ 1422.02 APPLICATION.
   The Ohio Basic Building Code, as adopted in §
1422.01, applies to all buildings except as follows:
   e.   Single-family, two-family and three-family dwelling houses which are
not constructed of industrialized units, except where the context specifies
mandatory applicability;
   f.   Buildings owned by and used for a function of the United States
government;
   g.   Existing buildings where their location, parts, equipment and other
items do not constitute a serious hazard;
   h.   Buildings constructed in accordance with plans which have been approved
prior to the effective date of the Ohio Basic Building Code;
   i.   Buildings or structures which are incident to the use for agricultural
purposes of the land on which such buildings or structures are located,
provided such buildings or structures are not used in the business of retail
trade (see Ohio R.C. 3781.06 and 3781.061);
   j.   Agricultural labor camps, as defined in Ohio R.C. 3733.41;
   k.   Single-family, two-family and three-family detached dwelling houses for
which applications have been submitted to the Ohio Director of Human Services
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 5104.03 for the purposes of operating type A family day-
care homes, as defined in Ohio R.C. 5104.01;
   l.   Single-family, two-family and three-family detached dwellings existing
on or before November 15, 1990, for which applications have been made to the
Ohio Director of Health pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3722.041 for the purpose of
operating adult group homes as defined in Ohio R.C. 3722.01; and
   m.   Buildings or structures which are designed, constructed and maintained
in accordance with Federal standards and regulations and are used primarily for
Federal and State military purposes where the U.S. Secretary of Defense,
pursuant to 10 U.S.C. § 2233(A)(1), (5) and (6) and 2237, has:
      1.   Acquired, by purchase, lease or transfer, and constructs, expands,
rehabilitates or corrects and equips such buildings or structures as he or she
determines to be necessary to carry out the purposes of Chapter 133 of the
U.S.C.;
      2.   Contributed to the State amounts for the acquisition, construction,
expansion, rehabilitation and conversion by the State of such additional
buildings or structures as he or she determines to be required because of the
failure of existing facilities to meet the purposes of Chapter 133 of the
U.S.C.; or
         3.   Contributed to the State such amounts for the construction,
alteration or rehabilitation of arms storage rooms as he or she determines to
be required to meet a change in U.S. Department of Defense standards related to
the safekeeping of arms.
(OAC 4101:2-1-09)
§ 1422.03 COMPLIANCE; VIOLATIONS.
   (a)   No owner or any other person shall construct, erect, build or equip
any building or structure to which the Ohio Basic Building Code is applicable,
or make any addition thereto or alteration thereof, except in the case of
repairs or maintenance that does not affect the construction, sanitation,
safety or any other vital feature of such building or structure, without
complying with this chapter, Ohio R.C. Chapters 3781 and 3791 or the Ohio Basic
Building Code, or fail to comply with any lawful order issued pursuant thereto.
(ORC 3791.01, 3791.02)
   (b)   No architect, builder, engineer, plumber, carpenter, mason,
contractor, subcontractor, foreman or employee shall violate or assist in
violating any of the provisions of this chapter, Ohio R.C. Chapters 3781 and
3791 or the Ohio Basic Building Code, or fail to comply with any lawful order
issued pursuant thereto.
(ORC 3791.01, 3791.03)
   (c)   No owner or any other person shall proceed with the construction,
erection, alteration or equipment of any building or structure to which the
Ohio Basic Building Code is applicable without complying with this chapter and
the plan and specification submission and processing requirements of the
Municipality, and until plans or drawings, specifications and data have been
approved or the industrialized unit has been inspected at the point of origin.
(ORC 3791.04)
§ 1422.04 CHANGE OF USE; MAINTENANCE.
   (a)   Change of use. The use of a building shall not be changed, as defined
in the Ohio Basic Building Code, unless or until the building and the building
service equipment therein conform to the requirements of such Code for
buildings of the proposed new use group classification and to Village zoning
requirements.
(OAC 4101:2-1-11)
   (b)   Maintenance. Buildings and building service equipment shall be
maintained so as to comply with the Code, except that when a serious hazard
does not exist, no change in construction and no additional facilities are
required except as may be made necessary by a change of use under division (a)
hereof.
(OAC 4101:2-1-13)
§ 1422.05 ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   When the Village finds that work or equipment is contrary to this
chapter, approved plans therefor or the Ohio Basic Building Code, notice in
writing shall be sent to the owner of the building involved or his or her
agent. The notice shall state where and in what respect the work or equipment
does not conform to such lawful requirements and shall specify a reasonable
period of time in which to conform.
(OAC 4101:2-1-34)
   (b)   Prior to enforcement of Ohio R.C. Chapters 3781 and 3791, or any rules
adopted pursuant thereto, including the Ohio Basic Building Code, as adopted in
§
1422.01, by any remedy, civil or criminal, the Village shall issue an
adjudication order within the meaning of Ohio R.C. 119.06 to 119.13 or a stop
work order as provided in § 4101:2-1-36 of the Ohio Administrative Code.
   (c)   Every adjudication order shall cite the law or rules directly involved
and shall specify what appliances, site preparations, additions or alterations
to structures, plans, materials, assemblages or procedures are necessary for
the same to comply with Ohio R.C. Chapters 3781 and 3791 and/or any rules
adopted pursuant thereto, including the provisions of the Ohio Basic Building
Code adopted in §
1422.01.
   (d)   The order shall include notice to the party of the procedure for
appeal and right to a hearing if requested within 30 days of the mailing of the
notice. The notice shall also inform the party that at the hearing he or she
may be represented by counsel, present his or her arguments or contentions
orally or in writing, and present evidence and examine witnesses appearing for
or against him or her.
   (e)   Upon the issuance of any order provided for herein or in § 4101:2-1-36
of the Ohio Administrative Code, the person receiving such order shall cease
work upon the site preparations or structure to be constructed, or, in the case
of an industrialized unit, the installation of the unit, or shall cease using
the appliance, materials, assemblages or manufactured product identified in the
order until such time as the appeal provided for in accordance with the
provisions of Ohio R.C. 3781.19, and all appeals from such hearing, have been
completed, or the order herein has been released.
(OAC 4101:2-1-35)
   (f)   Failure to cease work after receipt of a stop work order as provided
in § 4101:2-1-36 of the Ohio Administrative Code is hereby declared to be a
public nuisance.
(OAC 4101:2-1-36)
§ 1422.06 FILE AND DISTRIBUTION COPIES.
   At least one copy of the Codes adopted in §
1422.01 shall be on file with the Clerk of Council for inspection by the
public. At least one copy shall also be on file in the County Law Library. In
addition, the Clerk of Council shall keep copies available for distribution to
the public, at cost.
§ 1422.07 CONFLICT OF LAWS.
   (a)   Whenever a provision of the Ohio Basic Building Code, as adopted in §
1422.01, conflicts with a provision of the Ohio Fire Code or any other order,
standard or rule of the Ohio Department of Commerce, Division of State Fire
Marshal, the provision of the Ohio Basic Building Code shall control, except
that rules adopted and orders issued by the Fire Marshal pursuant to Ohio R.C.
Chapter 3743 prevail in the event of a conflict.
(OAC 4101:2-1-04(B); ORC 3781.11(D))
   (b)   Whenever a provision of the Ohio Basic Building Code, as adopted in §
1422.01, conflicts with a provision of any other standard technical code
adopted by the Village, other than as provided in division (a) hereof, or any
ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of Council, the stricter standard
shall control.
   (c)   When a special provision is made in a use group classification of the
Ohio Basic Building Code and is inconsistent with a general provision of the
Ohio Basic Building Code relating to buildings generally, the special provision
governs, unless it appears that the provisions are cumulative.
(OAC 4101:2-1-07)
§ 1422.99 PENALTY; EQUITABLE REMEDIES.
   (a)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter, including any provision of the Ohio Basic Building Code adopted in §
1422.01, is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not
more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned not more than six
months, or both, for each offense. Unless otherwise provided, a separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation or
noncompliance occurs or continues.
   (b)   The application of the penalty provided in division (a) hereof shall
not be deemed to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions, or the
application of any other equitable remedy, including abatement of the nuisance
referred to in §
1422.06(f).
CHAPTER 1424: NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE
1424.01   1993 edition adopted.
1424.02   Purpose.
1424.03   File and distribution copies.
1424.04   Electrical inspections.
1424.05   Separate circuits for motor-driven heating equipment.
1424.06   Separate circuits for certain signs.
1424.07   Amendments.
1424.08   Conflict of laws.
1424.99   Penalty; equitable remedies.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Power to license electricians - see Ohio R.C. 715.27
   Adoption of technical codes by reference - see Ohio R.C. 731.231
   Electricity - see S.U. & P.S.
Ch. 1046
   Administration and enforcement by Building Commissioner/Inspector - see B. &
H.
1440.02
   Electric fences - see B. & H.
1462.02
§ 1424.01 1993 EDITION ADOPTED.
   Pursuant to Ohio R.C. 731.231, there is hereby adopted by and for the
Village the National Electrical Code, being particularly the 1993 edition
thereof, recommended by the National Fire Protection Association, save and
except such portions thereof as may be hereinafter amended or deleted.
§ 1424.02 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the National Electrical Code, as adopted in §
1424.01, is to provide uniform standards for electrical materials and
installations in all structures in the Village.
§ 1424.03 FILE AND DISTRIBUTION COPIES.
   At least one copy of the National Electrical Code, as adopted in §
1424.01, shall be on file with the Clerk of Council for inspection by the
public. At least one copy shall also be on file in the County Law Library. In
addition, the Clerk of Council shall keep copies available for distribution to
the public, at cost.
§ 1424.04 ELECTRICAL INSPECTIONS.
   The Village Administrator is hereby authorized and directed to enter into an
agreement with Inspection Bureau, Inc., for the purpose of obtaining electrical
inspection services necessary for the Village. A copy of such agreement is
attached to original Ordinance 41-1979, passed October 23, 1979, as Exhibit A,
and is hereby made a part of this section by reference, as if fully rewritten
in this section.
(Ord. 41-1979, passed 10-23-1979)
§ 1424.05 SEPARATE CIRCUITS FOR MOTOR-DRIVEN HEATING EQUIPMENT.
   Separate circuits shall be required for electrically operated and controlled
motor-driven heating equipment such as stokers, oil burners, circulating pumps,
hot air circulating fans, unit heaters, component parts thereof and other
similar equipment. No other electrical equipment of any kind, particularly
lighting equipment, shall be connected on any such separate circuit. Each motor
shall be individually protected against overload.
(Ord. 11-1963, passed 8-27-1963)
§ 1424.06 SEPARATE CIRCUITS FOR CERTAIN SIGNS.
   Separate circuits shall be required for all exterior illuminated signs.
However, more than one sign may be placed on a circuit, provided that the
connected load does not exceed eighty percent of the circuit capacity.
(Ord. 11-1963, passed 8-27-1963)
§ 1424.07 AMENDMENTS.
   The following are amendments to the National Electrical Code, as adopted in
§
1424.01:
   NEC 230-24. Clearances is hereby amended by omitting the exceptions to the
required 8-foot clearance. The 8-foot clearance is mandatory.
   NEC 240-50. General is hereby amended by adding the following:
      (f)   Low Amperage Plug Fuses. Plug fuses 30 amperes or less in size
shall be of the nontamperable type.
   NEC 380-11. Circuit Breakers as Switches is hereby amended to read as
follows:
      A circuit breaker operable directly by applying the hand to a lever or
handle may serve as a switch, provided that one operation of the handle will
simultaneously disconnect all ungrounded conductors.
   NEC 384-16. Overcurrent Protection is hereby amended by changing division
(b) to read as follows:
      (b)   Snap Switches Rated at 30 Amperes or Less. Panelboards equipped
with snap switches rated at 30 amperes or less shall have overcurrent
protection not in excess of 225 amperes.
   NEC 517.15. shall be added to read as follows:
      517.15. Operating Room Wiring. The wiring in and safeguards for hospital
operating rooms shall be in accordance with the National Board of Fire
Underwriters recommended “Safe Practice for Hospital Operating Rooms,” N.B.F.U.
No. 56, July, 1962.
(Ord. 11-1963. Passed 8-27-63.)
§ 1424.08 CONFLICT OF LAWS.
   In the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of the National
Electrical Code, as adopted in §
1424.01, and a provision of any other standard technical code adopted by the
Village, the stricter standard shall control. In the event of a conflict
between any of the provisions of such Code and a Village ordinance, resolution,
rule or regulation, the Village ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation shall
control. In the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of such Code
and a State law, the State law shall control.
§ 1424.99 PENALTY; EQUITABLE REMEDIES.
   (a)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of the
National Electrical Code, as adopted in §
1424.01 and as amended in §
1424.07, is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be fined not
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned not more than 60 days,
or both, for each offense. Unless otherwise provided, a separate offense shall
be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance
occurs or continues.
   (b)   The application of the penalty provided in division (a) hereof shall
not be deemed to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions, or the
application of any other equitable remedy.
CHAPTER 1426: RESIDENTIAL CODE OF OHIO
1426.01   Application and enforcement.
1426.02   Appeals.
§ 1426.01 APPLICATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   Ohio Administrative Code 4101:8 - Residential Code of Ohio as
promulgated by the Ohio Board of Building Standards, and including the Appendix
“Swimming Pools & Hot Tubs” attached to Ordinance 06-2007 shall apply and be
enforced within the Village of Woodlawn, Ohio.
   (b)   This section shall be in full force and effect from and after the
earliest period permitted by law. With regard to the adoption of the
Residential Building Code, it shall be effective following promulgation of the
Residential Code of Ohio by the Board of Building Standards through the
certification process, adoption and effective date of certification issued by
the Ohio Board of Building Standards.
   (c)   The Municipal Manager of the Village of Woodlawn, Ohio is hereby
authorized and directed to sign and submit an application to the Ohio Board of
Building Standards requesting said Board to certify the Village of Woodlawn,
Ohio for enforcement of the Residential Code of Ohio.
(Ord. 06-2007, passed 3-27-2007)
§ 1426.02 APPEALS.
   Chapter 1442 of the Village of Woodlawn Code pertaining to the Board of
Building Appeals is the process established for the Residential Code of Ohio
appeals requirements.
(Ord. 06-2007, passed 3-27-2007)
TITLE FOUR: BUILDING ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1440: BUILDING DEPARTMENT
1440.01   Qualifications of Department head. (Repealed)
1440.02   Enforcement of Building and Housing Code.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Building Commissioner/Inspector - see CHTR. Sec.
4.17
   Power to regulate building erection - see Ohio R.C. 715.26, 715.29, 737.28,
737.37
§ 1440.01 QUALIFICATIONS OF DEPARTMENT HEAD. (REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
   Section 1440.01 was repealed by implication by the adoption by the voters,
on November 3, 1992, of the Village Charter, which authorized the Manager to
provide for a Building Commissioner/Inspector after approval of Council.
§ 1440.02 ENFORCEMENT OF BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE.
   (a)   The Building Commissioner/Inspector shall enforce all ordinances and
resolutions of the Village which relate to construction, arrangement, erection
and repair of buildings, structures and parts thereof.
   (b)   The Manager may cause the Building Commissioner/Inspector to enforce
any ordinance or resolution of the Village relating to the use, occupancy,
construction or demolition of buildings, structures and parts thereof.
   (c)   The Building Commissioner/Inspector shall determine all questions
arising under this Building and Housing Code. All appeals from decisions of the
Building Commissioner/Inspector shall be taken to the Board of Building
Appeals. The Building Commissioner/Inspector is authorized, however, to act on
his or her own best judgment, without waiting for the determination of an
appeal, where immediate action is required, as in the case of insecure or
unsafe buildings.
CHAPTER 1442: BOARD OF BUILDING APPEALS
1442.01   Establishment; composition; terms of office; rules and regulations.
1442.02   Appeals.
1442.03   Filing fees.
1442.04   Decisions.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Power to regulate building erection - see Ohio R.C. 715.26, 715.29, 737.28,
737.37
   Board of Zoning Appeals - see P. & Z.
Ch. 1256
   Authority of Building Commissioner/Inspector re Building and Housing Code -
see B. & H.
1420.05,
1440.02
   Building Department - see B. & H.
Ch. 1440
§ 1442.01 ESTABLISHMENT; COMPOSITION; TERMS OF OFFICE; RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   There is hereby established by and for the Village a Board of Building
Appeals. Such Board shall consist of three members, to be appointed by the
Mayor. The members shall be appointed for terms of three years, so arranged
that one term will expire each year. Members may be removed by the Mayor at any
time. The Board shall adopt, from time to time, such rules and regulations as
it deems necessary to carry into effect the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 24-1953, passed 12-8-1953)
§ 1442.02 APPEALS.
   Appeals to the Board of Building Appeals may be taken by any person
aggrieved, or by any officer or department of the Village affected, by any
decision of the Building Commissioner/Inspector, within 30 days after the
announcement of the ruling complained of, provided that the appeal is based on
one of the following grounds:
   n.   The interpretation or application of a particular provision of this
Building and Housing Code is erroneous.
   o.   The strict application of a particular of such Code imposes an undue
hardship on the complainant, and a modified application is feasible, whereby
the hardship can be relieved without defeating the purpose and intent of the
Code.
(Ord. 24-1953, passed 12-8-1953)
§ 1442.03 FILING FEES.
   No appeal shall be accepted for filing unless the complainant deposits a
filing fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) with the Building Commissioner/Inspector.
§ 1442.04 DECISIONS.
   The Board of Building Appeals shall have full authority to confirm, modify
or reverse the ruling appealed from, and its decision shall be final.
(Ord. 24-1953, passed 12-8-1953)
CHAPTER 1444: BUILDING PERMITS AND FEES
1444.01   Permit required.
1444.02   Permit expiration.
1444.03   Notice of permit issuance.
1444.04   Permits for excavations.
1444.05   Fees.
1444.06   Electrical permits and inspection fees.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Location and grade of sidewalks required for issuance of building permits -
see S.U. & P.S.
1022.02
   Filing fees for appeals - see B. & H.
1442.03
   Issuance of building permits for excavated property - see B. & H. 1460.18
   Development permits - see B. & H. 1466.11
§ 1444.01 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall begin a construction project that requires a zoning or
building permit without first providing the necessary plans and specifications
and obtaining such permit from the Office of the Building Official.
(Ord. 08-2004, passed 5-25-2004)
§ 1444.02 PERMIT EXPIRATION.
   Each permit issued shall be valid for six months from the date of issuance.
If the work included in the Permit is not completed within one year from the
date of issuance, a new permit shall be obtained. No work shall be performed
under an expired permit.
(Ord. 08-2004, passed 5-25-2004)
§ 1444.03 NOTICE OF PERMIT ISSUANCE.
   Each issued Permit shall be conspicuously posted at the work location along
with a copy of the approved plans and documents.
(Ord. 08-2004, passed 5-25-2004)
§ 1444.04 PERMIT FOR EXCAVATION.
   (a)   A permit shall be obtained for all excavations, fill or grade changes,
excepting minor site alterations as determined by the Building Official or
Village Engineer.
   (b)   All projects that require engineering review shall have the Engineer’s
incurred costs and full compensation added to the total cost of the permit.
(Ord. 08-2004, passed 5-25-2004)
§ 1444.05 FEES.
   The Schedule of Fees published by the Hamilton County, Ohio Department of
Building Inspections on January 1, 2007, as may be amended and updated from
time to time, is hereby adopted by reference.
(Ord. 06-2007, passed 3-27-2007)
§ 1444.06 ELECTRICAL PERMITS AND INSPECTION FEES.
(a)   Residential:
   Basic fee - new homes, room additions and $80.00, plus $4.00 per 100
alterations                                     square feet
   Temporary electric pole                   $25.00
   Electrical service upgrade                $55.00
      With additional wiring, add         $50.00
   Swimming pools, electric
      Above-ground                        $45.00
      In-ground                           $75.00
(b)   Commercial
   Process fees                              $200.00, plus $4.50 per 100
                                                square feet of total floor area
   Minor alteration: Electric                $75.00
   Sign fees:
      Small sign - under 30 square feet    
Electrical:                                     $75.00
      Large sign - over 30 square feet    $150.00
Electrical:
      Plan review:                        $60.00
 
(Ord. 38-2007, passed 11-1-07)
TITLE SIX: MISCELLANEOUS BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1460: EXCAVATIONS
Editor’s note:
   This chapter regulates excavations in private property. For provisions
regulating excavations in public rights of way, see
Chapter 1030 of Part Ten - the Streets, Utilities and Public Services Code.
CHAPTER 1462: FENCES
1462.01   Placement; construction; design.
1462.02   Electric and barbed wire fences.
1462.03   Chain link fences.
1462.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Fences - see Ohio R.C. 971.01 et seq.
   Fences on limited-access highways - see Ohio R.C. 3767.201
§ 1462.01 PLACEMENT; CONSTRUCTION; DESIGN.
   (a)   Fences may be placed on property where required but may not be used on
property lines within 30 feet of the intersection of two streets if the
screening would in any way reduce the visibility of traffic movement.
   (b)   A fence within required side yard lines shall be limited in height to
six feet from its base to the top of construction. Fences on the top of
retaining walls shall be measured from the grade on the higher side of the
wall. Whether intended primarily for protection from trespassers, for visual
barriers or for wind-break purposes, fences shall be made from durable
materials, permanently and securely anchored into place.
   (c)   All fences shall be engineered and designed to comply with the
provisions of the Ohio Basic Building Code.
§ 1462.02 ELECTRIC AND BARBED WIRE FENCES.
   (a)   No person shall erect or maintain any fence charged with electrical
current.
   (b)   No person shall erect or maintain a barbed wire fence, except as may
be authorized by the Building Commissioner/Inspector in business and
manufacturing zones when there is evidence from the Police Department that
vandalism problems exist in such areas, provided that:
      (1)   Fences with barbed wire are prohibited in any required front yard
or in front of any building.
      (2)   A maximum of three strands of barbed wire are permitted on a single
support, and a maximum of three strands are permitted on each arm of a “Y”
support, provided that the strands and support do not exceed 16 inches above
the required height of the fence and that such strands are not less than 72
inches from the ground.
§ 1462.03 CHAIN LINK FENCES.
   All chain link fences in residential zones shall be installed with the
“twisted” or “barbed” ends closest to the ground.
(Ord. 29-1978, passed 9-26-1978)
§ 1462.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or
continues.
CHAPTER 1464: FIRE EXTINGUISHERS (REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
   Chapter 1464 was repealed by Ordinance 21-1989, passed April 11, 1989.
CHAPTER 1466: FLOOD DAMAGE REDUCTION
Editor’s note:
   Chapter 1466 was replaced by a special purpose ordinance.
CHAPTER 1468: UNSAFE BUILDINGS
1468.01   Scope.
1468.02   Unsafe building defined; declaration of nuisance.
1468.03   Notice of violation; time limits for correction or demolition;
vacation of buildings.
1468.04   Service of notice.
1468.05   Posting of notice.
1468.06   Permits required.
1468.07   Noncompliance with notice; demolition by Village; costs.
1468.08   Reporting unsafe conditions.
1468.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Removal of unsafe buildings - see Ohio R.C. 715.26(B), 715.261
   Hamilton County, Ohio Building Code - see B. & H.
Ch. 1420
   Ohio Basic Building Code - see B. & H.
Ch. 1422
   Board of Building Appeals - see B. & H.
Ch. 1442
   Fees for demolition permits - see B. & H.
1444.05(k)
§ 1468.01 SCOPE.
   The provisions of this chapter are supplementary to and complement other
provisions of this Building and Housing Code so as to provide proper
enforcement of the provisions thereof.
(Ord. 17-1969, passed 7-22-1969)
§ 1468.02 UNSAFE BUILDING DEFINED; DECLARATION OF NUISANCE.
   (a)   As used in this chapter, “unsafe building” means a building or
structure which is structurally unsafe, which is not provided with adequate
egress, which constitutes a fire hazard, which is otherwise dangerous to human
life, or which, in relation to its existing use, constitutes a hazard to health
by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation or obsolescence.
   (b)   All unsafe buildings are hereby declared to be public nuisances and
shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation or demolition in accordance with this
chapter.
(Ord. 17-1969, passed 7-22-1969)
§ 1468.03 NOTICE OF VIOLATION; TIME LIMITS FOR CORRECTION OR DEMOLITION;
VACATION OF BUILDINGS.
   The Building Commissioner/Inspector shall examine or cause to be examined
every building or structure or portion thereof reported as, or believed to be,
an unsafe building. He or she shall give written notice to the owner of record,
including any purchaser under a recorded land contract, and to a person
occupying such building if he or she is not the owner thereof. The written
notice shall specifically state the defects that cause the building to be
unsafe and shall state that the specified repairs or improvements, or the
demolition and removal of the building or structure, or portion thereof,
leaving the premises in a clean, safe and sanitary condition, such condition
being subject to the approval of the Commissioner/Inspector, shall be completed
within 30 days from the date of the written notice. However, in cases of
emergency making immediate repairs necessary, the Commissioner/ Inspector may
order the changes or demolition to be made within a shorter period of time. The
notice shall also require that the building or portion thereof be vacated
forthwith by the occupants thereof.
(Ord. 17-1969, passed 7-22-1969; Ord. 20-2012, passed 8-28-2012)
§ 1468.04 SERVICE OF NOTICE.
   Proper service of the notice required in §
1468.03 shall be by personal service, residence service or registered mail,
provided that such notice shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy
thereof is sent by registered mail to the last known address of the owner of
record or purchaser under a land contract. If any of the parties cannot be
located, or their addresses cannot be ascertained, the notice shall be deemed
to be properly served if a copy thereof is placed in a conspicuous place in or
about the building or structure affected by the notice. If such notice is
served by registered mail, the 30-day period within which such owner is
required to comply with the order of the Building Commissioner/Inspector shall
begin as of the date he or she received such notice.
(Ord. 17-1969, passed 7-22-1969)
§ 1468.05 POSTING OF NOTICE.
   The Building Commissioner/Inspector shall cause to be posted, at each
entrance of an unsafe building, a notice to read as follows: “DO NOT ENTER.
UNSAFE TO OCCUPY. BUILDING COMMISSIONER/INSPECTOR OF THE VILLAGE OF WOODLAWN,
OHIO.” Such notice shall remain posted until the required repairs are made or
demolition is completed. No person shall remove such notice without permission
of the Building Commissioner/Inspector or shall enter the building, except for
the purpose of making the required repairs or demolishing the building.
(Ord. 17-1969, passed 7-22-1969)
§ 1468.06 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   In all cases of construction, repair or demolition pursuant to orders of the
Building Commissioner/Inspector, permits covering such work shall be obtained
as required by this Building and Housing Code.
(Ord. 17-1969, passed 7-22-1969)
§ 1468.07 NONCOMPLIANCE WITH NOTICE; DEMOLITION BY VILLAGE; COSTS.
   If an owner of record or purchaser under a land contract fails, neglects or
refuses to comply with the notice to repair, rehabilitate or demolish and
remove a building or structure, or portion thereof, the Building Commissioner/
Inspector shall proceed to have the building or structure, or portion thereof,
demolished and removed from the premises, leaving the premises in a clean, safe
and sanitary condition. The cost of such work shall be paid by the Village. If
the Village is not immediately reimbursed for such costs, the amount thereof
shall be certified to the County Treasurer and levied as a special assessment
against the property on which the building or structure is located and shall be
collected in the manner provided for special assessments. The remedy provided
for herein is in addition to the penalty provided in §
1468.99.
§ 1468.08 REPORTING UNSAFE CONDITIONS.
   Any owner, manager, lessee or occupant of a building who discovers or who
has reason to believe that there exists on the premises, a condition which may
endanger other property or the life or limb of any person, which condition
cannot be immediately remedied so as to remove any danger therefrom, shall,
within twenty-four hours after such discovery, report the existence of such
dangerous condition to the Building Commissioner/Inspector, who shall forthwith
take such steps as may be necessary to protect the public safety and welfare.
No person who is an owner, manager, lessee or occupant of a building on which
premises such a dangerous condition exists, and who knows or should know of
such dangerous condition, shall fail to make such report to the Building
Commissioner/Inspector within twenty-four hours after such knowledge is
obtained or should have been obtained.
(Ord. 17-1969, passed 7-22-1969)
§ 1468.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, being the owner, agent, or having control of any building or
premises, who violates any provision of this code, or fails to conform to any
provision thereof, or fails to obey and order of the Building Commissioner/
Inspector, or his or her duly authorized agent, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. Each and every day on which such person
continues to violate any provision of the code after having once been notified
of such violation shall constitute a separate offense.
CHAPTER 1470: VACANT BUILDINGS
1470.01   Vacations.
1470.02   Vacant buildings and structures declared a public nuisance.
1470.03   Vacation notices.
1470.04   Vacated buildings, structures, or dwelling units not to be rented.
1470.05   Securing of buildings and structures.
1470.06   Securing of buildings or structures by the Building Commissioner/
Inspector.
1470.07   Obligations of owners of vacated buildings or structures.
1470.08   Vacant building maintenance licenses.
1470.09   Vacated building maintenance standards.
1470.10   Procedure for renewal.
1470.11   Fees.
1470.12   Appeals.
1470.13   Validity.
1470.99   Penalty.
§ 1470.01 VACATIONS.
   (a)   The Building Commissioner/Inspector shall be authorized to order any
building or portion of any building vacated, or if it is vacant to remain
vacated for one or more of the reasons set out below:
      (1)   When a building is occupied, or any work, operation or construction
is performed therein or thereon in violation of any of the provisions of the
Ohio Building Code, the Woodlawn Property Maintenance Code, Woodlawn Zoning
Code, or any other applicable provisions in the Village Code of Ordinances.
      (2)   When one or more of the following has occurred:
         A.   The building is unfit for occupancy as it fails to meet the
minimum standards set out by Village ordinances before a certificate of
occupancy can be granted;
         B.   The building is unfit for human habitation because it fails to
meet the minimum standards set out in the Woodlawn Property Maintenance Code
(PMC); or
         C.   The doors, windows, and other openings into the building are
boarded up or otherwise secured by means other than the conventional method
used in the original construction and design of the building.
      (3)   When the owner, agent, or tenant fails or refuses to comply with
any lawful order issued by the Building Commissioner/Inspector.
      (4)   When the building is vacant and unoccupied for the purpose which it
was erected and for which purpose a certificate of occupancy may have been
issued.
      (5)   When it is determined by the Building Commissioner/Inspector and
the Fire Chief that a building constitutes an immediate hazard to the public
health and/or safety.
   (b)   If, after service of any lawful order from the Building Commissioner/
Inspector, the owner, agent, contractor or other person responsible for the
work or violation refuses to comply with such order or does not comply within
the period stated in the order of notice, such failure to comply shall
constitute a misdemeanor of the first degree punishable as provided for in §
1468.99.
(Ord. 23-2014, passed 4-29-2014)
§ 1470.02 VACANT BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES DECLARED A PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   Buildings which remain vacant and unoccupied for any appreciable period of
time become an attractive nuisance to children, a harborage for rodents, an
invitation to derelicts, vagrants, and criminals as a temporary abode, and an
increased fire hazard, and the unkept grounds surrounding such property invite
the dumping of garbage and rubbish thereon. The use and maintenance of property
in such condition and manner endangers the public health and safety and
constitutes unreasonable use and condition to the annoyance, discomfort, and
repose of a considerable number of the public, is detrimental to the public
good and common welfare and renders a considerable number of the public
insecure in the use and enjoyment of their property, and thus constitutes a
nuisance condition.
(Ord. 23-2014, passed 4-29-2014)
§ 1470.03 VACATION NOTICES.
   (a)   Every order of vacation shall be in writing stating the reason for the
order or vacation and directing that the building or portion of the building,
if it is occupied, be vacated by a specified time and shall be served upon the
owner, agent or tenant by personal service, priority mail with delivery
confirmation, or certified mail with return receipt requested. In addition to
providing service to the owner, agent or tenant, the Building Commissioner/
Inspector shall post a notice of vacation in a conspicuous place on the
building. After the posting of such notice or order of vacation, it shall be
unlawful to occupy or permit the occupancy of the premises or any portion
thereof until the provisions of law and the orders issued by the Building
Commissioner/Inspector are complied with.
   (b)   When it shall appear to the Building Commissioner/Inspector that the
reasons for the order of vacation have ceased to exist and that the building or
portion of the building and the occupancy thereof are in substantial compliance
with law, he shall rescind the vacation order in writing.
(Ord. 23-2014, passed 4-29-2014)
§ 1470.04 VACATED BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, OR DWELLING UNITS NOT TO BE RENTED.
   When any person, being the owner, agent or having control; of a building,
structure, or dwelling unit, fails to comply with an order of vacation issued
by the Building Commissioner/Inspector and allows the building, structure, or
dwelling unit to be occupied by persons other than himself, such person shall
be in violation of §
1470.03 unless he can show that the property is being occupied without his
knowledge or consent. Proper service of an eviction notice and the good faith
maintenance of forcible entry and detainer proceedings against occupants shall
be prima facie evidence of lack of knowledge and consent. The penalty for
violation shall be as provided in §
1470.99.
(Ord. 23-2014, passed 4-29-2014)
§ 1470.05 SECURING OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.
   (a)   If a vacant or vacated building or structure is open to access by
trespassers and/or the elements, the Building Commissioner/Inspector may order
any openings secured to prevent trespassers and/or the elements from entering
such building. The securing of such doors, windows and other openings shall be
maintained as long as the building is vacant or until the windows, doors and
other openings are repaired in an approved manner.
   (b)   If, after service of an order to secure a building or structure, the
owner or agent fails to comply with that order of the Building Commissioner
within the time allowed by that order, or fails to maintain the building or
structure secure from entry, the Building Commissioner/Inspector may at any
time thereafter proceed under §
1470.06 to secure the building and restore the premises to a safe condition.
(Ord. 23-2014, passed 4-29-2014)
§ 1470.06 SECURING OF BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES BY THE BUILDING COMMISSIONER/
INSPECTOR.
   (a) The Building Commissioner/Inspector may secure and barricade any
building whatsoever if:
      (1)   The building or structure has been deemed dangerous and unsafe
pursuant to §
1468.03, and the owner has failed to bring the building into compliance within
the time provided, but the building has not been determined as threatening to
collapse or posing other immediate peril, pursuant to §
1468.03; or
      (2)   The owner or person responsible has failed to comply with an order
of the Building Commissioner/Inspector to secure the building or structure
issued pursuant to §
1470.05.
   (b)   Whenever a building or structure is subject to being secured pursuant
to this section, the Building Commissioner/Inspector shall:
      (1)   Serve the building owner as determined from the official land
records of Hamilton County by personal delivery, by certified mail return
receipt requested, or by priority mail with delivery confirmation with a notice
of intent to secure.
      (2)   The Building Commissioner/Inspector shall also post a copy of the
notice of intent to secure on the building.
      (3)   The notice of intent to secure shall set forth the street address
of the building and the date of intended entry on the premises in order to
secure the building.
   (c)   Upon service of notice of intent to secure the premises pursuant to §
1470.06(b) and upon the failure of the owner to secure the premises within the
time specified in the order, the Building Commissioner/Inspector shall cause it
to be secured through any available public agency or contract or arrangement by
private persons.
   (d)   Any person who owns any interest in a building other than a lien shall
be jointly and severally liable for the costs incurred by the Building
Commissioner/Inspector pursuant to §
1470.06 and for service of notice.
   (e)   The owner or owners shall be billed directly by priority mail with
delivery confirmation certified mail, return receipt requested, or by posting a
copy of the bill upon the building if the Building Commissioner/Inspector is
unable to contact the owner for the cost. The bill for the cost shall be paid
within 30 days after receipt of the bill.
   (f)   If the costs are not recovered, the Building Commissioner/Inspector
shall recover all costs, including administrative and related costs incurred
from the persons liable for such costs by either of the following:
      (1)   The costs shall be certified to the County Auditor, who shall place
the costs upon the tax duplicate. The costs are a lien upon such lands from and
after the date of entry. The costs shall be collected as other taxes and
returned to the Village.
      (2)   The Village may also commence a civil action to recover the total
costs from the owner in a court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 23-2014, passed 4-29-2014)
§ 1470.07 OBLIGATIONS OF OWNERS OF VACATED BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES.
   (a)   The owner of a building or structure kept vacant by the owner, or
ordered in whole or in part vacated or kept vacant by the Building
Commissioner/Inspector, shall apply for a Vacant Building Maintenance License.
The owner shall also cause the premises to conform to the minimum standards of
safety and structural integrity set forth in §
1470.09.
   (b)   The owner of a building or structure kept vacant or ordered in whole
or in part vacated or kept vacant by the Building Commissioner/Inspector shall
acquire or otherwise maintain general liability insurance in an amount of not
less than $300,000 for buildings designed primarily for use as residential
units, including buildings containing no more than four dwelling units. For any
other building, including, but not limited to, buildings designed for
manufacturing, industrial, storage, or commercial uses, including buildings
containing five or more dwelling units, the owner shall acquire or maintain not
less than $1,000,000 of general liability insurance. Any insurance policy
acquired after an order to vacate or keep the building vacant shall provide for
written notice to the Building Commissioner/Inspector within 30 days of any
lapse, cancellation, or change in coverage. Upon request, the owner shall
provide evidence of the insurance to the Building Commissioner/Inspector.
   (c)   An owner who keeps a property vacant or is subject to §
1470.01 shall apply for a Vacant Building Maintenance License and obtain
liability insurance in the amount required by subsection (b) within 30 days
from the date of issuance of the initial order to vacate the building or
portion thereof. The owner shall cause the premises to conform to the minimum
standards of safety and structural integrity set forth in §
1470.09 within 60 days from the date of the issuance of the initial order to
vacate the building or portion thereof. The Building Commissioner/Inspector may
extend the time in writing, upon the owner showing good cause for extension.
Any such extensions of time shall not exceed a total of 180 days, following the
expiration of the 60-day period.
   (d)   If the owner of a building kept vacant or ordered vacated or kept
vacant by the Building Commissioner fails to comply with §
1470.07(b) or §
1470.09 or fails to renew the license as provided in §
1470.10 prior to the annual renewal date or due date, the Building
Commissioner/Inspector may charge the owner or person in control with failure
to comply with orders pursuant to §
1470.99 and take other action as authorized by this chapter. The annual renewal
date shall be the anniversary of the date that the building or portion thereof
was initially ordered to be vacated or kept vacant.
   (e)   The owner may apply for up to a two-year waiver of the license fee if
the owner demonstrates with satisfactory proof that the owner has both a
development plan and a satisfactory financing commitment in place. The owner
will apply for this waiver with the Building Commissioner/Inspector who will
make a recommendation to Village Council, which shall determine whether a
waiver shall be granted upon each application.
(Ord. 23-2014, passed 4-29-2014)
§ 1470.08 VACANT BUILDING MAINTENANCE LICENSES.
   (a)   An application for a Vacant Building Maintenance License shall be made
on a form provided by the Building Commissioner/Inspector and signed by the
owner. The application shall disclose all measures to be taken to ensure that
the building will be kept weathertight and secure from trespassers, safe for
entry by police officers and firefighters in times of emergency, and, together
with its premises, free from nuisance and in good order.
   (b)   At the time of application, the owner shall arrange for a preliminary
inspection of the premises by the Building Commissioner/Inspector in the
presence of the owner or an agent of the owner having responsibility for
maintenance of the premises. The Building Commissioner/Inspector shall ensure
that:
      (1)   The building is adequately protected from intrusion by trespassers
and from deterioration by the weather in accordance with the vacated building
maintenance standards set forth in §
1470.09; and
      (2)   Allowing the building to remain will not be detrimental to the
public health, safety and welfare, will not unreasonably interfere with the
reasonable and lawful use and enjoyment of other premises within the
neighborhood, and will not pose any extraordinary hazard to police officers or
fire fighters entering the premises in times of emergency.
      If the inspection reveals that the building is in compliance with the
vacated building maintenance standards set forth in §
1470.09 and is adequately protected from intrusion by trespassers and from
deterioration by the weather, the Building Commissioner/Inspector shall issue a
Vacant Building Maintenance License.
   (c)   If the property is not in compliance and upon request by the owner,
the Building Commissioner/Inspector shall, after completing the preliminary
inspection, issue a report in writing to the owner specifying the reasons why
the premises does not conform with the vacated building maintenance standards
set forth in §
1470.09 The Building Commissioner shall then provide time for the owner to
bring the property into compliance with §
1470.09. Such time shall not exceed 30 days. Upon conclusion of the time for
compliance, the Commissioner shall conduct a final inspection to determine if
the premises conforms with the vacated building maintenance standards set forth
in §
1470.09.
   (d)   If the owner fails or refuses to consent to and arrange for an
inspection, the Building Commissioner/Inspector shall apply to a court of
competent jurisdiction for an administrative search warrant.
(Ord. 23-2014, passed 4-29-2014)
§ 1470.09 VACATED BUILDING MAINTENANCE STANDARDS.
   (a)   A building or structure shall be deemed adequately protected from
intrusion by trespassers and from deterioration by the weather if:
      (1)   Building openings: Doors, windows, areaways and other openings are
weathertight and secured against entry by birds, vermin and trespassers.
Missing or broken doors, windows and opening coverings are covered with at
least one-half inch of CDX plywood, weather protected, tightly fitted to the
opening and secured by screws or bolts.
      (2)   Roofs: The roof and flashings are sound, tight, will not admit
moisture, and drained to prevent dampness or deterioration in the walls or
interior.
      (3)   Drainage: The building gutters and downspouts are watertight and
entire storm drainage system is adequately sized, installed in an approved
manner, functional and discharged in an approved manner.
      (4)   Building structure: The building is maintained in good repair,
structurally sound, free from debris, rubbish and garbage, and sanitary, and
interior floors, walking surfaces and stairs are structurally sound, and
interior walls and ceilings are free of loose or hanging plaster and finishes,
so as not to pose a threat to the public health or safety.
      (5)   Structural members: The structural members are free of
deterioration and capable of safely bearing imposed dead and live loads.
      (6)   Foundation Walls: The foundation walls are plumb, free from open
cracks and breaks, and rat- proof.
      (7)   Exterior walls: The exterior walls are free of holes, breaks, and
loose or rotting materials. Exposed metal and wood surfaces are protected from
the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather
coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.
      (8)   Decorative features: The cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra
cotta trim, wail facings and similar decorative features are safe, anchored,
and in good repair. Exposed metal and wood surfaces are protected from the
elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather coating
materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.
       (9)   Structure extensions: All balconies, porches, canopy, marquees,
metal awnings, cornices, stairways, fire escapes, standpipes, exhaust ducts and
similar features are in good repair, anchored, safe and sound. Exposed metal
and wood surfaces are protected from the elements and against decay or rust by
periodic application of weather coating materials, such as paint or similar
surface treatment.
      (10)   Chimneys and towers: Chimneys, cooling towers, smokestacks, and
similar appurtenances are structurally safe. Exposed metal and wood surfaces
are protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic
application of weather coating materials, such as paint or similar surface
treatment.
      (11)   Sidewalk openings: Yardwalks, steps, and openings in sidewalks are
safe for pedestrian travel.
      (12)   Accessory and appurtenant structures: Accessory and appurtenant
structures such as garages, sheds, and fences are free from safety, health, and
fire hazards,
      (13)   Premises: The premises on which a structure is located, are clean,
safe and sanitary, maintained free of weeds, junk cars, and litter, and do not
pose a threat to the public health or safety.
      (14)   Signs: All signs and sign structures shall be removed pursuant to
§ 1321.14 of these Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. 23-2014, passed 4-29-2014)
§ 1470.10 PROCEDURE FOR RENEWAL.
   (a)   At the time of application for a renewal of a vacant building license
the owner shall arrange with the Building Commissioner/Inspector for the
inspection of the building, its premises and interior. If the owner fails or
refuses to consent to and arrange for an inspection, the Building Commissioner/
Inspector shall not renew the Vacant Building Maintenance license.
   (b)   The Building Commissioner/Inspector shall renew a Vacant Building
Maintenance license if, after following an inspection, he or she is satisfied
that:
      (1)   The building is in compliance with the vacated Building Maintenance
standards in §
1470.09.
      (2)   The building is adequately protected from intrusion by trespassers
and from deterioration by the weather.
      (3)   The presence of the building will not be detrimental to the public
health, safety and welfare.
      (4)   The presence of the building will not unreasonably interfere with
the reasonable and lawful use and enjoyment of other premises within the
neighborhood.
      (5)   The building will not pose any extraordinary hazard to police
officers or fire fighters entering the premises in times of emergency.
Otherwise the Building Commissioner/Inspector shall dent renewal.
   (c)   The license renewal shall be for one year, which renewal shall run
from the anniversary of the date that the building or portion thereof was
initially vacated by the Building Commissioner/Inspector.
(Ord. 23-2014, passed 4-29-2014)
§ 1470.11 FEES.
   (a)   The fee for application for a Vacant Building Maintenance License is
based on the duration of time the building has been ordered vacated or kept
vacated as determined by the following scale:
      (1)   $900.00 for properties that have been ordered vacated or kept
vacant for less than one year;
      (2)   $1,800.00 for properties that have been ordered vacated or kept
vacant for at least one year but less than two years;
      (3)   $2,700.00 annually for properties that have been ordered vacated or
kept vacant for at least two years but less than five years;
      (4)   $3,500.00 annually for properties that have been ordered vacated or
kept vacant for at least five years.
   (b)   The fee shall be paid at the time of application and deposited in the
general fund. Upon any initial application for a license following the
implementation of the above-listed fee structure, all persons shall be required
to pay the $900.00 fee, and will there after pay the annual fee based on the
graduated fees, listed herein.
   (c)   The fee for renewal of a Vacant Building Maintenance License to be
determined by the scale in §
1470.11(a) shall be paid at the time of application for renewal and deposited
in the building hazard abatement fund. A renewal license shall expire on the
annual renewal date. The annual renewal date shall be the anniversary of the
date that the buildings or portion thereof was initially vacated or kept vacant
by the Building Commissioner/Inspector.
   (d)   If the owner fails to obtain a vacant building maintenance license
withing the time provided by §
1470.07 or if the owner fails to apply for a renewal of a vacant building
maintenance license before the annual renewal date, the Building Commissioner/
Inspector shall charge a late fee equal to the license or renewal fee or
$1,000.00, whichever is less. If the owner fails to pay the amount due for the
license, for renewal of the license, or as a fine for being out of compliance
with the vacant building requirements, said amount shall constitute a debt due
and owing to the Village.
   (e)   The Building Commissioner/Inspector shall refund 50% of the annual fee
for a Vacant Building Maintenance License paid if the subject building is
brought into compliance with standards of the Ohio Building Code and PMC and
reoccupied within one year of payment of the application fee.
(Ord. 23-2014, passed 4-29-2014)
§ 1470.12 APPEALS.
   (a)   Any person directly affected by any notice issued in connection with
this chapter may request and shall be granted a hearing before the Board of
Building Appeals.
   (b)   An appeal to the Board of Building Appeals may be taken by any owner
or individual affected by any decision by the Building Commissioner/Inspector
or by the enforcement of any provision of this chapter. Such an appeal shall be
in the form of a written petition, filed in the office of the Board of Building
Appeals within 30 days from the date the notice was received or before the
expiration of time for compliance stated in the notice, whichever is first.
   (c)   The Board of Building Appeals shall meet within 30 days after the
filing of any appeal and also periodically if the volume of its work warrants.
   (d)   In exercising its powers, the Board of Building Appeals may reverse,
affirm, or modify the order.
   (e)   If the Board of Building Appeals affirms the order of the Building
Commissioner/Inspector, the owner shall have seven calendar days to comply with
the order.
(Ord. 23-2014, passed 4-29-2014)
§ 1470.13 VALIDITY.
   (a)   If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of
this chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter, which shall continue
in full force and effect, and the provisions of this chapter are hereby
declared to severable.
   (b)   This chapter shall not affect violations of any other ordinance, code,
or regulation existing prior to the effective date hereof, and any such
violation shall be governed and shall continue to be punishable to the full
extent of the law under the provisions of the ordinances, codes, or regulations
in effect at the time the violation was committed.
(Ord. 23-2014, passed 4-29-2014)
§ 1470.99 PENALTY.
   Any person being the owner, agent, or having control of any building or
premises, who fails to obtain a Vacant Building Maintenance License pursuant to
§
1470.08 or violates any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day such violation continues after
receipt of a violation notice shall be considered a separate offense.
(Ord. 23-2014, passed 4-29-2014)
CHAPTER 1472: CERTIFICATE OF RENTAL LICENSE
Section
1472.01   Certificate of rental license, inspection and occupancy.
1472.02   Application; issuance; revocation.
1472.03   Fees.
1472.99   Penalty.
§ 1472.01 CERTIFICATE OF RENTAL LICENSE, INSPECTION AND OCCUPANCY.
   (a)   No owner, authorized agent or representative, or person in charge of
any dwelling unit(s) or structure, used or designed or intended to be used as a
single family or multi-family dwelling, up to three units, shall rent or lease
such unit(s) or structure or any part thereof for residential occupancy unless
the owner(s) thereof hold a current and valid certificate of rental license for
each such unit or structure issued by the Code Enforcement Officer. For
purposes of this chapter, a dwelling unit or structure that is subject to a
land sale contract shall be considered a rented or leased dwelling unit or
structure requiring a certificate of rental license.
   (b)   Certificates of rental license shall be valid for a period of one year
from the date of issuance.
   (c)   A certificate of rental license shall be issued after the structure or
unit is inspected by the Code Enforcement Officer. This inspection will enable
the Code Enforcement Officer to identify and list any repairs or other work
necessary to eliminate any unsafe or hazardous conditions, to ensure compliance
with the applicable requirements of the Zoning Code, Fire Code, Property
Maintenance Code, and other Village pertinent ordinances. The owner, occupant,
or authorized representative has the right to be present during such
inspection.
   (d)   Applications for a certificate of rental license shall be made on such
form and in such manner as may be prescribed from time to time by the Code
Enforcement Officer. The application shall include the name(s) of all tenants
who reside in each dwelling unit. The owner or authorized representative shall
notify the Code Enforcement Officer of any change in tenancy for any dwelling
unit or structure that has obtained a certificate of rental license under this
chapter within thirty days of the date the new tenant(s) takes occupancy.
   (e)   If the owner or authorized representative of the unit or structure
does not consent to the proposed inspection, the Code Enforcement Officer, or
his or her designee, may determine that, based upon the condition of the
property, including its age, exterior appearance, lack of complaints, and
rental history, the owner or authorized representative may conduct a self-
inspection of the property by completing and returning a department-issued
inspection checklist. In the event the owner or authorized representative self-
inspects the property, the Code Enforcement Officer, or his designee, shall
also conduct a plain view exterior inspection of the property. If the Code
Enforcement Officer, or his designee, determines that an inspection is
warranted, based on all facts known to the Code Enforcement Officer, or his or
her designee, at the time, the Code Enforcement Officer, or his or her
designee, may seek an administrate search warrant to allow an inspection. The
applicationfor the warrant shall specify the basis upon which the warrant is
being sought and shall include a statement that the inspection will be limited
to a determination as to whether there are violations of the provisions of the
applicable Zoning Code, Fire Code, or Property Maintenance Code. The following
factors shall be relevant in determining whether a warrant shall issue:
      (1)   Eyewitness accounts of violation(s);
      (2)   Citizen complaints;
      (3)   Tenant complaints;
      (4)   Plain view violations;
      (5)   Violations apparent from Village records;
      (6)   Property deterioration;
      (7)   Age of the property;
      (8)   Previous violations on the property.
   (f)   If a warrant is issued, no owner, occupant, or agent thereof shall
fail or neglect, upon presentation of a warrant, to permit entry therein to the
Code Enforcement Officer for the purpose of inspection pursuant to this chapter
and consistent with the terms of the warrant. If the court declines to issue
the warrant, or if no such warrant is sought, the inspection shall be limited
to such areas as are in plain view. A limited-scope inspection conducted
pursuant to this section shall be considered as "inspection" for purposes of
issuing a certificate of rental license.
   (g)   Upon completion of the inspection, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
either certify that the property meets the minimum necessary code requirements,
or shall issue of notice to the owner of violations that must be corrected
prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Rental License. Such notice shall be
provided to the owner or authorized representative within ten days of the
inspection. No certificate of rental license shall be issued until all
violations have been abated.
(Ord. 12-2017, passed 5-30-2017; Ord. 02-2018, passed 2-28-2018)
§ 1472.02 APPLICATION; ISSUANCE; REVOCATION.
   (a)   An application for certificate of rental license shall be made
annually or upon a change in ownership of the unit or structure, whichever
occurs sooner.
   (b)   Upon receipt of the application and payment of the necessary fee, the
Code Enforcement Officer shall cause for an inspection to be conducted as
provided in this chapter.
   (c)   If it is found that the unit or structure is in compliance with all
applicable codes, the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a certificate of
rental license for such unit or structure.
   (d)   The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the power to revoke a
certificate of rental license if:
      (1)   Any statement made by the applicant in connection with the issuance
of such certificate is determined to be false;
      (2)   If it is determined that a unit or structure or its use is not in
compliance with the requirements of the Building Code.
(Ord. 12-2017, passed 5-30-2017; Ord. 02-2018, passed 2-28-2018)
§ 1472.03 FEES.
   Applications for a certificate of rental license shall be accompanied by a
nonrefundable fee in the amount of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per structure
or unit, which includes one inspection and one follow-up inspection. Any
additional re-inspections shall require an additional fee of fifty dollars
($50.00). In the event that the application for a certificate of rental license
is required due to a change in ownership which occurs within twelve months of a
previous inspection, the updated license fee shall be reduced to fifty dollars
($50.00).
(Ord. 12-2017, passed 5-30-2017; Ord. 02-2018, passed 2-28-2018)
§ 1472.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, being the owner, agent, or having control of any building or
premises, who violates any provision of this chapter, or fails to conform to
any provision thereof or fails to obey any order of the Code Enforcement
Officer or his or her duly authorized agent, shall be guilty of a minor
misdemeanor of the first degree. However,
   (a)   Whoever is convicted or pleads guilty of a second offense not sooner
than twenty days and not later than one year of the same section of this
chapter shall be charged with a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (b)   Whoever is convicted or pleads guilty of the third offense not sooner
than twenty days and not later than one year of the same section of this
chapter shall be charged with a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(Ord. 12-2017, passed 5-30-2017; Ord. 02-2018, passed 2-28-2018)
   TITLE EIGHT: HOUSING
CHAPTER 1480: INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
1480.01   2012 edition adopted.
1480.02   Purpose.
1480.03   File and distribution copies.
1480.04   Conflict of laws.
1480.05   Amendments.
1480.06   Effect on pending proceedings or existing actions.
1480.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Adoption of technical codes by reference - see Ohio R.C. 731.231
   Intimidation in connection with housing - see GEN. OFF.
636.22
   Mobile homes as residences - see GEN. OFF.
660.16
   Hamilton County, Ohio Building Code - see B. & H.
Ch. 1420
   Ohio Basic Building Code - see B. & H.
Ch. 1422
   Administration and enforcement by Building Commissioner/Inspector - see B. &
H.
1440.02
   Construction in flood hazard areas - see B. & H.
Ch. 1466
   Unsafe buildings - see B. & H.
Ch. 1468
§ 1480.01 2012 EDITION ADOPTED.
   Pursuant to R.C. § 731.231, there is hereby adopted the most current edition
of the International Property Maintenance Code, as may be amended from time to
time by the International Code Council. Each time the International Code
Council updates and adopts a new edition of the International Property
Maintenance Code, that edition shall automatically be applicable and
enforceable in the Village of Woodlawn.
(Ord. 03-2014, passed 1-28-2014; Ord. 07-2018, passed 3-27-2018)
§ 1480.02 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted in §
1480.01, is to provide uniform standards for maintenance, basic equipment and
facilities, safety, space, use, location, egress, fire protection,
rehabilitation and re-use of existing structures, residential and
nonresidential.
§ 1480.03 FILE AND DISTRIBUTION COPIES.
   At least one copy of the International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted
in §
1480.01, shall be on file with the Clerk of Council for inspection by the
public. At least one copy shall also be on file in the County Law Library. In
addition, the Clerk of Council shall keep copies available for distribution to
the public, at cost.
§ 1480.04 CONFLICT OF LAWS.
   In the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of the
International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted in §
1480.01, and a provision of any other standard technical code adopted by the
Village, the stricter standard shall control. In the event of a conflict
between any of the provisions of such Code and a Village ordinance, resolution,
rule or regulation, the Village ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation shall
control. In the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of such Code
and a State law, the State law shall control.
§ 1480.05 AMENDMENTS.
   The following are amendments to the International Property Maintenance Code,
as adopted in §
1480.01:
   Section PM-101.1 Title: Insert: Village of Woodlawn
   Section PM 302.4 Weeds: Insert 10 inches; add the following sentence to the
end of Section 302.4: All expenses and labor costs incurred may, upon passage
of a resolution by Village Council, shall be certified to the County Auditor
and such amounts shall be entered on the tax duplicate and be a lien upon the
lands.
   Section PM-304.12 Insert Screens: Insert: April 15 to November 15
   Section PM-602.3 Heat Supply: Insert: November 15 to April 15 of the
following year
   Section PM-602.3 Occupiable Work Spaces: Insert: November 15 to April 15 of
the following year
(Ord. 03-2014, passed 1-28-2014; Ord. 07-2018, passed 3-27-2018)
§ 1480.06 EFFECT ON PENDING PROCEEDINGS OR EXISTING ACTIONS.
   Nothing in this chapter or in the International Property Maintenance Code,
as adopted in §
1480.01, shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding pending in any
court or any right acquired, liability incurred or cause of action acquired or
existing under any act or ordinance repealed by this chapter, nor shall any
just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by
this chapter.
§ 1480.99 PENALTY.
   (a)   Violation penalties. Any person, being the owner, agent, or having
control of any building or premises, who violates any provision of this
Property Maintenance Code, or fails to conform to any provision thereof, or
fails to obey any order of the Building Commissioner/Inspector or his or her
duly authorized agent, shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor. However:
      (1)   Whoever is convicted or pleads guilty of a second offense not
sooner than 20 days and not later than one year of the same section of the
Property Maintenance Code shall be charged with a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
      (2)   Whoever is convicted or pleads guilty of the third offense not
sooner than 20 days and not later than one year of the same section of the
Property Maintenance Code shall be charged with misdemeanor of the third
degree.
      (3)   Whoever is convicted or pleads guilty of the fourth offense not
sooner than 20 days and not later than one year of the same section of the
Property Maintenance Code shall be charged with misdemeanor of the second
degree.
      (4)   Whoever is convicted or pleads guilty of the fifth offense not
sooner than 20 days and not later than one year of the same section of the
Property Maintenance Code shall be charged with misdemeanor of the first
degree.
   (b)   Each and every day on which such person continues to violate any
provision of the Property Maintenance Code after having once been notified of
such violation shall constitute a separate offense.
   (c)   Abatement of violation. The imposition of the penalties herein
prescribed shall not preclude the Village from taking such appropriate action
as permitted by law to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to prevent
illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises, or to stop an illegal
act, conduct, business or utilization of the building, structure, or premises.
(Ord. 02-2016, passed 1-26-2016)
PART SIXTEEN: FIRE PREVENTION CODE
         
Ch. 1610. Adoption of Fire Code.
CHAPTER 1610: ADOPTION OF FIRE CODE
1610.01   2006 Ohio Basic Building Code adopted.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Adoption of technical codes by reference - see Ohio R.C. 731.231
   Fire Department - see ADM. Ch. 244 Ch.
244
   Driving over fire hose - see TRAF.
432.26
   Open burning - see GEN. OFF.
660.08
   Smoking in places of public assembly - see GEN. OFF.
660.17
   Use of grills on balconies of multifamily dwellings - see GEN. OFF.
660.18
   Fires in parks - see S.U. & P.S.
1062.04
   Fire extinguishers - see B. & H.
Ch. 1464
§ 1610.01 2006 OHIO BASIC BUILDING CODE ADOPTED.
   The 2006 Ohio Basic Building Code - Fire Code Section is hereby adopted by
reference in its entirety as the code and standard to be used by the Woodlawn
Fire Department for Fire Code enforcement.
(Ord. 21-2006, passed 7-25-2006)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   The Codified Ordinances of Woodlawn comprises all ordinances and resolutions
of a general and permanent nature. The provisions of such general and permanent
ordinances and resolutions are set forth in full in the Codified Ordinances.
   References must be made frequently to many special ordinances and
resolutions, particularly those relating to property, such as easements,
vacations, dedications, acquisitions, disposals, leases, etc. In the following
Tables A through I, all such ordinances and resolutions are listed. These
Tables list ordinances and resolutions chronologically by subject and include
both a citation to and a brief description of each ordinance and resolution.
         Table
            
TABLE A.   FRANCHISES
            
TABLE B.   EASEMENTS
            
TABLE C.   VACATING OF STREETS AND ALLEYS
            
TABLE D.   DEDICATION AND PLAT APPROVAL
            
TABLE E.   ACQUISITION AND DISPOSAL OF REAL PROPERTY
            
TABLE F.   LEASE OF REAL PROPERTY
            
TABLE G.   STREET GRADE LEVELS AND CHANGE OF STREET NAME
            
TABLE H.   ANNEXATION AND DETACHMENT OF TERRITORY
            
TABLE I.   ZONING MAP CHANGES
TABLE A: FRANCHISES
Ord. No. Date Description
Ord.    Date   Description
No.
8-1942  3-10-  To Cincinnati Gas & Electric Co. for street lighting for 10
        1942   yrs.
4-1946  3-12-  To Cincinnati Gas & Electric Co. for electricity for 25 yrs.
        1946
5-1946  3-12-  To Cincinnati Gas & Electric Co. for street lighting for 10
        1946   yrs.
8-1948  4-13-  To Cincinnati Gas & Electric Co. for gas for 25 yrs.
        1948
9-1948  4-13-  Fixes rates charged by Cincinnati Gas & Electric Co. for gas
        1948   service for 5 yrs.
10-1948 4-13-  To Cincinnati Gas & Electric Co. for street lighting for 5 yrs.
        1948
17-1948 7-13-  Fixes rates charged by Cincinnati Gas & Electric Co. for gas
        1948   service.
5-1949  3-8-   Fixes rates charged by Cincinnati Gas & Electric Co. for
        1949   electricity.
6-1953  4-14-  To Cincinnati Gas & Electric Co. for street lighting for 5 yrs.
        1953
18-1953 11-10- Fixes rates charged by Cincinnati Gas & Electric Co. for
        1953   electricity for 2 yrs.
19-1953 11-10- Fixes rates charged by Cincinnati Gas & Electric Co. for gas
        1953   service for 2 yrs.
18-1955 12-13- Fixes rates charged by Cincinnati Gas & Electric Co. for gas
        1955   service for 5 yrs.
19-1955 12-13- Fixes rates charged by Cincinnati Gas & Electric Co. for
        1955   electricity.
6-1958  5-13-  To Cincinnati Gas & Electric Co. for street lighting for 5 yrs.
        1958
7-1959  1-21-  To Cincinnati Gas & Electric Co. for street lighting for 5 yrs.
        1959
12-1961 4-25-  Fixes rates charged by Cincinnati Gas & Electric Co. for
        1961   electricity for 5 yrs.
13-1961 4-25-  Fixes rates charged by Cincinnati Gas & Electric Co. for gas
        1961   service for 5 yrs.
6-1964  4-28-  To Cincinnati Gas & Electric Co. for street lighting for 5 yrs.
        1964
10-1969 5-13-  To Cincinnati Gas & Electric Co. for street lighting for 5 yrs.
        1969
24-1969 12-9-  Amends Ord. 10-1969.
        1969
7-1971  3-23-  To Cincinnati Gas & Electric Co. for electricity for 25 yrs.
        1971
6-1973  3-13-  Fixes rates charged by Cincinnati Gas & Electric Co. for gas
        1973   service for 5 yrs.
9-1973  5-22-  To Cincinnati Gas & Electric Co. for gas for 25 yrs.
        1973
14-1974 5-28-  Fixes rates charged by Cincinnati Gas & Electric Co. for
        1974   electricity for 5 yrs.
29-1976 9-14-  To Cincinnati Gas & Electric Co. for street lighting for 3 yrs.
        1976
23-1979 8-14-  To Warner Cable Corp. for C.A.T.V. service for 15 yrs.
        1979
        9-12-  Disapproves of transfer of the C.A.T.V. franchise held by
55-1989 1989   Warner Cable Communications, Inc., effected by the consummation
               of the tender offer of Time, Inc.
32-1994 7-12-  To Time Warner Cable, a Division of Time Warner Entertainment
        1994   Company, L.P., a Delaware Limited Partnership.
7-96    --     To Cincinnati Gas and Electric Company, for 25 years.
05-2006 2-28-  Janitorial agreement with TBT Janitorial, Inc.
        2006
07-2006 3-28-  Contract with Cincinnati Bell Telephone Company.
        2006
10-2006 4-25-  Contract with O’Brien Pools, Inc., for painting the municipal
        2006   pool.
 
TABLE B: EASEMENTS
Ord. No. Date Description
Ord. No.     Date       Description
5-1951       5-8-1951   Purchases easement over 2 ft. of ground adjacent to
                        Village driveway south of Municipal Bldg.
12-1965      12-14-1965 Authorizes modification of sewer easement over Lots 13
                        and 15 of Woodlawn First Industrial Subdivision.
Res. 10-1968 3-12-1968  Relocates easement granted by Columbian Carbon Co.
23-1969      11-11-1969 Appropriates sewer easements for Mayview Forest Sewer
                        project.
5-1970       1-13-1970  Conveys easement for interceptor sewer purposes to
                        Hamilton County Metropolitan Sewer District.
13-1970      3-10-1970  Conveys easement for interceptor sewer purposes to
                        Hamilton County Metropolitan Sewer District.
17-1970      3-10-1970  Authorizes acquisition of easements for Mayview Forest
                        Sewer project.
11-1971      8-10-1971  Dedicates sewer easement in Woodlawn Municipal Park.
10-1974      3-12-1974  Appropriates slope easements on Marion Rd. for sidewalk
                        purposes.
                        Grants easement to Cincinnati Gas & Electric Co. for
24-1976      6-22-1976  anchors and guy wires for electric service to the new
                        fire house.
38-1976      11-1-1976  Grants easement to Cincinnati Gas & Electric Co. and
                        Cincinnati Bell, Inc., for utility purposes.
37-1985      8-13-1985  Grants easement to Cincinnati Gas & Electric Co. for
                        utility purposes.
                        Consenting to grant a landscape easement to MJM
09-2004      8-17-2004  Investments Group as part of the Trane Company
                        expansion at 10300 Springfield Pike.
                        Authorizing the Municipal Manager to execute a storm
18-2017      8-29-2017  water sewer easement and maintenance agreement with the
                        Woodlawn Meadows Community Association, Inc.
                       
 
TABLE C: VACATING STREETS AND ALLEYS
Ord. No. Date Description
Ord. No.     Date       Description
23-1942      10-13-1942 Chicago Ave., between Douglas Ave. and Chester Rd.
20-1961      8-22-1961  Foster Ave., from Grove Ave. to Jones Ave.
4-1968       2-27-1968  Washington Ave., between Grove Rd. and Waverly Ave.
Res. 13-1981 7-14-1981  Brown Ave., between Wayne Ave. and Grandview Ave.
38-1986      7-8-1986   Linden Ave., between Wayne Ave. and Grandview Ave.
19-1987      4-14-1987  Part of Taconic Terrace.
33-2014      8-26-2014  Vacating a portion of Shady Lane located in the
                        Village.
26-2016      11-8-2016  Arnold Drive in the Village.
21-2017      10-30-2017 Portion of Linden Avenue in the Village.
                       
 
TABLE D: DEDICATION AND PLAT APPROVAL
Ord. No. Date Description
Ord. No.     Date       Description
14-1953      7-14-1953  Accepting plat of sewer easements on Uetrecht property.
                        Accepting plats of Blocks A and B of Holly Acres
5-1955       4-19-1955  Subdivision and confirming dedication of 10-ft. wide
                        strip along Riddle Rd.
14-1955      12-13-1955 Accepting plat of Mrs. M. Herrmann of Riddleview
                        Subdivision, Block A.
4-1956       2-14-1956  Accepting plat of R. Bevis and W. Gilbert of Winton
                        Ridge Subdivision, Block C.
5-1956       2-14-1956  Accepting plat of R. Bevis and W. Gilbert of Cove Park
                        Subdivision, Block D.
9-1956       4-10-1956  Accepting part of Prairie Ave.
22-1956      12-11-1956 Accepting plat of Eden Realty Co. of First Industrial
                        Subdivision.
                        Accepting Mayview Forest Dr., Rustic Ln., Shady Ln.,
35-1957      10-8-1957  Tanager Ln., Beech Ln., Marric Ln., Mayview Forest Pl.,
                        Ronnie Rd. and Woodstock Rd.
6-1961       3-14-1961  Accepting Barron Dr.
7-1965       7-27-1965  Approving improvement plat of Redna Terrace.
1-1966       1-11-1966  Accepting improvements in Commerce Park North
                        Subdivision, Block A.
14-1970      3-10-1970  Accepting Novner Dr.
19-1970      4-14-1970  Accepting Westgate Industrial Park Subdivision.
11-1971      8-10-1971  Dedicating sewer easement in Woodlawn Municipal Park.
14-1971      10-26-1971 Accepting Novick and Weiner Second Industrial
                        Subdivision and Novner Dr.
Res. 12-1974 7-23-1974  Approving plat of Bic-Hill Acres Subdivision for record
                        purposes.
37-1979      10-23-1979 Accepting plat of J.G.E. Industrial Park, resubdivision
                        of Lot 5 and part of Lot 6, Westgate Industrial Park.
10-1980      3-25-1980  Accepting Woodlawn Blvd. and Mayview Forest Dr.
36-1981      1-26-1982  Approving subdivision plat of Kenko Commercial
                        Subdivision.
27-1983      6-28-1983  Accepting Skillman Dr. in Kenko Commercial Subdivision.
10-1984      4-24-1984  Adopting relocation plat of circulation road between
                        Grueninger Way and Marion Rd.
36-1985      8-13-1985  Accepting Redna Terrace, Part 2, Sharon Second
                        Subdivision.
4-1987       1-13-1987  Accepting plats of Sunrise Industrial Park, Blocks "A"
                        and "B."
28-1987      5-26-1987  Accepting an unnamed fire lane between Barron Dr. and
                        Terrace Dr.
26-1989      5-9-1989   Approving the replat of Sunrise Industrial Park Lots 5
                        and 6 Block B, Lot 7 Block A, and Lot 1 Block C.
                        Accepting plats of dedication to public use of
10-2000      7-11-2000  improvements on Springfield Pike by Duke Weeks Realty
                        Limited Partnership and the Kroger Company.
11-2006      4-25-2006  Designating a public park and recreation area;
                        establishing a 20 mph speed limit.
14-2006      4-25-2006  Dedicating Grueninger Way as a public street.
                        Accepting the dedication plat of Novick and Weiner
05-2009      4-28-2009  Second Industrial Subdivision Block "A" and Block "B"
                        and dedicating portions of Novner Drive in said plat.
19-2016      9-27-2016  Dedicating certain property owned by the Village for
                        road right-of- way for Terrace Drive.
29-2016      12-21-2016 Approving the dedication of plat for Arnold Drive.
27-2021      8-31-2021  Accepting Arnold Drive.
21-2022      8-30-2022  Accepting Timberview Court and Timberland Drive.
                       
 
TABLE E: ACQUISITION AND DISPOSAL OF REAL PROPERTY
Ord. No. Date Description
Ord. No.     Date       Description
23-1957      8-7-1957   Appropriating property for street purposes in Mayview
                        Forest First and Second Subdivisions.
16-1960      7-26-1960  Conveying land to Princeton Local School District Board
                        of Education.
4-1963       2-12-1963  Authorizing purchase of land from P. Lincoln Mitchell,
                        Jr., Executor of Estate for P. Lincoln Mitchell.
                        Authorizing quit claim deed to R.J. Katz for abandoned
12-1965      12-14-1965 portion of sewer easement in Lot 13 of Woodlawn First
                        Industrial Subdivision.
Res. 10-1968 3-12-1968  Authorizing quit claim deed to Columbian Carbon Co. for
                        an easement in vicinity of Glendale-Milford Rd.
2-1971       1-16-1971  Authorizing purchase of property in vicinity of Chester
                        Rd. from Cincinnati Model Homes Co. for park purposes.
22-1972      9-26-1972  Authorizing warranty deed to State for repair work on
                        S.R. 4.
23-1972      10-24-1972 Authorizing sale of property in Sec. 10, T. 3 E. R. 1,
                        Springfield Twp.
13-1973      7-24-1973  Authorizing contract with Mt. Zion Baptist Church for
                        purchase and sale of certain real estate.
8-1974       2-18-1974  Authorizing purchase of property from P.L. Mitchell,
                        Jr., for street purposes.
2-1976       1-27-1976  Authorizing purchase of 10100-116 Springfield Pike.
Res. 20-1981 9-22-1981  Authorizing purchase of property for improvements in
                        Grove Rd.- Springfield Pike Revitalization Area.
Res. 21-1981 9-22-1981  Authorizing purchase of property for improvements in
                        Grove Rd.- Springfield Pike Revitalization Area.
Res. 7-1982  3-23-1982  Authorizing purchase of property for improvements in
                        Grove Rd.- Springfield Pike Revitalization Area.
4-1983       1-25-1983  Authorizing sale of Lot 53 in William Jones
                        Subdivision.
5-1983       1-25-1983  Authorizing sale of Lots 135, 144 and 145 in William
                        Carter Subdivision.
6-1983       1-25-1983  Authorizing sale of Lots 146, 153 and 156 in William
                        Carter Subdivision.
                        Authorizing transfer of Lots 19 and 20 in William M.
16-1983      4-12-1983  Jones Subdivision of Foster Hill Station to Woodlawn
                        Community Improvement Corp.
                        Authorizing transfer of property to Cincinnati
22-1983      5-24-1983  Metropolitan Housing Authority for construction of
                        single-family residences.
53-1983      12-13-1983 Authorizing sale of Leslie Ave. property to N. Hodge.
30-1984      8-14-1984  Authorizing purchase of Book 598, Pg. 80, Parcels 91 to
                        94, from estate of T. Harris.
                        Authorizing transfer of property on Grove Rd. and
34-1984      9-25-1984  Waverly Rd. to Cincinnati Metropolitan Housing
                        Authority for construction of single-family residences.
1-1985       1-8-1985   Appropriating Parcel No. 2 for Planned Redevelopment of
                        Woodlawn.
5-1985       2-14-1985  Amends Ord. 34-1984.
                        Authorizing sale of part of a lot located on Gove Rd.
30-1990      9-11-1990  immediately west of S & W Car Care, no longer needed
                        for Municipal purposes.
23-1991      5-14-1991  Authorizing sale of the easterly half of Lots 19 and
                        20, Wm. Jones Subdivision, to Thelma Novick.
                        Appropriating a fee simple interest on a portion of the
07-2000      5-31-2000  property owned by American Self Storage Corporation on
                        property located at 101 East Glendale Milford Road.
                        Appropriating certain real property from the estate of
02-2004      2-10-2004  Thelma E. Novick for public use and the Grove Road
                        improvements and construction.
                        Appropriating real property of Royce and Ernestine
03-2004      3-23-2004  Chandler for public use and the Grove Road improvements
                        and construction.
                        Authorizing the transfer of certain properties owned by
10-2016      6-16-2016  the Village to the Woodlawn Community Improvement
                        Corporation.
                        Authorizing the transfer of certain property owned by
7-2019       6-11-2019  the Village of Woodlawn to the Woodlawn Community
                        Improvement Corporation.
                        Approving a sale/purchase agreement with the Hamilton
15-2021      3-30-2021  County Land Reutilization Corporation to acquire vacant
                        land located at 121 Chatsworth Avenue.
Res. 31-2022 5-31-2022  Authorizing purchase of property located at 10187 and
                        10193 Springfield Pike.
Res. 55-2022 11-29-2022 Authorizing purchase of property located on Taconic
                        Terrace.
13-2023      4-25-2023  Approving the sale of vacant property located at 20 and
                        22 Leslie Avenue.
Res. 18-2023 5-23-2023  Authorizing purchase of property located at 10171 and
                        10175 Springfield Pike.
Res. 19-2023 5-23-2023  Authorizing purchase of property located on Warren
                        Avenue.
Res. 26-2023 7-25-2023  Authorizing purchase of property located at 10171 and
                        10175 Springfield Pike.
29-2023      8-29-2023  Approving the sale of vacant property located at 62
                        McLean Street.
Res. 38-2023 11-28-2023 Authorizing first amendment to agreement to purchase
                        property located at 10171 and 10175 Springfield Pike.
Res. 04-2024 1-30-2024  Authorizing purchase of property located on Grove Road/
                        Jones Avenue.
                        Authorizing a second amendment to purchase agreement
Res. 12-2024 3-26-2024  for property located at 10171 and 10175 Springfield
                        Pike.
Res. 13-2024 4-30-2024  Authorizing the purchase of property located at 84
                        Waverly Avenue and 612 Marion Road.
                       
 
TABLE F: LEASE OF REAL PROPERTY
 
Ord. No. Date       Description
23-1982  5-25-1982  Authorizing lease with YMCA for basement of 10151
                    Springfield Pike.
                    Appropriating all leasehold interests and improvements
25-1999  11-23-1999 owned by Sherwin Williams Company on property located at
                    10360 Springfield Pike.
08-2006  3-28-2006  Authorizing lease-purchasing agreement with U.S. Bank
                    National Association.
                   
 
TABLE G: STREET GRADE LEVELS AND CHANGE OF STREET NAMES
Ord. No. Date Description
Ord. No. Date       Description
12-1941  12-9-1941  Waverly Ave. to Booker Ave. and Foster Ave. to Stowe Ave.
4-1949   2-18-1949  Riddle Rd. to Tacke Rd.
10-1951  9-11-1951  Establishing grade for sidewalk on west side of Chester
                    Rd., north of Brown Ave.
21-1956  11-13-1956 Part of Tacke Rd. to Leacrest Rd.
41-1957  12-10-1957 Foster Ave. to Firestone Ave. and Waverly Ave. to
                    Chatsworth Ave.
16-1968  10-8-1968  Bellbrook Ct. to Princess Ct.
 
TABLE H: ANNEXATION AND DETACHMENT OF TERRITORY
 
Ord. No.    Date       Description
4-1941      7-9-1941   Authorizing annexation of land in south half of Sec. 5,
                       T. 3, E. R. 1, Springfield Twp.
8-1941      10-31-1941 Accepting annexation of land in south half of Sec. 5, T.
                       3, E. R. 1, Springfield Twp.
Res. 4-1986 4-8-1986   Accepting annexation of 14.660 acres in Springfield Twp.
 
TABLE I: ZONING MAP CHANGES
Ord. No. Date Description
Ord. No. Date      Description
27-1993  9-28-1993 The Woodlawn Prairie Ave. Park property, from R3 to R4-A.
16-1995  6-13-1995 Property located at 10090 Wayne Avenue and 10112 Wayne
                   Avenue from R-3 to R-M.
11-2000  8-22-2000 Establishing D-1 Downtown District and Repealing B-1 Zoning
                   District and B-2 Zoning District.
01-2001  2-13–200Property located north of Marion Road and east of
                   Springfield Pike from D-1, B2 and OS to IP District.
12-2007  5-29-2007 Amending the official zoning map to reflect the new
                   Springfield Pike Overlay District.
15-2016  7-26-2016 Rezoning property located in the vicinity of Mayview Forest
                   Drive from C-C to R-3.
01-2019  1-29-2019 Rezoning property located at 10024 Wayne Avenue from R-3 to
                   RM- PUD.
1-2020   1-28-2020 Rezoning property located at 10090 Wayne Avenue from R-3 to
                   RM- PUD.
                   Rezoning property located in the vicinity of Springfield
10-2024  6-25-2024 Pike, Terrance Drive and Barron Drive from Springfield Pike
                   Overlay District to Industrial Park District.
                  
 
COMPARATIVE TABLES
References to Ohio Revised Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO OHIO REVISED CODE
ORC Cites Code Section
ORC Cites                                 Code Section
1.01                                      202.01
1.02                                      202.02
1.05                                      202.02
1.14                                      202.03
1.15                                      202.03
1.23                                      202.05
1.42                                      202.03
1.43                                      202.03
1.44                                      202.02
1.45                                      202.03
1.50                                      202.06
1.55                                      202.05
1.57                                      202.04
1.58                                      202.04
1.59                                      202.02
121.22                                    286.04
128.01(A)                                 606.30
128.96(F) - (H)                           606.30
128.99(A), (B)                            606.30
Chapter 146                               286.04
146.03                                    286.02
146.04                                    286.02
146.05                                    286.03
146.12                                    286.05
146.14                                    286.05
146.16                                    286.06
146.17                                    286.06
701.01                                    202.02
723.011                                   660.05
733.82                                    237.14
901.51                                    642.06
901.99(A)                                 642.06
925.62                                    618.06
925.99(B)                                 618.06
951.01                                    618.01
951.02                                    618.01
951.99                                    618.01
955.10                                    618.095
955.11(A)                                 618.01
955.21                                    618.08
955.22(B), (D) - (I)                      618.01
955.222                                   618.01
955.24                                    618.09
955.25                                    618.10
955.43(A) - (C)                           618.16
955.54                                    618.17
                                          618.09,
955.99(B)                                 618.095,
                                          618.10
955.99(D)                                 618.16
955.99(E)                                 618.08
955.99(E)(2)                              618.02
955.99(E) - (H), (J), (L) - (N), (P), (Q) 618.01
955.99(O)                                 618.17
959.01                                    618.02
955.011(B)                                618.16
959.02                                    618.03
959.03                                    618.04
959.13                                    618.05
959.131                                   618.05
959.15                                    618.15
959.21                                    618.18
959.99(B)                                 618.03
959.99(C)                                 618.04,
                                          618.15
959.99(D)                                 618.05,
                                          618.18
959.99(E)                                 618.02
959.99(E)(3)                              618.02
959.99(E)(7)                              618.18
959.99(I)                                 618.15
1349.17                                   642.155
1349.99                                   642.155
2307.44                                   636.19
2901.01                                   606.01
2901.02                                   606.03
2901.03                                   606.04
2901.04                                   606.05
2901.09                                   606.31
2901.11                                   606.055
2901.13                                   606.06
2901.21                                   606.07
2901.22                                   606.02
2901.23                                   606.08
2901.24                                   606.09
2903.05                                   636.01
2903.09                                   636.001
2903.10                                   636.13
2903.13                                   636.02
2903.14                                   636.03
2903.16                                   636.13
2903.21                                   636.04
2903.211                                  636.045
2903.216                                  636.22
2903.22                                   636.05
2903.31                                   636.19
2903.311                                  636.19
2905.03                                   636.06
2905.12                                   636.08
2907.01                                   666.01
2907.04                                   666.02
2907.06                                   666.03
2907.071                                  666.24
2907.08                                   666.05
2907.09                                   666.04
2907.10                                   666.06
2907.23                                   666.07
2907.231                                  666.07
2907.24(A), (C)(1), (D), (E)              666.08
2907.241                                  666.085
2907.25                                   666.09
2907.26                                   666.10
2907.31                                   666.11
2907.311                                  666.115
2907.33                                   666.14
2907.35                                   666.15
2907.36                                   666.16
2907.37                                   666.17
2907.38                                   666.18
2907.39                                   666.19
2907.40                                   666.20
2907.311                                  666.10
2909.01                                   642.01
2909.03                                   642.09
2909.06                                   642.10
2909.07                                   642.11
2909.08(A) - (E)                          672.11
2909.09                                   642.10
2909.10                                   642.34
2909.101                                  642.34
2909.31                                   606.29
2911.21                                   642.12
2911.211                                  642.125
2911.23                                   642.12
2911.32                                   642.13
2913.01                                   642.01
2913.02                                   642.02
2913.03                                   642.04
2913.04                                   642.05
2913.07                                   642.33
2913.11                                   642.14
2913.21                                   642.15
2913.31(B), (C)(2)                        642.145
2913.32                                   642.146
2913.33                                   642.16
2913.40                                   642.32
2913.401                                  642.32
2913.41                                   642.17
2913.42                                   642.18
2913.43                                   642.19
2913.44                                   642.20
2913.441                                  606.26
2913.45                                   642.21
2913.47                                   642.28
2913.48                                   642.31
2913.49                                   642.205
2913.51                                   642.22
2913.71                                   642.03
2913.72                                   642.035
2915.01                                   630.01
2915.02(A) - (G), (K)                     630.02
2915.03                                   630.03
2915.04                                   630.04
2915.05                                   630.05
2915.06                                   630.14
2915.061                                  630.14
2915.09                                   630.06
2915.091                                  630.10
2915.092                                  630.11
2915.093                                  630.12
2915.094                                  630.13
2915.10                                   630.07
2915.11                                   630.08
2915.12                                   630.09
2915.13                                   630.12
2915.14                                   630.15
2917.01                                   648.10
2917.03                                   648.01
2917.031                                  648.01
2917.04                                   648.02
2917.05                                   648.03
2917.11                                   648.04,
                                          648.06
2917.12                                   648.05
2917.13                                   648.06
2917.14                                   648.11
2917.21                                   636.15
2917.211                                  666.23
2917.31                                   648.07
2917.32                                   648.08
2917.40                                   636.18
2917.41                                   642.30
2919.22(A) - (E), (H)                     636.11
2919.23                                   636.12
2919.24                                   636.125
2919.25                                   636.17
2919.27                                   636.045
2921.01                                   606.01
2921.13                                   606.10
2921.14                                   606.105
2921.21                                   606.11
2921.22                                   606.12
2921.23                                   606.13
2921.29                                   606.29
2921.31                                   606.14
2921.32                                   606.15
2921.321                                  642.08
2921.33                                   606.16
2921.331                                  606.165
2921.36                                   612.09
2921.42                                   606.17
2921.43                                   606.18
2921.44                                   606.19
2921.45                                   606.20
2921.51                                   606.25
2921.52(A) - (D)                          606.28
2923.02                                   606.21
2923.03                                   606.22
2923.11                                   672.01,
                                          672.10
2923.12                                   672.02
2923.1211(B), (C)                         672.14
2923.1212                                 672.14
2923.122(C) - (G)                         672.13
2923.126                                  672.14
2923.131                                  672.025
2923.15                                   672.03
2923.16                                   672.04
2923.162                                  672.095
2923.18                                   672.05
2923.19                                   672.06
2923.20                                   672.07
2923.201                                  672.15
2923.211                                  672.085
2923.24                                   672.12
2925.01                                   624.01
2925.04(A), (B), (C)(5), (G)              624.025
2925.11                                   624.03
2925.12                                   624.04
2925.13                                   624.05
2925.31                                   624.07
2925.32(B)(4), (D)(2), (F), (G)           624.073
2925.33                                   624.076
2925.34                                   624.21
2925.36 (A) - (D), (F)                    624.08
2925.37(A), (G)                           624.17
2925.50                                   624.11
2925.51                                   624.10
2925.511                                  624.10
2925.55                                   624.19
2925.56                                   624.19
2925.57                                   624.19
2925.58                                   624.19
2925.62                                   624.22
2927.02                                   636.20
2927.021                                  636.20
2927.022                                  636.20
2927.023                                  636.20
2927.024                                  636.20
2927.11                                   642.07
2927.12                                   636.21
2927.15                                   636.23
2927.17                                   666.23
2929.21                                   698.02
2929.22                                   698.03
2929.23                                   666.99
2929.24                                   698.02
2929.25                                   698.02
2929.26                                   698.02
2929.27                                   698.02
2929.28                                   698.02
2929.31                                   698.04
2929.41                                   698.05
2935.041                                  606.23
2935.36(E)                                698.01
2981.07                                   642.29
2981.11                                   606.24
2981.12                                   606.24
2981.13(A)                                606.24
3701.81                                   660.02
3701.82                                   660.01
3701.99(B)                                660.01
3701.99(C)                                660.02
3715.05                                   624.19
3715.06                                   624.19
3716.11                                   636.16
3716.99(C)                                636.16
3719.08(A), (E)                           624.13
3719.172(A), (B)                          624.09
3719.19                                   624.11
3719.99(C)                                624.13
3719.99(E)                                624.09
3767.13                                   660.04
3767.29                                   660.06
3767.99(B)                                660.06
3767.99(C)                                660.04
3780.36                                   624.02
3780.99                                   624.02
3781.55                                   666.04
3791.031                                  660.17
4301.01                                   612.01
4301.22(A)(2)                             612.10
4301.22(B)                                612.03
4301.244                                  612.01
4301.62                                   612.07
4301.63                                   612.02
4301.631                                  612.10
4301.633                                  612.02
4301.634                                  612.02
4301.637                                  612.06
4301.64                                   612.04
4301.65                                   612.11
4301.69                                   612.02
4301.70                                   612.06
                                          612.06,
4301.99(A)                                612.07,
                                          612.11
4301.99(B)                                612.04,
                                          612.10
4301.99(C)                                612.02
4301.99(D), (H)                           612.03
4301.99(E)                                612.02,
                                          612.10
4301.99(F)                                612.02
4301.99(I)                                612.02
4301.99(J)                                612.11
4303.202(D)(2)                            612.08
4303.208(C)                               612.08
4303.25                                   612.05
4303.99(D)                                612.08
4501.01(LL)                               402.075
4501.01(TT)                               416.12
4503.11(A)                                436.09
4503.11(D)                                436.09
4503.111                                  436.09
4503.12                                   436.09
4503.21                                   436.09
4505.18                                   436.08
4506.01                                   442.01
4506.011                                  442.02
4506.04(A), (B)                           442.03
4506.04(C)                                442.03
4506.10(A), (E)                           442.04
4506.011                                  442.01
4506.12(I)                                442.03
4506.12(J)                                442.03
4506.15                                   442.05
4506.19                                   442.06
4506.20                                   442.07
4506.23                                   442.08
4507.02(A)(1)                             436.01
4507.02(A)(2)                             436.02
4507.03                                   436.01
4507.04                                   436.01
4507.05(F), (I)                           436.03
4507.071(B) - (J)                         436.035
4507.213                                  436.01
4507.30                                   436.04
4507.35                                   436.06
4507.99                                   436.02
4509.102                                  606.10
                                          436.071,
4510.04                                   436.073,
                                          436.074,
                                          436.075
4510.05                                   408.03,
                                          698.07
4510.11                                   436.071
4510.12                                   436.072
4510.14                                   436.073
4510.16                                   436.074
4510.21                                   436.075
4511.01(A)                                402.53
4511.01(B)                                402.20
4511.01(C)                                402.21
4511.01(D)                                402.12
4511.01(E)                                402.29
4511.01(F)                                402.37
4511.01(G)                                402.05
4511.01(H)                                402.22
4511.01(I)                                402.08
4511.01(J)                                402.02
4511.01(K)                                402.51
4511.01(L)                                402.06
4511.01(M)                                402.50
4511.01(N)                                402.38
4511.01(O)                                402.26
4511.01(P)                                402.30
4511.01(Q)                                402.32
4511.01(T)                                402.13
4511.01(U)                                402.15
4511.01(V)                                402.17
4511.01(W)                                402.25
4511.01(X)                                402.24
4511.01(Y)                                402.11
4511.01(Z)                                402.27
4511.01(AA)                               402.195
4511.01(BB)                               402.44
4511.01(CC)                               402.09
4511.01(DD)                               402.28
4511.01(EE)                               402.35
4511.01(FF)                               402.39
4511.01(GG)                               402.19
4511.01(II)                               402.395
4511.01(JJ)                               402.40
4511.01(KK)                               402.18
4511.01(LL)                               402.10
4511.01(MM)                               402.36
4511.01(NN)                               402.07
4511.01(OO)                               402.33
4511.01(PP)                               402.52
4511.01(QQ)                               402.48
4511.01(RR)                               402.49
4511.01(SS)                               402.31
4511.01(TT)                               402.47
4511.01(UU)                               402.34
4511.01(VV)                               402.355
4511.01(WW)                               402.165
4511.01(XX)                               402.03
4511.01(YY)                               402.16
4511.01(ZZ)                               402.14
4511.01(AAA)                              402.46
4511.01(BBB)                              402.42
4511.01(CCC)                              402.04
4511.01(DDD)                              402.335
4511.01(EEE)                              402.225
4511.01(FFF)                              402.077
4511.01(GGG)                              402.02
4511.01(HHH)                              402.227
4511.01(III)                              402.275
4511.01(JJJ)                              402.345
4511.01(KKK)                              402.045
4511.01(LLL)                              402.177
4511.01(MMM)                              402.175
4511.01(NNN)                              402.197
4511.01(OOO)                              402.277
4511.01(PPP)                              402.393
4511.01(QQQ)                              402.173
4511.01(RRR)                              402.54
4511.01(SSS)                              402.115
4511.01(TTT)                              402.115
4511.01(UUU)                              402.115
4511.01(XXX)                              402.226
4511.01(YYY)                              402.55
4511.03                                   432.18
4511.031                                  414.11
4511.04                                   404.03
4511.041                                  404.035
4511.042                                  404.035
4511.05                                   404.04
4511.051                                  412.05
4511.12(A)                                414.01
4511.12(B)                                414.01
4511.121(A) - (C), (E)                    414.01
4511.121(D)                               414.01
4511.13                                   414.03
4511.131                                  414.04
4511.132                                  432.155
4511.14                                   414.05
4511.16                                   414.07
4511.17                                   414.08
4511.18                                   414.10
4511.203                                  436.05
4511.204                                  432.42
4511.205                                  432.43
4511.213                                  432.195
4511.214                                  434.09
4511.215                                  434.09
4511.216                                  434.09
4511.25                                   432.01
4511.26                                   432.02
4511.27                                   432.03
4511.28                                   432.04
4511.29                                   432.05
4511.30                                   432.06
4511.31                                   432.07
4511.32                                   432.28
4511.33                                   432.08
4511.34                                   432.09
4511.35                                   432.29
4511.36                                   432.10
4511.37                                   432.11
4511.38                                   432.12
4511.39                                   432.13
4511.40                                   432.14
4511.41                                   432.15
4511.42                                   432.16
4511.43                                   432.17
4511.431(A)                               432.20
4511.431(B)                               432.20
4511.432                                  432.205
4511.44                                   432.20
4511.441                                  416.09
4511.45                                   432.19
4511.451                                  432.21
4511.452                                  416.08
4511.454                                  432.19
4511.46                                   416.01
4511.47                                   416.02
4511.48                                   416.03
4511.481                                  416.10
4511.49                                   416.04
4511.491                                  416.11
4511.50                                   416.05
4511.51                                   416.06
4511.511                                  416.07
4511.512                                  416.12
4511.513                                  416.13
4511.514                                  416.14
4511.52                                   474.01
4511.521                                  474.09
4511.522                                  474.13
4511.53                                   474.02
4511.55                                   474.04
4511.60                                   432.27
4511.61                                   432.32
4511.62                                   432.31
4511.63                                   432.32
4511.64                                   432.33
4511.65                                   414.02
4511.66                                   452.01
4511.661                                  452.06
4511.67                                   452.02
4511.68(A) - (C)                          452.03
4511.681                                  452.055
4511.70                                   432.23,
                                          452.07
4511.701                                  440.08 
4511.71(A), (B)                           432.24
4511.711                                  432.22
4511.712                                  432.34
4511.713(A), (B)                          432.39
4511.714(A) - (D)                         432.24
4511.72                                   432.25
4511.73                                   432.26
4511.74                                   412.01
4511.75                                   432.30
4511.79                                   442.09
4511.81(A) - (H), (K), (L)                438.28
4511.82                                   432.40
4511.84                                   432.41
4511.85                                   440.11
4511.99                                   408.02
4511.991                                  408.02
4513.02(A), (H)                           438.01
4513.021                                  438.26
4513.03                                   438.02
4513.04                                   438.03
4513.05                                   438.04
4513.06                                   438.05
4513.07                                   438.06
4513.071                                  438.25
4513.08                                   438.07
4513.09                                   438.08
4513.10                                   438.09
4513.11                                   438.10
4513.111                                  438.10
4513.112                                  438.10
4513.113                                  438.10
4513.114                                  438.10
4513.115                                  438.10
4513.12                                   438.11
4513.13                                   438.12
4513.14                                   438.13
4513.15                                   438.14
4513.16                                   438.15
4513.17                                   438.16
4513.171                                  438.165
4513.182                                  438.17
4513.19                                   438.18
4513.20                                   438.19
4513.21                                   438.20
4513.021                                  438.24
4513.22                                   438.21
4513.23                                   438.22
4513.24                                   438.23
4513.241(C) - (J)                         438.235
4513.241(K)                               438.235
4513.263                                  438.29
4513.29                                   440.04
4513.30                                   438.24
4513.31                                   440.06
4513.32                                   440.05
4513.34                                   440.01
4513.36                                   404.02
4513.361                                  404.08
4513.60                                   452.055
4513.601                                  452.055
4513.61                                   452.05
4513.64                                   452.05
4513.65                                   660.07
4513.66                                   436.14
4513.68                                   436.14
                                          438.08,
                                          438.17,
                                          438.19,
4513.99                                   438.24,
                                          440.01,
                                          440.04,
                                          440.05,
                                          440.06
4519.01                                   476.01
4519.02                                   476.08
4519.20                                   476.02
4519.40                                   476.03
4519.401                                  434.09
4519.41                                   476.04
4519.44                                   476.05
4519.46                                   476.06
4519.48                                   476.07
4519.66                                   476.09
4549.02                                   436.11
4549.021                                  436.12
4549.03                                   436.13
4549.05                                   444.01
4549.08                                   436.10
4549.081(B)                               414.01
4549.081(C)                               414.01
4549.11(A)                                436.09
4549.11(B)                                436.09
4549.12(A)                                436.09
4549.12(B)                                436.09
4549.20                                   438.32
4933.18                                   642.26
4933.19                                   642.26
5577.05                                   440.02
5577.11                                   440.03
5577.15                                   440.05
5577.99(E)                                440.03
5589.08                                   440.07
5589.081                                  440.07
5589.99(B)                                440.07
                                          
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.     Date Passed Description
-            - -         1444.05
7-96         - -         T.S.O. A
4-1941       7-9-1941    T.S.O. H
8-1941       10-31-1941  T.S.O. H
12-1941      12-9-1941   T.S.O. G
8-1942       3-10-1942   T.S.O. A
23-1942      10-13-1942  T.S.O. C
2540         9-12-1945   606.27
4-1946       3-12-1946   T.S.O. A
5-1946       3-12-1946   T.S.O. A
16-1946      12-19-1946  1220.01,
                         1220.03
                         880.04,
8-1947       11-11-1947  880.13,
                         880.15
8-1948       4-13-1948   T.S.O. A
9-1948       4-13-1948   T.S.O. A
10-1948      4-13-1948   T.S.O. A
12-1948      5-11-1948   1024.08
17-1948      7-13-1948   T.S.O. A
4-1949       2-18-1949   T.S.O. G
5-1949       3-8-1949    T.S.O. A
5-1951       5-8-1951    T.S.O. B
10-1951      9-11-1951   T.S.O. G
6-1953       4-14-1953   T.S.O. A
14-1953      7-14-1953   T.S.O. D
18-1953      11-10-1953  T.S.O. A
19-1953      11-10-1953  T.S.O. A
                         1442.01,
24-1953      12-8-1953   1442.02,
                         1442.04
5-1955       4-19-1955   T.S.O. D
14-1955      12-13-1955  T.S.O. D
18-1955      12-13-1955  T.S.O. A
19-1955      12-13-1955  T.S.O. A
4-1956       2-14-1956   T.S.O. D
5-1956       2-14-1956   T.S.O. D
9-1956       4-10-1956   T.S.O. D
3200         5-23-1956   404.01,
                         642.23
21-1956      11-13-1956  T.S.O. G
22-1956      12-11-1956  T.S.O. D
17-1957      7-9-1957    660.16
23-1957      8-7-1957    T.S.O. E
35-1957      10-8-1957   T.S.O. D
41-1957      12-10-1957  T.S.O. G
6-1958       5-13-1958   T.S.O. A
6-1959       1-13-1959   880.02
7-1959       1-21-1959   T.S.O. A
17-1959      6-9-1959    440.01
14-1960      5-24-1960   242.02
16-1960      7-26-1960   T.S.O. E
6-1961       3-14-1961   T.S.O. D
12-1961      4-25-1961   T.S.O. A
13-1961      4-25-1961   T.S.O. A
20-1961      8-22-1961   T.S.O. C
4-1963       2-12-1963   T.S.O. E
11-1963      8-27-1963   1424.05-
                         1424.07
6-1964       4-28-1964   T.S.O. A
8-1964       8-25-1964   1024.01-
                         1024.04
                         868.01,
                         868.04,
3-1965       3-23-1965   868.07-
                         868.12,
                         868.14-
                         868.19
6-1965       6-8-1965    1024.05-
                         1024.07
5-1965       7-13-1965   1022.01-
                         1022.03
7-1965       7-27-1965   T.S.O. D
11-1965      9-28-1965   868.13
12-1965      12-14-1965  T.S.O. B,
                         E
1-1966       1-11-1966   T.S.O. D
14-1967      7-25-1967   660.12,
                         660.15
4-1968       2-27-1968   T.S.O. C
Res. 10-1968 3-12-1968   T.S.O. B,
                         E
16-1968      10-8-1968   T.S.O. G
17-1968      12-10-1968  668.02-
                         668.05
10-1969      5-13-1969   T.S.O. A
                         1468.01-
17-1969      7-22-1969   1468.06,
                         1468.08
23-1969      11-11-1969  T.S.O. B
24-1969      12-9-1969   T.S.O. A
5-1970       1-13-1970   T.S.O. B
13-1970      3-10-1970   T.S.O. B
14-1970      3-10-1970   T.S.O. D
17-1970      3-10-1970   T.S.O. B
19-1970      4-14-1970   T.S.O. D
2-1971       1-16-1971   T.S.O. E
7-1971       3-23-1971   T.S.O. A
11-1971      8-10-1971   T.S.O. B,
                         D
14-1971      10-26-1971  T.S.O. D
22-1972      9-26-1972   T.S.O. E
23-1972      10-24-1972  T.S.O. E
24-1972      11-14-1972  237.04
6-1973       3-13-1973   T.S.O. A
9-1973       5-22-1973   T.S.O. A
13-1973      7-24-1973   T.S.O. E
19-1973      9-25-1973   452.13
8-1974       2-18-1974   T.S.O. E
10-1974      3-12-1974   T.S.O. B
12-1974      4-23-1974   1062.99
14-1974      5-28-1974   T.S.O. A
                         1062.01-
18-1974      7-23-1974   1062.05,
                         1062.99
Res. 12-1974 7-23-1974   T.S.O. D
2-1976       1-27-1976   T.S.O. E
3-1976       2-24-1976   208.01
10-1976      4-13-1976   414.09
14-1976      4-13-1976   1020.01
24-1976      6-22-1976   T.S.O. B
26-1976      6-22-1976   660.14
29-1976      9-14-1976   T.S.O. A
38-1976      11-1-1976   T.S.O. B
                         1060.03,
45-1976      11-23-1976  1060.04,
                         1060.99
10-1977      3-22-1977   452.03
11-1977      3-22-1977   438.27
7-1977       4-12-1977   660.13
35-1977      9-27-1977   278.06
29-1978      9-26-1978   1462.03
31-1978      11-14-1978  668.01
35-1978      11-28-1978  452.03
14-1979      4-10-1979   414.09
23-1979      8-14-1979   T.S.O. A
                         1240.01-
                         1240.06,
                         1242.01-
                         1242.03,
                         1242.99,
                         1244.01-
22-1979      9-11-1979   1244.06,
                         1246.01-
                         1246.04,
                         1248.01-
                         1248.10,
                         1250.01,
                         1250.03-
                         1250.08
33-1979      9-25-1979   452.03
26-1979      10-9-1979   1064.01
28-1979      10-9-1979   1064.02
37-1979      10-23-1979  T.S.O. D
41-1979      10-23-1979  1424.04
8-1980       1-22-1980   452.03
10-1980      3-25-1980   T.S.O. D
22-1980      3-25-1980   1066.01
                         280.01,
35-1980      6-10-1980   280.02,
                         280.04-
                         280.06
44-1980      9-23-1980   278.01-
                         278.05
45-1980      11-11-1980  278.04
48-1980      1-13-1981   474.10,
                         474.11
7-1981       3-24-1981   237.06
Res. 13-1981 7-14-1981   T.S.O. C
26-1981      8-17-1981   252.01
23-1981      9-22-1981   206.04
Res. 20-1981 9-22-1981   T.S.O. E
Res. 21-1981 9-22-1981   T.S.O. E
37-1981      12-8-1981   220.02
36-1981      1-26-1982   T.S.O. D
Res. 7-1982  3-23-1982   T.S.O. E
23-1982      5-25-1982   T.S.O. F
27-1982      8-10-1982   237.05
4-1983       1-25-1983   T.S.O. E
5-1983       1-25-1983   T.S.O. E
6-1983       1-25-1983   T.S.O. E
16-1983      4-12-1983   T.S.O. E
22-1983      5-24-1983   T.S.O. E
083-58       6-21-1983   636.19
27-1983      6-28-1983   T.S.O. D
38-1983      9-27-1983   221.01
53-1983      12-13-1983  T.S.O. E
10-1984      4-24-1984   T.S.O. D
21-1984      8-14-1984   237.05
30-1984      8-14-1984   T.S.O. E
34-1984      9-25-1984   T.S.O. E
1-1985       1-8-1985    T.S.O. E
5-1985       2-14-1985   T.S.O. E
36-1985      8-13-1985   T.S.O. D
37-1985      8-13-1985   T.S.O. B
4-1986       2-11-1986   290.01
10-1986      3-11-1986   828.01,
                         828.99
Res. 4-1986  4-8-1986    T.S.O. H
38-1986      7-8-1986    T.S.O. C
46-1986      10-28-1986  237.07
4-1987       1-13-1987   T.S.O. D
19-1987      4-14-1987   T.S.O. C
20-1987      4-14-1987   242.07
28-1987      5-26-1987   T.S.O. D
-            9-8-1987    1220.02
27-1987      9-8-1987    1220.03-
                         1220.06
21-1988      4-26-1988   237.08
16-1989      3-28-1989   237.10
26-1989      5-9-1989    T.S.O. D
55-1989      9-12-1989   T.S.O. A
30-1990      9-11-1990   T.S.O. E
39-1990      10-25-1990  290.03
42-1990      10-25-1990  452.03
48-1990      11-13-1990  280.04
5-1991       2-26-1991   1060.01,
                         1060.02
23-1991      5-14-1991   T.S.O. E
24           5-14-1991   884.01
11-1992      3-10-1992   660.18
48-1992      11-24-1992  280.03
27-1993      9-28-1993   T.S.O. I
                         812.01-
9-1994       2-8-1994    812.06,
                         812.99
32-1994      7-12-1994   T.S.O. A
16-1995      6-13-1995   T.S.O. I
25-1999      11-23-1999  T.S.O. F
2000-6       2-1-2000    636.10
07-2000      5-31-2000   T.S.O. E
10-2000      7-11-2000   T.S.O. D
11-2000      8-22-2000   T.S.O. I
01-2001      2-13-2001   T.S.O. I
02-2004      2-10-2004   T.S.O. E
03-2004      3-23-2004   T.S.O. E
08-2004      5-25-2004   1444.01-
                         1444.04
09-2004      8-17-2004   T.S.O. B
21-2005      7-26-2005   222.01
05-2006      2-28-2006   T.S.O. A
07-2006      3-28-2006   T.S.O. A
08-2006      3-28-2006   T.S.O. F
10-2006      4-25-2006   T.S.O. A
11-2006      4-25-2006   T.S.O. D
14-2006      4-25-2006   T.S.O. D
21-2006      7-25-2006   1610.01
01-2007      1-17-2007   220.01
                         1426.01,
06-2007      3-27-2007   1426.02,
                         1444.05
                         882.01 -
09-2007      4-24-2007   882.26,
                         882.99
11-2007      5-29-2007   636.09
12-2007      5-29-07     T.S.O. I
16-2007      6-26-2007   237.07
25-2007      - -2007     Ch. 1250, App. F
01-2009      2-5-2009    220.01
05-2009      4-28-2009   T.S.O. D
07-2009      4-28-2009   1062.04
Res. 24-2009 9-29-2009   816.01 -
                         816.09
27-2009      10-27-2009  237.12
02-2010      1-28-2010   220.01
10-2010      5-27-2010   880.02
33-2010      12-28-2010  Ch. 1040, Ed. Note
01-2011      1-25-2011   660.19
09-2011      1-25-2011   237.11
54-2011      12-27-2011  438.33
20-2012      8-28-2012   1468.03
25-2012      10-30-2012  624.20
26-2012      10-30-2012  222.01
                         434.01 -
30-2012      12-18-2012  434.08,
                         434.99
01-2013      1-29-2013   220.01
                         1252.01 -
                         1252.07,
                         1253.01,
                         1254.01 -
                         1254.12,
                         1256.01 -
                         1256.08,
                         1258.01 -
                         1258.07,
                         1262.01 -
                         1262.08,
                         1264.01 -
                         1264.08,
                         1266.01 -
                         1266.08,
                         1268.01 -
                         1268.09,
                         1270.01 -
                         1270.08,
                         1272.01 -
                         1272.07,
                         1274.01 -
17-2013      9-24-2013   1274.08,
                         1276.01 -
                         1276.08,
                         1280.01 -
                         1280.11,
                         1282.01 -
                         1282.06,
                         1288.01 -
                         1288.13,
                         1292.01 -
                         1292.16,
                         1294.01 -
                         1294.10,
                         1295.01 -
                         1295.10,
                         1296.01 -
                         1296.29,
                         1297.01 -
                         1297.08,
                         1298.01 -
                         1298.06,
                         1299.01 -
                         1299.04
21-2013      12-18-2013  1026.01 -
                         1026.19
01-2014      1-28-2014   220.01
03-2014      1-28-2014   1480.01
18-2014      3-25-2014   624.16
19-2014      3-25-2014   666.21
                         1470.01 -
23-2014      4-29-2014   1470.13,
                         1470.99
27-2014      5-27-2014   618.01,
                         618.07
32-2014      8-26-2014   T.S.O. C
36-2014      10-28-2014  1280.01
01-2015      3-31-2015   220.01
18-2015      11-24-2015  Adopting Ordinance
02-2016      1-26-2016   1480.99
05-2016      3-29-2016   1280.02,
                         1280.04
09-2016      6-28-2016   660.20
10-2016      6-16-2016   T.S.O. E
15-2016      7-26-2016   T.S.O. I
19-2016      9-27-2016   T.S.O. D
26-2016      11-8-2016   T.S.O. C
29-2016      12-21-2016  T.S.O. D
01-2017      1-31-2017   1269.01 -
                         1269.08
08-2017      4-25-2017   237.11
                         1262.05,
                         1264.05,
11-2017      5-30-2017   1266.05,
                         1268.05,
                         1269.05
                         1472.01,
12-2017      5-30-2017   1472.02,
                         1472.03,
                         1472.99
                         1253.01,
13-2017      6-27-2017   1254.08,
                         1282.04,
                         1296.30
18-2017      8-29-2017   T.S.O. B
21-2017      10-30-2017  T.S.O. C
01-2018      2-27-2018   220.01
                         1472.01,
02-2018      2-28-2018   1472.02,
                         1472.03,
                         1472.99
                         882.01 -
05-2018      2-27-2018   882.38,
                         882.99
07-2018      3-27-2018   1480.01,
                         1480.05
                         1048.01 to
16-2018      7-31-2018   1048.06,
                         1048.99
17-2018      7-31-2018   882.012
01-2019      1-29-2019   T.S.O. I
03-2019      1-29-2019   220.01
7-2019       6-11-2019   T.S.O. E
12-2019      12-17-2019  672.09
1-2020       1-28-2020   T.S.O. I
20-2020      9-29-2020   237.13
24-2020      10-27-2020  882.081
12-2021      3-2-2021    220.01
15-2021      3-30-2021   T.S.O. E
27-2021      8-31-2021   T.S.O. D
33-2021      10-26-2021  1026.01 -
                         1026.19
35-2021      11-30-2021  286.02 -
                         286.06
14-2022      6-28-2022   672.10
21-2022      8-30-2022   T.S.O. D
Res. 31-2022 5-31-2022   T.S.O. E
33-2022      9-27-2022   206.01 -
                         206.08
Res. 55-2022 11-29-2022  T.S.O. E
13-2023      4-25-2023   T.S.O. E
Res. 18-2023 5-23-2023   T.S.O. E
Res. 19-2023 5-23-2023   T.S.O. E
21-2023      6-27-2023   882.012
Res. 26-2023 7-25-2023   T.S.O. E
29-2023      8-29-2023   T.S.O. E
30-2023      9-26-2023   206.02,
                         206.03
Res. 38-2023 11-28-2023  T.S.O. E
                         882.013,
                         882.02,
40-2023      12-19-2023  882.062,
                         882.094,
                         882.10
03-2024      1-30-2024   220.01
Res. 04-2024 1-30-2024   T.S.O. E
09-2024      6-25-2024   1282.05
10-2024      6-25-2024   T.S.O. I
Res. 12-2024 3-26-2024   T.S.O. E
Res. 13-2024 4-30-2024   T.S.O. E
23-2024      8-27-2024   624.23
                         854.01 -
29-2024      12-17-2024  854.10,
                         854.99
                         1253.01,
                         1276.04,
31-2024      12-10-2024  1280.04,
                         1296.31 -
                         1296.33
                        
 
