WRIGHTSVILLE BEACH, NORTH CAROLINA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Contains 2025 S-30, current through
Ordinance 1869, passed 11-18-25
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE 1101
   AN ORDINANCE OF THE BOARD OF ALDERMEN OF THE TOWN OF WRIGHTSVILLE BEACH,
NORTH CAROLINA, REVISING, CONSOLIDATING, ELABORATING AND ADDING TO THE
ORDINANCES OF THE TOWN OF WRIGHTSVILLE BEACH, NORTH CAROLINA
   The Board of Aldermen of the Town of Wrightsville Beach, North Carolina,
doth ORDAIN:
   1.   The Code of Ordinances prepared for the Town of Wrightsville Beach,
North Carolina, by American Legal Publishing Corporation, 133 West Fourth St.,
Cincinnati, Ohio, bearing a copyright of 1989 is hereby adopted as the official
Code of Ordinances of the Town of Wrightsville Beach, North Carolina.
   2.   (a)   All ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the town
enacted on or before June 30, 1988 and not included within the Code, or
recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are hereby repealed
from and after the effective date of this ordinance, except as provided in
Section 3;
      (b)   To the extent that ordinances or portions of ordinances included
within this Code are the same in substance as ordinances in effect prior to the
adoption of this Code, it is intended that they be treated as continuations and
not as new enactments or amendments, in order that all rights and liabilities
that have been accrued are preserved and may be enforced.
   3.   This Code of Ordinances contains all of the general and permanent
ordinances of the Town of Wrightsville Beach, but it does not contain, and is
not intended to affect, the following classes of ordinances or actions having
the effect of ordinances:
      (a)   Annexation ordinances;
      (b)   Budget ordinances or amendments thereto;
      (c)   Bond orders and ordinances;
      (d)   Ordinances granting a franchise;
      (e)   Ordinances or resolutions pertaining to the exercise of the power
of eminent domain;
      (f)   Ordinances or resolutions pertaining to the levy of special
assessments;
      (g)   Ordinances, resolutions, or orders naming, renaming or closing a
street;
      (h)   Ordinances establishing or amending the boundaries of zoning
districts;
      (i)   Ordinances establishing or amending a position classification and
pay plan for town employees; and
      (j)   Ordinances or resolutions of any type which are not normally
codified, including but not limited to, ordinances or resolutions of limited
interest or of a transitory nature;
   4.   No provision of this ordinance is intended, nor shall be construed, to
affect in any way any rights or interests (whether public or private):
      (a)   Now vested or accrued, in whole or in part, the validity of which
might be sustained or preserved by reference to any provisions of an ordinance
repealed by the adoption of this code;
      (b)   Derived from, or which might be sustained or preserved in reliance
upon, action heretofore taken pursuant to or within the scope of any ordinance
repealed by the adoption of this code.
   5.   No action or proceeding of any nature (whether civil or criminal,
judicial or administrative or otherwise) pending on the effective date of this
ordinance by or against the Town of Wrightsville Beach or any of its
departments or agencies shall be abated or otherwise affected by the adoption
of this Code.
   6.   If any portion of this Code or the application thereof to any person or
circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other
provisions or applications of this Code which can be given effect without the
invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of the Code
are declared to be severable.
   7.   Ordinances which are adopted after the cut-off date specified in
Section 2 shall be forwarded to the North Carolina League of Municipalities or
publisher for codification into this volume. The League or publisher is hereby
authorized to make all necessary editorial changes to codify such ordinances
appropriately.
   8.   A copy of this Code shall be kept on file in the office of the Town
Clerk and it shall be the express duty of the Clerk, or someone authorized by
the Clerk, to insert in their designated places all duly adopted amendments to
this code, and to extract from this Code all provisions which may be from time
to time duly repealed. A copy of this Code shall be available for all persons
desiring to examine it during reasonable times, under the supervision of the
Town Clerk.
   9.   It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or
deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to alter or tamper with the Code
in any manner whatsoever which will cause the Ordinances of the Town to be
misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this Section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and shall be punished as provided in Section 14-4 of the General
Statues of North Carolina.
   10.   This ordinance, and the Code of Ordinances which it adopts, shall be
in full force and effect from and after the 27th day of July 1989.
   This Ordinance adopted this 27th day of July, 1989.
                                          Carlton G. Hay /s/
                                          Mayor
ATTEST:
Linda Askew /s/
Town Clerk
   (SEAL)
APPROVED AS TO FORM:
John C. Wessel /s/
Town Attorney
CHARTER
Section
   1.
Article I. Incorporation, Corporate Powers and Boundaries
      
1.1   Incorporation
      
1.2   Powers
      
1.3   Corporate limits
Article II. Governing Body
      
2.1   Mayor and Board of Aldermen
      
2.2   Board of Aldermen; composition; terms of office
      
2.3   Mayor; term of office; duties
      
2.4   Mayor Pro Tempore
      
2.5   Meetings
      
2.6   Voting requirements; quorum
      
2.7   Compensation; qualifications for office; vacancies
      
2.8   Board of adjustment
Article III. Elections
      
3.1   Regular municipal elections
      
3.2   Election of Board members
      
3.3   Election of Mayor
      
3.4   Special elections and referendums
Article IV. Organization and Administration
      
4.1   Form of government
      
4.2   Town Manager
      
4.3   Town Clerk
      
4.4   Tax Collector
      
4.5   Town Attorney
      
4.6   Other administrative officers and employees
Article V. Special Assessment Provisions
      
5.1   Assessment for street improvement; petition unnecessary
      
5.2   Assessments for sidewalk improvement; petition unnecessary
      
5.3   Procedure; effect of assessments
Article VI. Adoption of Ordinances by Initiative and Referendum
      
6.1   Initiative ordinances generally; petitions
      
6.2   Form of ballots; passage of referendum; repeal or amendment
      
6.3   Number of ordinances on ballot; limitation on number of special elections
      
6.4   Publication of notice of election
      
6.5   Sufficiency of petition
Article VII. Additional Provisions
      
7.1   Development over water and anchorage of vessels
      
7.2   Ocean activities
      
7.3   Fishing from bridges
      
7.4   Vehicles on beaches
      
7.5   Removal of trees
      
7.6   Building permits
   2.
   3.
   4.
   5.
   6.
   7.
   8.
   9.
   10.
   11.
GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF NORTH CAROLINA
   1989 SESSION
   RATIFIED BILL
   CHAPTER 611
   HOUSE BILL 869
AN ACT TO REVISE AND CONSOLIDATE THE CHARTER OF THE TOWN OF WRIGHTSVILLE BEACH.
The General Assembly of North Carolina enacts:
   Section 1. The Charter of the Town of Wrightsville Beach is revised and
consolidated to read:
   The Charter of the Town of Wrightsville Beach.
Article I.
Incorporation, Corporate Powers and Boundaries.
Section 1.1. Incorporation. 
The Town of Wrightsville Beach, North Carolina, in New Hanover County and the
inhabitants thereof shall continue to be a municipal body politic and
corporate, under the name of the "Town of Wrightsville Beach", hereinafter at
times referred to as the "Town."
Sec. 1.2. Powers.
The Town shall have and may exercise all of the powers, duties, rights,
privileges and immunities conferred upon the Town of Wrightsville Beach
specifically by this Charter or upon municipal corporations by general law. The
term "general law" is employed herein as defined in G.S. 160A-1.
Sec. 1.3.  Corporate limits.
The corporate limits shall be those existing at the time of ratification of
this Charter, as set forth on the official map of the Town and as they may be
altered from time to time in accordance with law. An official map of the Town,
showing the current boundaries, shall be maintained permanently in the office
of the Town Clerk and shall be available for public inspection. Immediately
upon alteration of the corporate limits made pursuant to law, the appropriate
changes to the official map shall be made and copies shall be filed in the
office of the Secretary of State, the New Hanover County Register of Deeds and
the appropriate board of elections.
Article II.
Governing Body.
Sec. 2.1.  Mayor and Board of Aldermen.
The Mayor and Town Board of Aldermen, hereinafter referred to as the "Board,"
shall be the governing body of the Town.
Sec. 2.2.  Board of Aldermen; composition; terms of office.
The Board shall be composed of four members elected by all the qualified voters
of the Town for staggered terms of four years or until their successors are
elected and qualified.
Sec. 2.3. Mayor; term of office; duties.
The Mayor shall be elected by all the qualified voters of the Town for a term
of two years or until his or her successor is elected and qualified; shall be
the official head of the Town government and preside at meetings of the Board;
shall have the right to vote on all matters before the Board; and shall
exercise the powers and duties conferred by law or as directed by the Board.
Sec. 2.4. Mayor Pro Tempore.
The Board shall elect one of its members as Mayor Pro Tempore to perform the
duties of the Mayor during his or her absence or disability, in accordance with
general law. The Mayor Pro Tempore shall serve in such capacity at the pleasure
of the other members of the Board.
Sec. 2.5. Meetings.
In accordance with general law, the Board shall establish a suitable time and
place for its regular meetings. Special and emergency meetings may be held as
provided by general law.
Sec. 2.6. Voting requirements; quorum.
Official actions of the Board and all votes shall be taken in accordance with
applicable provisions of general law, particularly G.S. 160A-75. The quorum
provisions of G.S. 160A-74 shall apply.
Sec. 2.7. Compensation; qualifications for office; vacancies.
The compensation and qualifications of the Mayor and Board members shall be in
accordance with general law. Vacancies that occur in any elective office of the
Town shall be filled by appointment as provided in G.S. 160A-63.
Sec. 2.8. Board of adjustment.
The Town Board shall appoint a board of adjustment that shall have and exercise
the powers and duties provided in G.S. § 160A-388.
(Res. 1465, passed 8-11-05)
Article III.
Elections.
Sec. 3.1. Regular municipal elections.
Regular municipal elections shall be held in each odd-numbered year in
accordance with the uniform municipal election laws of North Carolina.
Elections are conducted on a nonpartisan basis and the results determined using
the nonpartisan plurality method as provided in G.S. 163-292.
Sec. 3.2. Election of Board members.
The Board members serving on the date of ratification of this Charter shall
serve until the expiration of their term or until their successors are elected
and qualified. In the regular municipal election in 1989, and every four years
thereafter, there shall be elected two Board members to serve as provided in
Article II of this Charter. In the regular municipal election in 1991, and
every four years thereafter, there shall be elected two Board members to serve
as provided in Article II.
Sec. 3.3. Election of Mayor.
A Mayor shall be elected in each regular municipal election.
Sec. 3.4. Special elections and referendums.
Special elections and referendums may be held only as provided by this Charter,
general law or applicable local acts of the General Assembly.
Article IV.
Organization and Administration.
Sec. 4.1. Form of government.
The Town shall operate under the council-manager form of government, in
accordance with Part 2 of Article 7 of Chapter 160A of the General Statutes.
Sec. 4.2. Town Manager.
The Board shall appoint a Town Manager who shall be responsible for the
administration of all departments of the Town government. The Town Manager
shall have all the powers and duties conferred by general law, except as
expressly limited by the provisions of this Charter.
Sec. 4.3. Town Clerk.
The Town Manager shall appoint a Town Clerk to keep a journal of the
proceedings of the Board; to maintain official records and documents; to give
notice of meetings; and to perform such other duties required by law or as the
Town Manager may direct.
Sec. 4.4. Town Collector.
The Board shall appoint a Tax Collector pursuant to G.S. 105-349 to collect all
taxes owed to the Town, subject to general law, this Charter and Town
ordinances.
Sec. 4.5. Town Attorney.
The Board shall appoint a Town Attorney licensed to practice law in North
Carolina. It shall be the duty of the Town Attorney to represent the Town,
advise Town officials and perform other duties required by law or as the Board
may direct.
Sec. 4.6. Other administrative officers and employees.
The Board may provide for appointment of other officers and employees by the
Town Manager, and may organize the Town government as deemed appropriate,
subject to the requirements of general law.
Article V.
Special Assessment Provisions.
Sec. 5.1 Assessment for street improvements; petition unnecessary.
   (a)   In addition to any authority granted by general law, the Board is
hereby authorized to order street improvements and to assess the costs thereof
against abutting property in accordance with the provisions of this Article.
   (b)   The Board may order street improvements and assess the total costs
thereof against abutting property, exclusive of the costs incurred at street
intersections, according to one or more of the assessment bases set forth in
Article 10 of Chapter 160A of the General Statutes without the necessity of a
petition, upon the following findings of fact:
      (1)   That the street improvement project does not exceed 1,200 linear
feet; and
      (2)   That such street or part thereof is unsafe for vehicular traffic or
creates a safety or health hazard and it is in the public interest to make such
improvements; or
      (3)   That it is in the public interest to connect two streets or
portions of a street already improved; or
      (4)   That it is in the public interest to widen a street, or part
thereof, which is already improved; provided that assessments for widening any
street or portion of a street without a petition shall be limited to the cost
of widening and otherwise improving such street in accordance with street
classification and improvement standards established by the Town, as applied to
the particular street or part thereof.
   (c) For the purposes of this Article, the term "street improvement" includes
grading, regrading, surfacing, resurfacing, widening, paving, repaving,
acquisition of right-of-way and construction or reconstruction of curbs,
gutters and street drainage facilities.
Sec. 5.2. Assessments for sidewalk improvement; petition unnecessary.
In addition to any authority granted by general law, the Board is hereby
authorized, without the necessity of petition, to order sidewalk improvements
or repairs according to standards and specifications of the Town, and to assess
the total costs thereof against abutting property, according to one or more of
the assessment bases set forth in Article 10 of Chapter 160A of the General
Statutes; provided that regardless of the assessment basis or bases employed,
the Board may order the costs of sidewalk improvements made only on one side of
a street to be assessed against property abutting both sides of such street.
Sec. 5.3. Procedure; effect of amusements.
In ordering street and sidewalk improvements without a petition and assessing
the costs thereof under authority of this Article, the Board shall comply with
the procedures required by Article 10 of Chapter 160A of the General Statutes,
except those provisions relating to petitions of property owners and
sufficiency thereof. The effect of the act of levying assessments under
authority of this Article shall be the same as if assessments were levied under
authority of Article 10 of Chapter 160A of the General Statutes.
Article VI.
Adoption of Ordinances by Initiative and Referendum.
Sec. 6.1. Initiative ordinances generally; petitions.
Any proposed ordinance, which the Board may lawfully adopt, may be submitted to
the Board by petition if the petition accompanying the proposed ordinance is
signed by voters of the Town equal in number to at least thirty-five percent
(35%) of the total number of registered voters residing within the Town at the
time of the last regular municipal election and contains a request that such
ordinance be submitted to a vote of the people if not passed by the Board. Upon
receipt of a proposed ordinance and petition, the Board shall either: (i)
within 20 days after the Town Clerk and the New Hanover County Board of
Elections have certified the sufficiency of the accompanying petition, adopt
the ordinance without alteration or (ii) within 20 days after the Town Clerk
and the New Hanover County Board of Elections have certified the sufficiency of
the petition, call an election to be held on a date authorized by G.S. 163-287
(a). At such election the ordinance shall be submitted without alteration to
the registered voters of the Town.
(S.L. 2024-14, ratified 6-27-24)
Sec. 6.2. Form of ballots; passage of referendum; repeal or amendment.
The ballots used when voting upon such ordinances shall contain these words:
"For the ordinance" (stating the nature of the proposed ordinance) and "Against
the ordinance" (stating the nature of the proposed ordinance). If a majority of
the qualified voters voting on the proposed ordinance shall vote in favor
thereof, such ordinance shall thereupon become a valid and binding ordinance of
the Town. Any ordinance proposed by petition or which shall be adopted by the
vote of the people may be repealed or amended by the Board; provided, however,
that such ordinance may not be repealed or amended earlier than two years
following the effective date of such ordinance.
Sec. 6.3 Number of ordinances on ballot; limitation on number of special
elections.
Any number of proposed ordinances may be voted upon at the same election in
accordance with the provisions of this section, but there shall not be more
than one special election in any period of six months for such purpose.
Sec. 6.4. Publication of notice of election.
Whenever any ordinance is required by this section to be submitted to voters of
the Town at any election, the Town Clerk shall cause such ordinance to be
published once in a newspaper published daily in New Hanover County. Such
publication shall not be more than 20 nor less than five days before the date
fixed for the special or general election.
Sec. 6.5. Sufficiency of petition.
The petition provided for herein shall only be signed by registered voters of
the Town. Each petition shall contain, in addition to the names of the
petitioners, the street and house number at which each petitioner resides. It
shall also be accompanied by the affidavit of one or more registered voters of
the Town, stating that the signers thereof were, at the time of the signing,
registered voters of the Town, and stating the number of signers at the time
the affidavit was made.
(S.L. 2024-14, ratified 6-27-24)
Article VII.
Additional Provisions.
Sec. 7.1 Development over water and anchorage of vessels.
The Town Board may regulate by ordinance development over and anchorage of
vessels on estuarine waters and over lands covered by navigable waters and
owned by the State pursuant to G.S. 146-12, that are within the zoning
jurisdiction of the Town. In addition to the authority granted in G.S. 160A-381
concerning general zoning power, the Town may also regular the location and use
of floating homes.
Sec. 7.2. Ocean activities.
The Town Board may adopt ordinances to regulate and control swimming, surfing
and littering in the Atlantic Ocean and other waterways adjacent to the Town
and lying within its boundaries or within its extraterritorial jurisdiction
established pursuant to G.S. 160A-360; provided, however, nothing contained
herein shall be construed to permit the Town to prohibit altogether swimming
and surfing or to make these activities unlawful.
Sec. 7.3. Fishing from bridges.
In addition to the authority granted municipalities in G.S. 160A-302.1, the
Town Board is authorized to enact ordinances prohibiting or regulating fishing
from any bridge for any purpose relating to public safety.
Sec. 7.4. Vehicles on beaches.
Notwithstanding the provisions of G.S. 160A-308, the Town Board is authorized
to enact ordinances to regulate, restrict and prohibit the use of dune or beach
buggies, jeeps, motorcycles, cars, trucks, or any other form of power-driven
vehicle specified by the Board on the foreshore, beach strand and barrier dune
system by commercial fishermen for commercial activities.
Sec. 7.5. Removal of trees.
The Town is authorized to enact ordinances to regulate the removal of trees
from public and private property within its jurisdiction in order to preserve,
protect and enhance one of the most valuable natural resources of the community
and to protect and enhance the public health, safety and welfare of its
citizens. Such ordinances by their terms may be made applicable to areas over
which the Town is authorized to exercise extraterritorial jurisdiction pursuant
to G.S. 160A-360 subject to approval of any other local government units having
jurisdiction over the extraterritorial areas to be regulated. The boundaries of
any extraterritorial jurisdiction shall be designated utilizing the standards
and procedures set forth in G.S. 160A-360 and may include areas under county or
city/county jurisdiction with approval of the relevant governing body.
Provided, however, that no ordinance enacted pursuant to this section shall
apply to any agricultural land, forest land, or horticultural land as defined
in G.S. 105-277.2.
Sec. 7.6. Building permits.
Notwithstanding the provisions of G.S. 160A-417 and Article 9 or 9C of Chapter
143 of the General Statutes, the Town Board may require permits (as provided by
G.S. 160A-417 and Article 9 or 9C of Chapter 143 of the General Statutes) for
any construction, installation, repair, replacement or alteration costing five
thousand dollars ($5,000) or less in any single family residence.
   Sec. 2. The purpose of this act is to revise the Charter of the Town of
Wrightsville Beach and to consolidate certain acts concerning the property,
affairs or government of the Town. It is intended to continue without
interruption those provisions of prior acts which are expressly consolidated
into this act, so that all rights and liabilities which have accrued are
preserved and may be enforced.
   Sec. 3. This act does not repeal or affect any acts concerning the property,
affairs or government of public schools, or acts validating official actions,
proceedings, contracts or obligations of any kind.
   Sec. 4. All local acts in conflict with this act are repealed. The following
acts having served the purposes for which they were enacted or having been
consolidated into this act, are expressly repealed:
Chapter 234, Private Laws of 1935
Chapter 575, Session Laws of 1949
Chapter 1113, Session Laws of 1957
Chapter 894, Session Laws of 1963
Chapter 1220, Session Laws of 1963
Chapter 519, Session Laws of 1965
   Sec. 5. The Mayor and Aldermen serving on the date of ratification of this
act shall serve until the expiration of their term. Thereafter, those offices
shall be filled as provide in Articles II and III of the Charter contained in
Section 1 of this act.
   Sec. 6. This act does not affect any rights or interest which arose under
any provisions repealed by this act.
   Sec. 7. All existing ordinances, resolutions and other provisions of the
Town of Wrightsville Beach not inconsistent with the provisions of this act
shall continue in effect until repealed or amended.
   Sec. 8. No action or proceeding pending on the effective date of this act by
or against the Town or any of its departments or agencies shall be abated or
otherwise affected by this act.
   Sec. 9. If any provision or application of this act is held invalid, such
invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this act which
can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this
end the provisions of this act are declared to be severable.
   Sec. 10. Whenever a reference is made in this act to the particular
provision of the General Statutes, and such provision is later amended,
superseded or recodified, the reference shall be deemed amended to referred to
the amended General Statute, or to the General Statute which most clearly
corresponds to the statutory provision which is superseded or recodified.
   Sec. 11. This act is effective upon ratification.
   In the General Assembly read three times and ratified this the 11th day of
July, 1989.
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter
   
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Rules of construction
   
10.07   Revivor; effect of repeal
   
10.08   Conflicting provisions
   
10.09   Severability
   
10.10   Reference to other sections
   
10.11   Reference to offices
   
10.12   Errors and omissions
   
10.13   Official time
   
10.14   Reasonable time
   
10.15   Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances
   
10.16   Ordinances repealed
   
10.17   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.18   Ordinances saved
   
10.19   Amendments to code; amendatory language
   
10.20   Damaging ordinances prohibited
   
10.21   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.22   Ordinances confined to one subject
   
10.23   Official copy of ordinance
   
10.24   Ordinances adding to code
 
   
10.98   Remedies
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections
shall constitute and be designated "The Code of the Town of Wrightsville Beach,
North Carolina" and may be so cited. Such code may also be cited as
"Wrightsville Beach, Town Code," or "the code."
('72 Code, § l-l)
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   (A) Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of the
General Statutes of North Carolina.
   (B) Where a section of this code is followed by a reference to the General
Statutes of North Carolina, the reference indicates that the section is
analogous or similar to the cited sections in the General Statutes of North
Carolina. Footnotes, cross-references, and other comments are by way of
explanation only and should not be deemed a part of the text of any section.
   (C) All provisions of this code are limited in application to the
territorial boundaries of the town although the provisions may not be so
limited specifically. Nothing herein contained is intended to conflict with or
supercede applicable state or federal laws.
   (D) Code, title, chapter, and section headings do not constitute any part of
the law as contained in the code.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I not incompatible with future legislation shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted which amend or supplement this code
unless otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   The captions of the several sections of this code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of the sections nor as any part of the section, nor, unless
expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of the sections,
including the captions are amended or re-enacted.
('72 Code, § l-4)
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code, unless otherwise specifically provided, the
following words and phrases shall have the following meanings.
   "BOARD OF ALDERMEN." The governing body of the Town of Wrightsville Beach,
North Carolina.
   "BOND." When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be
sufficient.
   "COMPUTATION OF TIME." The time within which an act is to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first and including the last day; and if the last day
is Saturday, Sunday, or a legal holiday, that shall be excluded.
   "COUNTY." The County of New Hanover, in the State of North Carolina, except
as otherwise provided.
   "IN THE TOWN." Any territory, jurisdiction of which for the exercise of its
regulatory power has been conferred on the town by public or private law.
   "MAYOR." Mayor of Wrightsville Beach.
   "MONTH." A calendar month.
   "OATH." Includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words swear
and sworn shall be equivalent to the words affirm and affirmed.
   "OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD." Whenever certain hours are named in this code,
they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use
in this town.
   "OWNER." Applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole
or a part of such building or land.
   "PERSON." A corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, and
any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual.
   "PERSONAL PROPERTY." Every species of property except real property, as
herein defined.
   "PRECEDING, FOLLOWING." Next before and next after, respectively.
   "PROPERTY." Includes real and personal property.
   "REAL PROPERTY." Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments.
   "SIDEWALK." Any portion of a street, between the curb line and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
   "SIGNATURE" or "SUBSCRIPTION." Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
   "STATE." The State of North Carolina, except as otherwise provided.
   "STREET." Includes any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard,
parkway, alley, lane, viaduct, bridge, and the approaches thereto within the
town and shall mean the entire width of the right-of-way between abutting
property lines.
   "TENANT" or "OCCUPANT." Applied to a building or land shall include any
person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone
or with others.
   "TOWN." Town of Wrightsville Beach, except as otherwise provided.
   "WRITING" or "WRITTEN." Includes printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters.
('72 Code, § l-2)
§ 10.06 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   The construction of all ordinances of this town shall be by the following
rules, unless that construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the
legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance.
   (A) "AND" or "OR." Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
"and/or," if the sense requires it.
   (B) Acts by assistants. When a statute requires an act to be done which, by
law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, the requisition shall
be satisfied by the performance of the act by an authorized agent or deputy.
   (C) Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine gender
shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the past or present tense shall include the
future, if applicable.
   (D) General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms is
not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
   (E) Joint authority. Words importing joint authority to three or more
persons shall be construed as authority to a majority of these persons, unless
otherwise declared in the law giving the authority.
Statutory reference:
   For provisions concerning rules of construction, see G.S. § 12-3.
   For provisions concerning computation of time, see G.S. § l-593
§ 10.07 REVIVOR; EFFECT OF REPEAL.
   Whenever an ordinance is repealed, which repealed a former ordinance, the
original ordinance shall not thereby be revived, unless it shall be so
expressly provided.
§ 10.08 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   If the provisions of different codes, chapters, or sections of the codified
ordinances conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions bearing the
latest passage date shall prevail. If the conflicting provisions bear the same
passage date, the conflict shall be construed so as to be consistent with the
meaning or legal effect of the subject matter taken as a whole.
§ 10.09 SEVERABILITY.
   It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Board of Aldermen that the
sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this code are
severable. If any phrases, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this code
shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment
or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or
invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences,
paragraphs, and sections of this code, since the same would have been enacted
by the Board of Aldermen without the incorporation in this code of any such
unconstitutional or invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section.
('72 Code, § l-5)
§ 10.10 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, the
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.11 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of the town exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.12 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or
words supplied, omitted, or substituted that will conform wth the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
the error.
§ 10.13 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal law, shall
be the official time within the town of the transaction of all county business.
Statutory reference:
   Computation of time, see G.S. § l-593
§ 10.14 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A) In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or
notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B) In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this code, by
order of any court, or by any applicable statute, the day of the act, event, or
default from which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be
included. The last day of the period so computed is to be included unless it is
a Saturday; a Sunday; a legal holiday as defined by state statute; or a day the
office in which the act is to be done is closed during regular business hours.
In any event, the period runs until the end of the next day that is not a
Saturday, a Sunday, a legal holiday, or a day on which the office is closed.
When the period of time allowed is less than seven days, intermediate
Saturdays, Sundays, legal holidays, and days on which the office is closed
shall be excluded from the computations.
Statutory reference:
   Computation of time, see G.S. § l-593
§ 10.15 PROVISIONS CONSIDERED AS CONTINUATIONS OF EXISTING ORDINANCES.
   The provisions appearing in this code, so fas as they are the same as those
of the ordinances included herein, shall be considered as continuations thereof
and not as new enactments.
('72 Code, § l-3)
§ 10.16 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.17 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.18 ORDINANCES SAVED.
   Whenever an ordinance by its nature either authorizes or enables the
legislative body or a certain town officer or employee to make additional
ordinances or regulations for the purpose of carrying out the intent of the
ordinance, all ordinances and regulations of a similar nature serving that
purpose effected prior to the codification and not inconsistent thereto, shall
remain in effect and are saved.
§ 10.19 AMENDMENTS TO CODE; AMENDATORY LANGUAGE.
   (A) All ordinances passed subsequent to this code which amend, repeal, or in
any way affect this code, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering
system of this code and printed for inclusion herein.
In the case of repealed chapters, sections, and subsections, or any part
thereof, by subsequent ordinances, the repealed portions may be excluded from
this code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent
ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be
prima facie evidence of subsequent ordinances until a time that this code and
subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are re-adopted as a new code by the
Board of Aldermen.
   (B) Amendments to any of the provisions of this code may be made by amending
these provisions by specific reference to the section number of this code in
the following language: "That section              of the Code of Ordinances,
Town of Wrightsville Beach, is hereby amended to read as follows:
                                                  ." The new provisions shall
then be set out in full as desired.
   (C) In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the code is to be
added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, Town
of Wrightsville Beach, is hereby amended by adding a section to be numbered,
which section reads as follows:                        ." The new provisions
shall then be set out in full as desired.
§ 10.20 DAMAGING ORDINANCES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall tear or deface any of the town ordinances.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 10.21 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances shall be effective after the ratification thereof except
ordinances specifying some other effective date or ordinance required by state
law to be effective only after having met specific date requirements.
('72 Code, § l-7)
§ 10.22 ORDINANCES CONFINED TO ONE SUBJECT.
   All ordinances shall be confined to one subject. Appropriation ordinances
dealing with several items shall be deemed to consist of only one subject.
('72 Code, § l-8)
§ 10.23 OFFICIAL COPY OF ORDINANCE.
   A true copy of an ordinance which has been duly enacted by the Board of
Aldermen, signed by the Mayor, and attested to by the Town Clerk shall be known
as an official copy of any ordinance for the town. All ordinances or a true
copy thereof shall be inserted in this code in the proper chapter.
('72 Code, § l-9)
§ 10.24 ORDINANCES ADDING TO CODE.
   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the code a new title, chapter, or
section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this code, the
proper number of the title, chapter, or section.
§ 10.98 REMEDIES.
   Any ordinance contained herein may be enforced by other remedies, as
authorized in G.S. 160A-175, including the imposition of civil fines, the
ordering of appropriate equitable relief, including injunctions, or a
combination of remedies.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Unless otherwise provided in the code, a violation of any provision of
the code is a misdemeanor or infraction as provided by G.S. § 14-4 punishable
upon conviction by a fine not exceeding $50 or by imprisonment not exceeding 30
days. An ordinance may provide by express statement that the maximum fine, term
of imprisonment, or infraction penalty to be imposed for violation is some
amount of money or number of days less than the maximum imposed by G.S. § 14-4.
   (B)   Unless otherwise provided in the code, a violation of any provision of
the code shall subject the offender to a civil penalty in the amount of $50 to
be recovered by the town in a civil action in the nature of debt if the
offender does not pay the penalty within ten days after having been cited for
violation of the ordinance.
   (C)   The provisions of the code may be enforced by an appropriate equitable
remedy issuing from a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (D)   Each day's continuing violation of any provisions of the code shall be
a separate and distinct offense.
   (E)   The provisions of the code may be enforced by any one, all, or a
combination of the remedies authorized and prescribed by G.S. § 160A-175 and
this section.
(Ord. 1360, passed 4-13-00)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
Chapter
   
30.   BOARD OF ALDERMEN
   
31.   TOWN OFFICIALS
   
32.   DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS, AND COMMISSIONS
   
33.   FINANCE
CHAPTER 30: BOARD OF ALDERMAN
Section
   
30.01   Governing body
   
30.02   Powers and duties generally
   
30.03   Ordinance book
   
30.04   Form of government
   
30.05   Committees
   
30.06   Regular meetings
   
30.07   Special meetings
   
30.08   Presiding officer
   
30.09   Quorum
   
30.10   Minutes to be kept
   
30.11   Rules of procedure
Cross-reference:
   Election of Board, see Charter Sec.
3.2
   Term, see Charter Sec.
2.2
   Vacancies, see Charter Sec.
2.7
§ 30.01 GOVERNING BODY.
   The governing body of the town shall consist of a Mayor and Board of
Aldermen of four members. The governing body shall be charged with the general
government and administration of the affairs of the town.
Cross-reference:
   Board as governing body of town; members, see Charter Sec. 3
Statutory reference:
   Board to organize town government, see G.S. § 160A-146
§ 30.02 POWERS AND DUTIES GENERALLY.
   The powers and duties of the governing body shall be set out in the General
Statutes of North Carolina, the town Charter, and the ordinances of the town.
Cross-reference:
   Powers and duties, see Charter Sec. 7
Statutory reference:
   General power, see G.S. § 160A-67
§ 30.03 ORDINANCE BOOK.
   The Clerk shall file a true copy of each ordinance, until it is codified in
this code, in an ordinance book or a file separate and apart from the Board of
Aldermen's minute book. The ordinance book or file shall be appropriately
indexed and maintained for public inspection in the office of the Clerk.
Statutory reference:
   For similar requirements, see G.S. § 160A-78
§ 30.04 FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
   The town shall operate under the Council-Manager form of government in
accordance with G.S. Ch. 160A, Article 7, Part 2, and any Charter provisions
not in conflict therewith.
§ 30.05 COMMITTEES.
   The Mayor and Board of Aldermen may create such committees of the Board for
special purposes as they deem best.
('72 Code, § 2-10)
§ 30.06 REGULAR MEETINGS.
   The regular meetings of the Mayor and Board of Aldermen of the town shall be
held at least once monthly at a time and place as shall be fixed by the Board
of Aldermen. The Board of Aldermen may, in its discretion, change the meeting
schedule after first giving proper notice.
('72 Code, §2-4) (Ord. 1128, passed 12-20-90; Ord. 1224, passed 1-20-94; Am.
Ord. 1520, passed 9-14-06)
Statutory reference:
   Regular meetings, see G.S. § 160A-71
§ 30.07 SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   Special meetings of the Board of Aldermen may be held according to the
procedures set out in the applicable general statutes.
Statutory reference:
   Special meetings, see G.S. § 160A-71
§ 30.08 PRESIDING OFFICER.
   The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the Board of Aldermen. In his
absence, the Mayor Pro Tempore shall preside.
('72 Code, § 2-9)
Cross-reference:
   Mayor as presiding officer, see Charter Sec. 4
§ 30.09 QUORUM.
   A majority of the members of the Board of Aldermen shall constitute a
quorum. No official business of the town shall be transacted by the Board
unless a quorum is present.
('72 Code, § 2-6)
Statutory reference:
   Quorum, see G.S. § 160A-74
§ 30.10 MINUTES TO BE KEPT.
   The Town Clerk or Assistant Town Clerk shall be present at all the meetings
of the Board of Aldermen and shall keep in a book provided for that purpose a
record of all the proceedings of the Board.
('72 Code, § 2-7) (Ord., passed 6-27-74)
Statutory reference:
   Minutes to be kept, see G.S. § 160A-72
§ 30.11 RULES OF PROCEDURE.
   The Board of Aldermen may adopt rules of procedure not inconsistent with the
Town Charter, general law, or generally accepted principles of parliamentary
procedure.
Statutory reference:
   Rules of procedure, G.S § 160A-71
CHAPTER 31: TOWN OFFICIALS
Section
General Provisions
   
31.01   Officers and employees
   
31.02   Official bonds; premiums to be paid by town
   
31.03   Consolidation of offices
   
31.04   Employees serve at pleasure of Board
   
31.05   Conflicts of interest prohibited
   
31.06   Criminal history checks
Officials
   
31.20   Building Inspector
   
31.21   Finance Director
   
31.22   Director of Public Works
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.01 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   Such officers and employees as are deemed necessary shall be appointed by
the Board of Aldermen. All officers and employees shall serve at the pleasure
of the Board and receive such compensation as from time to time is prescribed
by the Board.
('72 Code, § 2-2)
§ 31.02 OFFICIAL BONDS; PREMIUMS TO BE PAID BY TOWN.
   The Town Clerk and other officers or employees required by the Board of
Aldermen shall, before entering upon their duties, post bond in amounts
specified by the Board. All bond premiums shall be paid from town funds;
however, when two offices are combined, such as Clerk and Treasurer, only one
bond shall be required.
('72 Code, § 2-3)
Statutory reference:
   Fidelity bonds, see G.S. § 159-29
§ 31.03 CONSOLIDATION OF OFFICES.
   Except as otherwise provided by law, the Board may in its discretion
consolidate any two or more offices and assign the duties of both offices to
one or more persons.
§ 31.04 EMPLOYEES SERVE AT PLEASURE OF BOARD.
   All employees elected or appointed by the Board of Aldermen shall hold their
office at the pleasure of the Board and may be removed at any time by the
Board.
§ 31.05 CONFLICTS OF INTEREST PROHIBITED.
   No member of the Board of Aldermen shall be pecuniarily interested, directly
or indirectly, in any contract made or entered into by the Board, nor in any
matter where the rights or liabilities of the town are, or may be, involved,
except as allowed by state law.
Statutory reference:
   Conflict of interest, see G.S. § 14-234
§ 31.06 CRIMINAL HISTORY CHECKS.
   In order to protect the citizens of the town and their properties, the
procedures herein are established to provide for fingerprinting and criminal
history checks on all final applicants for regular full and part-time positions
in the town government. Subject to division (C) of this section, employment
with the town may be denied for those persons convicted of any crime against a
person, or crimes against property where intent is an element, or any drug or
gambling related offense.
   (A)   The Town Manager, or designee, shall conduct an investigation of any
final candidate for a permanent full-time or permanent part-time position with
the town government and it shall be a precondition of employment that an
applicant for such a position shall upon request, provide fingerprints and all
other necessary personal identification including a birth certificate, social
security number and drivers license, if available, so that the Town Manager, or
designee, may cause a thorough search to be made of local and state criminal
records to determine if the applicant has a history of criminal convictions or
the crimes enumerated above by use of the Police Information Network (PIN).
   (B)   The Police Department shall provide the findings from the use of the
PIN to the Town Manager or designee, provided that all necessary agreements
with the State Bureau of Investigations Division of Criminal Information have
been executed.
(Ord. 1469, passed 9-30-04)
OFFICIALS
§ 31.20 BUILDING INSPECTOR.
   For provisions concerning the Building Inspector, see §
151.110.
(Am. Ord., 1108, passed 1-11-90; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
§ 31.21 FINANCE DIRECTOR.
   The position of Finance Director for the town is hereby established pursuant
to G.S. § 159-24.
§ 31.22 DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS.
   The Director of Public Works shall be knowledgeable of general public works
operations including all work of the various divisions within the Department of
Public Works. He shall, under the general direction of the Town Manager, be
responsible for planning and directing the activities of the Department of
Public Works, operations to include the four major divisions within the
Department (Water and Sewer, Streets and Sanitation, Equipment and Building
Maintenance, and Land Use and Building). He shall prepare and assist in
preparing long and short term public works improvements for approval by the
Town Manager and Board of Aldermen. He shall assist in the development of and
coordinate budget requests so as to develop an overall public works program for
the town. For the purposes of administration, the Town Manager shall place
under the direct supervision of the Director of Public Works such divisions as
he deems to be necessary for efficient public works operations.
CHAPTER 32: DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS, AND COMMISSIONS
Section
Fire Department
   
32.01   Establishment of the Fire Department
   
32.02   Fire Department members
   
32.03   Duties and responsibilities of the Fire Chief
   
32.04   Chain of command
   
32.05   Fire Department members subject to personnel ordinances of the town
   
32.06   Relationship of Fire Department and volunteer members
Planning Board
   
32.10   Creation
   
32.11   Composition; filling vacancies
   
32.12   Organization; meetings; records
   
32.13   Powers and duties
Police Department
   
32.20   Organization
   
32.21   Duties of Chief
   
32.22   Duties of police
   
32.23   Town Manager to supervise
   
32.24   Uniforms
   
32.25   Requirements of employment
   
32.26   Issuance of civil penalties
   
32.27   Reserve Police Division
Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee
   
32.35   Creation; appointment of members
   
32.36   Length of appointment
   
32.37   Powers and duties
   
32.38   Meetings
   
32.39   Attendance
   
32.40   Compensation
   
32.41   Officers
   
32.42   Officers' duties
   
32.43   Sub-committees
   
32.44   By-laws
Historic Landmark Commission
   
32.46   Historic Landmark Commission
   
32.47   Appointment and tenure of members
   
32.48   Composition
   
32.49   Attendance at meetings
   
32.50   Rules of procedure
   
32.51   Meetings open to the public
   
32.52   Authority and power
   
32.53   Design review process for Certificate of Appropriateness
Marketing Advisory Committee
   
32.55   Creation and purpose
   
32.56   Composition and appointment of members
   
32.57   Organization; meetings; records
   
32.58   Responsibility, powers, and duties
   
32.59   Compensation
FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 32.01 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   The Fire Department is hereby established to consist of a Chief and a
sufficient number of fire fighters, volunteer and paid, to maintain and operate
the department. The department and all members, both volunteer and paid, shall
operate under the general direction of the Chief. The Fire Chief is appointed
by and works under the general direction of the Town Manager. The Board of
Aldermen is responsible for providing funding for the operation of the Fire
Department and payment of all expenses associated therewith and for
establishing policy, procedures and all other matters related to the Fire
Department, which matters shall be implemented through the Town Manager and
subsequently the Fire Chief.
(Ord. 1240, passed 8-25-94)
§ 32.02 FIRE DEPARTMENT MEMBERS.
   (A)   The Fire Department shall consist of both volunteer and paid members.
   (B)   The Fire Chief shall be responsible for establishing ranks within the
Fire Department. The Chief shall do so in accordance with existing town
ordinances, policies and other applicable federal or state laws and
regulations. All members of the Fire Department, both paid and volunteer, shall
be eligible to hold rank.
(Ord. 1240, passed 8-25-94)
§ 32.03 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FIRE CHIEF.
   The duties and responsibilities of the Fire Chief shall include, but not
necessarily be limited to, the following:
   (A)   Acting as the Chief Executive Officer for the Department and being
held accountable to the Town Manager and Board of Aldermen for the supervision
and oversight of the department.
   (B)   Being held responsible to the Town Manager and Board of Aldermen for
the promulgation of orders, regulations, and policies made or given by or
through the Town Manager relating to the Fire Chief's duties and those of his
department.
   (C)   Conferring with and being advised by the Town Manager on all important
matters not otherwise provided for in the regulations, policies and ordinances.
   (D)   Performing all duties as required by the North Carolina General
Statutes, the Town Charter, the code of ordinances, and the policies developed
for the Fire Department by the town.
   (E)   Controlling and being responsible for all actions of the Fire
Department and its employees, both full-time and volunteer.
   (F)   Establishing and maintaining policies for recruitment and selection of
volunteer members of the Fire Department, such policies to be consistent with
existing recruitment policies of the town.
   (G)   Inspecting, on a regular basis, the equipment of the Fire Department.
   (H)   Supervising the fighting and extinguishing of all fires.
   (I)   Exercising authority at all fire scenes to ensure that fires are
expediently extinguished and that persons inhibiting the fire fighting function
do not interfere.
   (J)   Causing all fire hydrants to be inspected at least once every six
months and report to the Town Manager the results of the inspections.
   (K)   Ensuring that complete and accurate records regarding all departmental
activity are maintained.
   (L)   Assuming the duties of the Fire Prevention Officer.
   (M)   Investigating, or causing the investigation of, all fires occurring
within the town in an effort to ascertain the cause of each fire.
   (N)   Developing and maintaining an appropriate recruitment and training
program for the department.
   (O)   Coordinating the fire inspection program for the town.
   (P)   Serving as emergency preparedness coordinator.
   (Q)   Performing other duties as required. (Ord. 1240, passed 8-25-94)
§ 32.04 CHAIN OF COMMAND.
   (A)   The Fire Chief shall be responsible, subject to the approval of the
Town Manager, for establishing a chain of command for the Fire Department.
   (B)   All members of the Fire Department, both paid and volunteer, shall be
obligated to comply and act in accordance with the chain of command for the
Fire Department so established by the Fire Chief.
(Ord. 1240, passed 8-25-94)
§ 32.05 FIRE DEPARTMENT MEMBERS SUBJECT TO PERSONNEL ORDINANCES OF THE TOWN.
   (A)   All paid members of the Fire Department shall be subject to certain
sections of the personnel policies of the town.
   (B)   Volunteer members of the Fire Department shall be subject to certain
sections of the personnel policies, such sections to include the following:
      (1)   Recruitment policies as set forth in the personnel policies to
include, but not necessarily limited to Equal Opportunity Employment Policy,
Equal Opportunity Employment Responsibility, Recruitment, Implementation,
Recruitment Sources, Job Advertisements, Applications for Employment,
Application File, Selection, Qualifications and Standards, and any amendments
to or substitutions for these sections.
      (2)   In keeping with the council-manager form of government, all
appointments to the Fire Department, both paid and volunteer, shall be subject
to the final approval of the Town Manager. Appointments to vacant positions
shall be based upon the recommendations made by the Fire Chief.
      (3)   Promotions policies and any amendments to or substitutions for this
section.
      (4)   The grievance procedures and procedures for disciplinary action to
include but not be limited to oral reprimand, written reprimand, suspension,
demotion, and dismissal as set forth in Chapter 34 of the town code.
      (5)   The provisions of the personnel policies regarding personnel
records to include Personnel Records Maintenance, Personnel Records, Basic
Information Maintenance, Access to Personnel Records, Former Employees,
Remedies of Employees Objecting to Material in File, Penalty for Permitting
Access to Confidential File by Unauthorized Person, Disposal of Records
Regulated, and Violations, or any amendments to or substitutions for these
sections.
      (6)   Restriction on the use of confidential information or any
amendments to or substitutions for this section.
   (C)   In addition to the provisions of the personnel policies to which
volunteer and paid members of the Fire Department are subject, all volunteer
and paid members of the Fire Department shall be subject to rules and
regulations adopted for the operation of the Fire Department by the Fire Chief
acting under the supervision of the Town Manager.
(Ord. 1240, passed 8-25-94; Am. Ord. 1489, passed 1-12-06)
§ 32.06 RELATIONSHIP OF FIRE DEPARTMENT AND VOLUNTEER MEMBERS.
   (A)   The Board of Aldermen recognizes that historically the volunteer
members of the Fire Department have organized into a group for the purpose of
enhancing their capability as fire fighters and improving fire suppression
services provided to the town. The Board of Aldermen recognizes the right of
the volunteer members to organize into such a volunteer group known as the
"Wrightsville Beach Volunteer Firefighters Association," (herein "WBVFA")
provided, however, that nothing contained herein shall be construed to
authorize any activities which are in violation of the restrictions of G.S. Ch.
95, Art. 12.
   (B)   (1)   The responsibility for: (a) establishing recruitment policies
for volunteer members; (b) selecting volunteer members consistent with existing
town policies; (c) establishing and maintaining training and performance
standards for volunteer members; (d) terminating participation by volunteer
members in the Fire Department; and (e) managing and supervising the activities
of volunteer members while participating as members of the Fire Department is
given to the Town Manager acting through the Fire Chief.
      (2)   Prior to implementing changes to (a) recruitment and selection
policies of volunteer members or (b) training and performance standards for
volunteer members, the town will use its best efforts to consult with officers
of the WBVFA regarding such matters; provided, however, that nothing contained
herein shall obligate the town to consult with WBVFA, and the town shall be and
remain responsible for all such actions as they relate to volunteer members of
the Fire Department. In the event WBVFA is dissatisfied with such changes in
recruitment and selection policies of volunteer members or training and
performance standards for volunteer members, it may request a meeting regarding
such changes with the Fire Chief. If after meeting with the Fire Chief, WBVFA
continues to be dissatisfied with such changes, it may request a meeting
regarding those matters with the Town Manager. Any such request shall be in
writing, shall specifically state the concerns of WBVFA and shall be signed by
the President of WBVFA. The request shall be presented to the Fire Chief. Upon
receipt of a request in proper form, the Fire Chief will forward such request
to the Town Manager who will set a date and a time for a meeting to consider
the concerns of WBVFA. Such meeting will be attended by town personnel as
deemed appropriate by the Town Manager. Officers of WBVFA may attend but the
meeting will not be open to the general membership of WBVFA. The Town Manager
shall give a written response to the concerns of WBVFA following such meeting
and the Manager's decision in such matter shall be final.
   (C)   WBVFA may use the fire station as a meeting place subject to rules and
regulations and scheduling as approved by the Fire Chief.
   (D)   Because of the relationship between the Fire Department and WBVFA,
there is the possibility that the general public may confuse the two
organizations. The volunteer members of the Fire Department have historically
solicited funds from members of the community. The town does not intend to
restrict the ability of WBVFA to solicit funds on its own, but all such
solicitations must clearly state that they are being made on behalf of WBVFA
and no town funds may be used in conjunction with such solicitation efforts.
   (E)   (1)   All equipment used by volunteer and paid members of the Fire
Department shall be owned by the town. The town acknowledges that it has been
the policy of the volunteer members of the Fire Department to purchase
equipment for use by members of the Fire Department. The town acknowledges the
debt that it owes to the volunteer Fire Department members for their efforts in
obtaining equipment for the Fire Department. However, in order to eliminate any
question regarding ownership of property used by members of the Fire
Department, it is hereby declared that all such property is property of the
town.
      (2)   All equipment purchased by WBVFA for use by the Fire Department
shall be formally offered to the town and accepted by the Board of Aldermen.
The Town Manager is hereby authorized to act as agent for the Board of Aldermen
and to accept equipment purchased by WBVFA for use by the Fire Department and
having a value of $500 or less.
   (F)   In the event WBVFA chooses to use some of its funds raised through
solicitation or otherwise for the purpose of providing training for members of
the Fire Department, both paid and volunteer, such funds shall only be utilized
in a manner as approved by the Fire Chief. In no event shall there be a co-
mingling of town funds with funds of WBVFA.
   (G)   The Town Manager is ultimately responsible for the operation of the
Fire Department in a manner consistent with direction given by the Board of
Aldermen. All members of the Fire Department, both paid and volunteer, shall be
subject to rules and regulations regarding operation of the Fire Department as
promulgated by the Town Manager and the Fire Chief.
(Ord. 1240, passed 8-25-94)
PLANNING BOARD
§ 32.10 CREATION.
   Pursuant to state law, G.S. § 160A-361, a Planning Board for the town is
hereby created.
('72 Code, § 2-12) (Ord., passed 3-20-69)
§ 32.11 COMPOSITION; FILLING VACANCIES.
   The Planning Board shall consist of seven members, all of whom shall be
citizens of the town and appointed by the Board of Aldermen. All members shall
be appointed for two-year terms or until a successor is appointed. Members'
terms shall run from February 1 through January 31. No member of the Planning
Board shall serve more than three consecutive terms. Vacancies occurring for
reasons other than expiration of terms shall be filled as they occur by the
Board of Aldermen for the period of the unexpired term.
('72 Code, § 2-13) (Ord., passed 3-20-69; Am. Ord., passed 6-27-74; Am. Ord.
1170, passed 3-12-92; Am. Ord. 1329, passed 3-11-99; Am. Ord. 1654, passed 4-
14-11)
§ 32.12 ORGANIZATION; MEETINGS; RECORDS.
   (A)   There shall be a Chairman and Vice Chairman elected annually by the
Board members at the regular meeting in February. The Board shall adopt Rules
of Procedure which shall be effective following approval by the Board of
Aldermen. The Board shall keep minutes of meetings, records of the members'
attendance and resolutions, discussions, findings and recommendations, all of
which minutes and such records shall be furnished to the Board of Aldermen. The
records shall be considered public records. The Board shall hold at least one
meeting each month and all meetings shall be open to the public and subject to
the provisions of G.S. Chapter 143, Article 33C regarding open meetings.
   (B)   The Board of Aldermen shall have the authority to remove any member
who misses three consecutive regular meetings or more than four total meetings
during his or her membership on the Planning Board. It shall be the
responsibility of the Chairman of the Planning Board to advise the Board of
Aldermen of any member who misses three consecutive regular meetings or more
than a total of four meetings. In the event the Board of Aldermen removes a
member because of his or her failure to comply with the attendance requirements
set forth herein, the Board of Aldermen shall notify the Chairman of the
Planning Board, in writing, that the member has been removed. Each member shall
notify the Chairman or the Planning staff at least 48 hours before a regular
meeting when an absence is anticipated.
('72 Code, § 2-14) (Ord., passed 3-20-69; Am. Ord., passed 6-27-74; Am. Ord.
1170, passed 3-12-92; Am. Ord. 1252, passed 5-25-95)
Statutory reference:
   Meetings open to public, see G.S. § 143-318.10
§ 32.13 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Planning Board shall have the following powers and duties:
   (A) Studies. To make careful studies of present conditions and the probable
future development of the town and its environs. Such studies may include but
are not limited to land use surveys; population studies; economic base studies;
schools, parks, and recreation studies; traffic studies; and urban renewal
studies.
   (B) Comprehensive plan. To formulate and maintain a comprehensive plan of
the town and its environs for the purpose of achieving a coordinated, adjusted,
and harmonious development of the municipality which would promote, in
accordance with present and future needs, the safety, morals, order,
convenience, prosperity, and general welfare of its citizens; efficiency and
economy in the process of development; convenience of traffic; safety from fire
and other dangers; adequate light and air; healthful and convenient
distribution of population; provision of adequate open spaces; good civic
design and arrangement; wise and efficient expenditures of public funds;
adequate provision for public utilities; and other matters pertaining to public
requirements. The comprehensive plan shall consist of a number of parts which
may include but not be limited to the following: a land use plan, a major
thoroughfare plan, a utilities plan, a plan for economic development, a
recreation plan, a school plan, and a community facilities plan.
   (C)   Zoning ordinances. To suggest revisions from time to time to the
existing zoning ordinances and to make other recommendations as the Planning
Board deems appropriate from time to time to the Board of Aldermen regarding
zoning ordinances.
   (D) Subdivision regulations. To suggest revisions from time to time to the
existing subdivision regulations and to make other recommendations as the
Planning Board deems appropriate from time to time to the Board of Aldermen
regarding subdivision ordinances.
   (E) Powers of review. To review and make recommendations to the Board of
Aldermen upon the extent, location, and design of all public structures and
facilities; on the acquisition and disposal of public properties; on the
opening, abandonment, widening, extension, narrowing, or other change to
streets and other public ways; and on the construction, extension, expansion,
or abandonment of utilities, whether publicly or privately owned. However, in
the absence of a recommendation from the Planning Board after the expiration of
30 days from the date on which the question has been submitted in writing to
the Board, the Board of Aldermen may if it deems wise, take final action.
   (F) Annual report. To submit, in April of each year, to the Board of
Aldermen, a report of its activities, for the preceding year.
   (G)   Prior approval by the Board of Aldermen. In exercising the powers and
duties set forth herein, the Planning Board is authorized to appoint committees
made up in whole or in part of citizens of the town who are not members of the
Planning Board. Provided, however, that the creation of the committees and the
appointments thereto shall be subject to the prior approval of the Board of
Aldermen.
   (H)    Staff support. The Town Manager shall be responsible for appointing
staff personnel to support the activities of the Planning Board. The Town
Manager shall designate those staff members so appointed in writing and shall
provide a copy of the designation to the Planning Board Chairman. The Planning
Board shall not utilize the services of any staff personnel other than those so
designated without the prior approval of the Town Manager.
('72 Code, § 2-16) (Ord., passed 3-20-69; Am. Ord. 1170, passed 3-12-92)
Statutory reference:
   Planning Board duties, see G.S. § 160A-361
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 32.20 ORGANIZATION.
   The Police Department of the town shall consist of a Chief and as many
police officers as the Board of Aldermen shall from time to time determine and
elect, and as many police officers as the Mayor and Board of Aldermen may deem
necessary to appoint for special purposes.
('72 Code, § 16-l)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to establish, see G.S. § 160A-281
§ 32.21 DUTIES OF CHIEF.
   The Chief of Police shall have control over the Police Department under the
general supervision of the Town Manager. The Chief shall keep the Town Manager
informed of the Department's activities and make such reports as the Town
Manager may from time to time require. He shall perform other duties as may be
required of him by the Board of Aldermen and Town Manager.
('72 Code, § 16-2)
§ 32.22 DUTIES OF POLICE.
   The Police Department shall carry out all orders of the Board of Aldermen
and Town Manager, shall enforce all laws of the state, all provisions of this
code and other ordinances of the town, and shall at all times preserve the
peace and protect the property and the safety of the citizens of the town.
('72 Code, § 16-3)
Statutory reference:
   Powers and duties, see G.S. § 160A-285
§ 32.23 TOWN MANAGER TO SUPERVISE.
   The Town Manager shall have general supervision over the Police Department.
('72 Code, § 16-4)
§ 32.24 UNIFORMS.
   All police officers shall wear uniforms provided by the town and shall keep
such uniforms in a neat and clean condition. They shall surrender all uniforms
and equipment upon leaving the police service of the town.
('72 Code, § 16-5)
§ 32.25 REQUIREMENTS OF EMPLOYMENT.
   Each person appointed as a police officer shall meet all requirements
established by the North Carolina General Statutes and appropriate state
regulatory agencies.
Statutory reference:
   Oath of office, see G.S. § 160A-284
   State law requirements, see G.S. § 17C-10
§ 32.26 ISSUANCE OF CIVIL PENALTIES.
   Police officers employed by the town shall have the authority to issue civil
penalty citations for all town ordinances made specifically punishable by civil
penalty. In addition, the Ocean Rescue Director, the Lifeguard Captain, and any
Park Ranger shall have the authority to issue civil penalty citations for all
town ordinances made specifically punishable by civil penalty.
(Ord., passed 8-10-78; Am. Ord. 1138, passed 3-14-91; Am. Ord. 1475, passed 4-
14-05)
§ 32.27 RESERVE POLICE DIVISION.
   (A)   There is established within the Police Department, as a division
thereof, a Reserve Police Division. This Division shall be a volunteer
organization composed of as many members as may from time to time be determined
by the Police Chief and approved by the Town Manager.
   (B)   The Division shall be under the direct control of the Chief of Police
or his or her designee, acting under the general supervision of the Town
Manager. Members of the Division when on active duty shall be subject to the
same chain of command within the Police Department as are regular officers.
Provided further, that members of the Division while on active duty shall obey
the instructions of regular officers in carrying out their duties. All
appointments and removals of members of this Division shall be made at the
discretion of the Chief of Police.
   (C)   The Reserve Police Division shall have no commanding officer, or any
officers other than the Chief of Police or his or her designee and all members
shall bear the rank of Police Officer I. The Chief of Police shall provide for
adequate training and establish policies and procedures regulating the conduct
and performance of members of the Division, and of candidates for membership.
   (D)   The duties of the Division, subject at all times to the direction,
supervision and control of the Chief of Police or his or her designee, shall be
to assist the regular members of the Police Department in the enforcement of
law and the maintenance of peace and order when called to active duty by the
Chief of Police or his or her designee. The Chief shall, by order, establish
rules and regulations to govern the Division, to fix the specific duties of its
members, and to provide for the maintenance of discipline. Members of the
Division shall obey the instructions of regular police officers in carrying out
their duties. The Chief may prescribe other duties than those mentioned herein
to be performed by the Division, with approval of the Town Manager.
   (E) An identification card and other insignia or evidence of identity as the
Chief may prescribe shall be issued to each member of the Division, who must
carry the card and other identification at all times while on duty, and who
must surrender them upon the termination of membership.
   (F)   No member of the Division shall, while on duty, carry or use any
firearm other than a type approved or issued at the direction of the Chief of
Police.
   (G)   No member or members of the Division shall enforce, nor attempt to
enforce, any law, except within the normal jurisdiction of the town. Reserve
Officers will at all times conduct themselves in the same manner and under the
same limitations as regular police officers as described by North Carolina
General Statutes, town ordinances and Police Department Standard Operating
Procedures.
   (H) While undergoing official training and while performing duties on behalf
of the town pursuant to orders or instructions of the Chief of Police, members
of the Division shall be entitled to benefits under the North Carolina
Workmen's Compensation Act pursuant to G.S. § 160A-282(a).
(Ord. passed 12-7-78; Am. Ord. 1271, passed 5-9-96; Am. Ord. 1416, passed 6-13-
02)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to establish, see G.S. § 160A-282
   Oath of office, see G.S. § 160A-284
PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY COMMITTEE
§ 32.35 CREATION; APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS.
   There is created the Town Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee composed
of seven citizens of the town. Each member of the Committee shall be appointed
by the Board of Aldermen.
(Ord., passed 7-25-74; Am. Ord. 1298, passed 1-22-98; Am. Ord. 1472, passed 2-
24-05; Am. Ord. 1492, passed 1-26-06; Am. Ord. 1646, passed 2-10-11; Am. Ord.
1668, passed 1-12-12)
Statutory reference:
   Recreation defined, see G.S. § 160A-352
   State policy, see G.S. § 160A-351
§ 32.36 LENGTH OF APPOINTMENT.
   Each member shall be appointed to serve for a two-year term. Members’ terms
shall run from February 1 through January 31, or until a successor is
appointed. Members may be appointed for no more than three consecutive terms.
Any person who has previously served as a member of the Board for three
consecutive terms cannot serve a subsequent term until at least one year has
expired since the end of his or her last term.
(Ord., passed 7-25-74; Am. Ord., passed
3-13-75; Am. Ord. 1179, passed 5-14-92; Am. Ord. 1592, passed 2-26-09)
§ 32.37 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee shall serve as an advisory
body for the Parks and Recreation Department. The Committee shall recommend
policies to the Parks and Recreation Director or his or her designee within its
powers and responsibilities as stated in this subchapter. The Committee shall
serve as a liaison between the Parks and Recreation Department and the citizens
of the community in parks and recreation matters. The Committee shall consult
with and make recommendations to the Parks and Recreation Director or his or
her designee in matters affecting parks and recreation policies, programs, and
the acquisition and disposal of lands and properties related to the total
community parks and recreation program, and to its long-range, projected
program for parks and recreation. The Parks and Recreation Director or his or
her designee will submit Committee recommendations to the Town Manager and/or
Board of Aldermen for appropriate action.
   (B)   The Committee shall make recommendations relating to the acceptance by
the town of any grants, gifts, or bequests of any personal or real property
offered or made available for parks and recreational purposes and which are
judged to be of present or possible future use for or to parks and recreation.
Any gift, bequest of money or other property, grant, or devise of real property
or personal property so acquired, shall be held by the town, used, and finally
disposed of in accordance with the terms under which the grant, gift, or devise
is made and accepted.
   (C)   Upon investigating and interpreting the needs of the community, the
Committee shall make recommendations in regard to the construction and
equipping of parks, playgrounds, and recreation centers necessary or useful to
parks and recreation function and programming.
   (D)   The Town Manager shall be responsible for appointing staff personnel
to support the activities of the Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee. The
Town Manager shall designate those staff members so appointed in writing and
shall provide a copy of the designation to the Parks and Recreation Director.
The Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee shall not utilize the services of
any staff personnel other than those so designated without the prior approval
of the Town Manager.
(Ord., passed 7-25-74; Am. Ord. 1179, passed 5-14-92; Am. Ord. 1592, passed 2-
26-09; Am. Ord. 1869, passed 11-18-25)
Statutory reference:
   General powers, see G.S. § 160A-353
§ 32.38 MEETINGS.
   The Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee meetings shall be held on a
monthly basis as approved by the Board of Aldermen. The Chairman or in his or
her absence, the Vice-Chairman, may request a special meeting of the Committee
at any time. Special meetings may also be requested at any time by at least
five Committee members. Upon approval by the Board of Aldermen, notice of
regular and special meetings shall be given in accordance with G.S. § 143-318.9
et seq. A quorum of the Committee shall be in attendance before action of an
official nature can be taken. A majority of the actual membership of the Parks
and Recreation Advisory Committee, excluding vacant seats, shall constitute a
quorum in accordance with G.S. § 160A-74. A member who has withdrawn from a
meeting without being excused by a majority vote of the remaining members
present shall be counted as present for purposes of determining whether a
quorum is present.
(Ord., passed 7-25-74; Am. Ord. 1592, passed 2-26-09; Am. Ord. 1594, passed 4-
9-09; Am. Ord. 1646, passed 2-10-11)
§ 32.39 ATTENDANCE.
   The Board of Aldermen shall have the authority to remove any member who
misses three consecutive regular meetings or more than four total meetings
during any two-year term of membership on the Parks and Recreation Advisory
Committee. It shall be the responsibility of the Chairman of the Parks and
Recreation Advisory Committee to advise the Board of Aldermen of any member who
misses three consecutive regular meetings or more than a total of four
meetings. In the event the Board of Aldermen removes a member because of his or
her failure to comply with the attendance requirements set forth herein, the
Board of Aldermen shall notify the Chairman of the Parks and Recreation
Advisory Committee in writing that the member has been removed. Vacancies
occurring for reasons other than expiration of terms shall be filled by the
Board of Aldermen for the period of the unexpired term.
(Ord., passed 7-25-74; Am. Ord. 1179, passed 5-14-92; Am. Ord. 1592, passed 2-
26-09)
§ 32.40 COMPENSATION.
   Committee members shall serve without monetary compensation. Subject to the
prior approval of the Town Manager and in compliance with existing policies of
the town, members may be reimbursed for travel and subsistence to professional
recreation meetings, conferences and workshops.
(Ord., passed 7-25-74; Am. Ord. 1179, passed 5-14-92; Am. Ord. 1592, passed 2-
26-09)
§ 32.41 OFFICERS.
   There shall be a Chairman and Vice- Chairman of the Parks and Recreation
Advisory Committee. An annual election of the Chairman and Vice-Chairman shall
be held by the Committee members and shall occur at the regular monthly meeting
in February. Officers shall serve for one year from election, with eligibility
for re-election. In the event an officer's appointment to the Committee is
terminated, a replacement to this office shall be elected by the Committee,
from its membership, at the meeting following the termination. The Parks and
Recreation Director or his or her designee shall serve as Secretary of the
Committee.
(Ord., passed 7-25-74; Am. Ord. 1592, passed 2-26-09; Am. Ord. 1869, passed 11-
18-25)
§ 32.42 OFFICERS' DUTIES.
   (A) The Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee Chairman shall preside at
all meetings and sign all documents relative to action taken by the Committee.
   (B) When the Chairman is absent, the Vice-Chairman shall perform the duties
of the Chairman. When both the Chairman and Vice-Chairman are absent, a
temporary Chairman shall be selected by those members who are present.
   (C)   The Secretary shall keep minutes of meetings, records of the members'
attendance and records of discussions, findings and recommendations, all of
which minutes and such records shall be furnished to the Board of Aldermen. The
records shall be considered public records.
(Ord., passed 7-25-74; Am. Ord. 1179, passed 5-14-92; Am. Ord. 1592, passed 2-
26-09)
§ 32.43 SUB-COMMITTEES.
   (A)   Subject to the prior approval of the Board of Aldermen, in exercising
the powers and duties set forth herein, the Parks and Recreation Advisory
Committee may appoint sub-committees composed only of appointed members of the
Committee.
   (B)   Under certain circumstances the need may arise to create a sub-
committee made up in whole or in part of citizens of the town who are not
members of the Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee. Formation of such a
sub-committee shall be of a temporary nature to address a specific purpose and
shall not be authorized without approval of the Board of Aldermen. The actual
appointment of sub-committee members who are not already members of the Parks
and Recreation Advisory Committee shall be made by the Board of Aldermen. The
Recreation Advisory Committee may provide recommendations to the Board of
Aldermen pertaining to the selection of non-committee members for appointment
to a special sub-committee.
(Ord., passed 7-25-74; Am. Ord. 1179, passed 5-14-92; Am. Ord. 1592, passed 2-
26-09; Am. Ord. 1646, passed 2-10-11)
§ 32.44 BY-LAWS.
   The Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee is authorized to adopt
procedures for conducting its meetings and other matters which shall be
incorporated into a set of by-Laws. Provided, however, that the by-Laws shall
not be effective until approved by the Board of Aldermen.
(Ord., passed 7-25-74; Am. Ord., passed 3-13-75;Am. Ord. 1179, passed 5-14-92)
HISTORIC LANDMARK COMMISSION
§ 32.46 HISTORIC LANDMARK COMMISSION.
   A Historic Landmark Commission is hereby established in accordance with the
provisions of G.S. § 160A-400.7.
(Ord. 1198, passed 9-10-92; Am. Ord. 1222, passed 12-2-93)
§ 32.47 APPOINTMENT AND TENURE OF MEMBERS.
   The Historic Landmark Commission shall be composed of five members appointed
by the Board of Aldermen. The term of office shall be two years. Members shall
be appointed for terms of two years as vacancies occur. An appointment to fill
an unexpired term shall be only for the remaining portion of that term.
Membership on the Historic Landmark Commission will be limited to three
consecutive terms. Members shall continue to serve until their successors are
appointed.
(Ord. 1198, passed 9-10-92; Am. Ord. 1222, passed 12-2-93)
§ 32.48 COMPOSITION.
   All members of the Historic Landmark Commission shall be residents of the
town. A majority of the members of the Historic Landmark Commission shall have
demonstrated special interest, experience or education in history,
architecture, archeology or related fields. All members shall serve without
compensation.
(Ord. 1198, passed 9-10-92; Am. Ord. 1222, passed 12-2-93)
§ 32.49 ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS.
   Should a member fail to attend three consecutive regular meetings of the
Commission, and should there be no adequate excuse for the absences, the
Chairman, with the concurrence of a majority of the entire Commission, shall
recommend to the Board of Aldermen that a vacancy be declared and that the
vacant position be filled by the Board of Aldermen. Absence due to illness,
death or other emergency situations shall not affect the member's status
excepting that of an extreme duration resulting in prolonged absence, whereby
the procedure for replacement of the member as specified in § 32.47 shall be
followed.
(Ord. 1198, passed 9-10-92)
§ 32.50 RULES OF PROCEDURE.
   The Historic Landmark Commission shall adopt rules of procedure subject to
approval of such rules by the Board of Aldermen for the conduct of its
business. The Commission shall keep a record of its members' attendance and of
its resolutions, findings and recommendations and the records shall be of
public record.
(Ord. 1198, passed 9-10-92; Am. Ord. 1222, passed 12-2-93)
§ 32.51 MEETINGS OPEN TO THE PUBLIC.
   All meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public and governed by
the provisions of G.S. Ch. 143, Art. 33C.
(Ord. 1198, passed 9-10-92)
§ 32.52 AUTHORITY AND POWER.
   The Historic Landmark Commission is authorized to discharge and conduct its
duties and responsibilities in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
and as specified in G.S. Ch. 160A, Art. 19, Part 3C. Provided, that pending
establishment by the Board of Aldermen of a historic district either as a
separate use district classification under the town's zoning ordinance or as
districts which overlay other zoning districts or designation of one or more
historic landmarks in accordance with G.S. § 160A-400.5, the Commission shall
limit its activities to the following:
   (A)   Conduct an investigation of and prepare a report describing the
boundaries of any proposed historic districts within the town and describing
the significance of the buildings, structures, features, sites or surroundings
included in the proposed district, such investigation and report to be in
accordance with the provisions of G.S. § 160A-400.4;
   (B)   Upon conclusion of the investigation and report, the Commission shall
forward the report to the Department of Cultural Resources acting through the
State Historic Preservation Officer or his or her designee for analysis and
recommendations in accordance with the provisions of G.S. § 160A-400.4;
   (C)   Following action on the report by the Department of Cultural Resources
as specified above, the Commission shall forward the report to the Town's
Planning Board for its review and recommendation. The Planning Board shall make
its recommendations upon conclusion of a review of the report to the Board of
Aldermen;
   (D)   Upon receipt of the recommendations of the Planning Board, the Board
of Aldermen shall take such action as it deems appropriate. Before taking any
action on the recommendations, the Board of Aldermen shall hold a public
hearing for the purpose of soliciting input from the public concerning the
recommendations;
   (E)   The Commission is authorized to undertake other activities as
specified in G.S. Ch. 160A, Art. 19, Part 3C, which are required to be carried
out prior to the establishment by the Board of Aldermen of a historic district
either as a separate use district classification under the town zoning
ordinance or as districts which overlay other zoning districts or designation
of one or more historic landmarks in accordance with G.S. § 160A-400.5.
   (F)   From and after the designation of a landmark, no exterior portion of
any building or other structure (including masonry walls, fences, light
fixtures, steps and pavement, or other appurtenant features) nor above-ground
utility structures nor any type of outdoor advertising sign shall be erected,
altered, restored, moved, or demolished on such landmark until after an
application for a Certificate of Appropriateness as to exterior features has
been submitted to and approved by the Historic Landmark Commission. A
Certificate of Appropriateness under the provisions of this section shall be
required whether or not a building permit is required, but, in all instances
where such a permit is required, the Certificate of Appropriateness shall be
issued prior to the issuance of a building permit.
(Ord. 1198, passed 9-10-92; Am. Ord. 1213, passed 6-10-93; Am. Ord. 1222,
passed 12-2-93)
§ 32.53 DESIGN REVIEW PROCESS FOR CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS.
   Applications for Certificate of Appropriateness shall be subject to review
based upon the design principles and guidelines then in effect and as have been
adopted by the Historic Landmark Commission and approved by resolution of the
Board of Aldermen.
(Ord. 1213, passed 6-10-93; Am. Ord. 1222, passed 12-2-93)
MARKETING ADVISORY COMMITTEE
§ 32.55 CREATION AND PURPOSE.
   Pursuant to G.S. § 160A-146, the Marketing Advisory Committee of the town
was created for the purpose of providing advice to the Board of Aldermen and
the New Hanover County Tourism Development Authority relating to the tourism
industry in the town.
(Ord. 1504, passed 3-23-06; Am. Ord. 1643, passed 11-18-10)
§ 32.56 COMPOSITION AND APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS.
   The Marketing Advisory Committee shall consist of five voting members and
two non-voting members. All voting members shall be appointed by the Board of
Aldermen and shall be citizens of the town or representatives from the town's
business community, including but not limited to small business, real estate,
and the resort/lodging industry within the town. One non-voting member shall be
the town's non-governmental representative to the New Hanover County Tourism
Development Authority (TDA); the other non-voting member shall be a member of
the Board of Aldermen. The non-voting members shall be considered alternate
members with full authority to vote on all matters in those cases where such
alternates are necessary to satisfy a quorum for a meeting. All voting members
shall be appointed for two-year terms or until a successor is appointed. Terms
shall run from July 1 to June 30. The term of the non-voting member who is the
town's non-governmental representative to the TDA shall be as dictated by the
membership rules applicable to TDA members. The term of the non-voting member
who is a member of the Board of Aldermen shall be February 1 to January 31. No
member of the Marketing Advisory Committee shall serve more than three
consecutive terms. Vacancies occurring for reasons other than expiration of a
term shall be filled as they occur by the Board of Aldermen for the period of
the unexpired term.
(Ord. 1504, passed 3-23-06; Am. Ord. 1617, passed 2-11-10; Am. Ord. 1643,
passed 11-18-10; Am. Ord. 1752, passed 11-12-15; Am. Ord. 1754, passed 12-10-
15; Am. Ord. 1781, passed 1-7-19; Am. Ord. 1790, passed 9-12-19)
§ 32.57 ORGANIZATION; MEETINGS; RECORDS.
   (A)   There shall be a Chairman, Vice Chairman, and Secretary elected
annually by the Marketing Advisory Committee members at the regular meeting in
February. The Committee shall adopt rules of procedure for the conduct of its
business that shall be effective following approval by the Board of Aldermen.
Subsequent changes to the rules of procedure shall also be subject to approval
by the Board of Aldermen. The Committee shall keep minutes of the meetings and
records of the members' attendance, discussions, and recommendations, all of
which minutes and such records shall be furnished to the Board of Aldermen. The
records shall be considered public records.
   (B)   The Marketing Advisory Committee Chairman shall preside at all
meetings and sign all documents relative to action taken by the Committee. When
the Chairman is absent, the Vice-Chairman shall perform the duties of the
Chairman. When both the Chairman and Vice-Chairman are absent, a temporary
Chairman shall be selected by those members who are present.
   (C)   The Marketing Advisory Committee shall hold a meeting in February of
each year and at least five additional meetings during the remaining calendar
year based on a schedule adopted at the February meeting. The Committee's
adopted meeting schedule shall be approved by the Board of Aldermen at the
Board’s March meeting. The Chairman, or in his or her absence the Vice-
Chairman, may call a special meeting of the Marketing Advisory Committee at any
time. Notice of special meetings and changes to the adopted meeting schedule
shall be given in accordance with G.S. § 143-318.9 et seq. All meetings shall
be open to the public and subject to the provisions of G.S. Ch. 143, Article
33C, regarding open meetings. A quorum of the Marketing Advisory Committee
shall be in attendance before action of an official nature can be taken.
   (D)   Routine business shall include issues pertinent to the successful
marketing of the community in relation to tourism as well as a review of
applications being submitted from the Board of Aldermen for funding projects,
programs, or equipment supporting the community's efforts to attract and
support the tourism industry.
   (E)   The Board of Aldermen shall have the authority to remove any member
who misses three consecutive regular meetings or more than four total meetings
in a one-year period. It shall be the responsibility of the Chairman of the
Committee to advise the Board of Aldermen of any member who misses three
consecutive regular meetings or more than a total of four meetings in a one-
year period. Absences due to sickness, death, or other emergencies of a like
nature shall be regarded as approved absences and shall not affect the member's
status on the Committee. However, in the event of a long illness, or other such
cause for prolonged absences, the Chairman of the Marketing Advisory Committee
shall advise the Board of Aldermen of the situation, and the Board of Aldermen
may remove the member. In the event the Board of Aldermen removes a member
because of his or her failure to comply with the attendance requirements set
forth herein, the Board of Aldermen shall notify the Chairman of the Committee,
in writing, that the member has been removed. Each member shall notify the
Chairman, Vice-Chairman, or Secretary at least 48 hours before a regular
meeting when an absence is anticipated.
   (F) Subject to prior approval by the Board of Aldermen, the Marketing
Advisory Committee may appoint sub-committees composed exclusively of members
of the Marketing Advisory Committee. The role and duration of each sub-
committee must be clearly defined and approved by the Board of Aldermen. It is
the responsibility of the Marketing Advisory Committee Chairman to insure that
all appointed members of the Marketing Advisory Committee be fully informed of
actions and decisions made by each sub-committee.
(Ord. 1504, passed 3-23-06; Am. Ord. 1643, passed 11-18-10; Am. Ord. 1781,
passed 1-7-19)
§ 32.58 RESPONSIBILITY, POWERS, AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Marketing Advisory Committee shall work in concert with the Board
of Aldermen, the TDA, and the Cape Fear Coast Convention and Visitors Bureau
(CFCCVB) to develop programs and initiatives to promote the tourism industry in
the town.
   (B)   Upon approval by the Board of Aldermen, the Marketing Advisory
Committee shall provide annual marketing recommendations to the CFCCVB for
inclusion in the annual county-wide marketing plan.
   (C)   The Marketing Advisory Committee shall function in an advisory
capacity to the Board of Aldermen and shall meet from time to time with the
Board of Aldermen to discuss issues relative to marketing and tourism.
   (D)   The Marketing Advisory Committee shall be provided the opportunity to
review and comment on program funding requests that have been prepared and
approved by the Board of Aldermen prior to submission to the TDA for
consideration.
   (E)   The Marketing Advisory Committee shall work closely with local non-
governmental organizations and the private sector to promote tourism that will
benefit the community.
   (F)   Neither the Marketing Advisory Committee nor any subcommittee of the
Marketing Advisory Committee is empowered to obligate municipal funds, enter
into contracts on behalf of the town, or implement town policy without the
express approval of the Board of Aldermen.
(Ord. 1504, passed 3-23-06; Am. Ord. 1643, passed 11-18-10)
§ 32.59 COMPENSATION.
   Marketing Advisory Committee members shall serve without monetary
compensation.
(Ord. 1504, passed 3-23-06; Am. Ord. 1643, passed 11-18-10)
CHAPTER 33: FINANCE
Section
   
33.01   [Repealed.]
   
33.02   Purchases by town employees
   
33.03   Law enforcement officers special separation allowance trust fund
   
33.04   Disbursement of funds
   
33.05   Counter-signatures on all drafts
   
33.06   Capital Reserve Fund
   
33.07   Bad checks presented to the town
   
33.08   Cash management policy
§ 33.01 [REPEALED.]
§ 33.02 PURCHASES BY TOWN EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   Before any order shall be given for items to be paid by the town or
any purchase made by any town employees, a purchase order must first be
obtained from the Finance Officer if the amount of purchase exceeds $500.
   (B)   The Finance Officer may issue the purchase order only when there are
sufficient funds for the purchase and in accordance with the annual budget as
allocated by the Board of Aldermen in the annual budget ordinance.
   (C)   Any town employee purchasing goods exceeding $500 without a purchase
order from the Finance Officer will be held responsible for the cost of same.
   (D)   The Finance Officer may change the amount necessary for a purchase
order as deemed necessary, provided that this action and amount are reported to
the Board of Aldermen at its next meeting.
('72 Code, § 7-2) (Am. Ord. 1250, passed 5-18-95; Am. Ord. 1293, passed 9-11-
97; Am. Ord. 1721, passed 1-23-14)
§ 33.03 LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS SPECIAL SEPARATION ALLOWANCE TRUST FUND.
   (A) There is established on the books of the town a trust fund to be known
as the Law Enforcement Officers' Special Separation Allowance Trust Fund.
   (B)   The purpose of this trust fund is to receive monies appropriated by
the Board of Aldermen to fund the law enforcement officers' special separation
allowance benefit as required by G.S. § 143-166.42 and to be a source of
payment of special monthly separation allowances to former law enforcement
officers who have retired from employment with the town and who meet the
qualifying requirements of G.S. § 143-166.41 for receipt of payments of the
special separation allowance.
   (C)   The Board of Aldermen shall appropriate monies to the trust fund as
needed to assure that sufficient assets will exist and remain available to pay
future benefits when due. The Town Manager shall obtain actuarial evaluations
of the status of the trust fund as necessary to assure adequate appropriations
to the trust fund to maintain its actuarial soundness.
   (D)   The Finance Officer shall be and hereby is directed to invest the
monies in the trust fund in deposits and securities eligible for investment of
local funds under state law, until such time as the monies are needed for
disbursement.
(Ord. 1132, passed 1-10-91)
Statutory reference:
   Investment of funds, see G.S. § 159-30
   Local Fiscal Assistance Act, see G.S. § 159, Article 3
   Selection of depository, see G.S. § 159-31
§ 33.04 DISBURSEMENT OF FUNDS.
   (A) In accordance with the Local Government Budget and Fiscal Control Act,
no bill or claim against the town may be paid unless it has been approved by
the officer or employee responsible for the function or agency to which the
expense is charged. No check or draft of the town shall be valid unless it
bears on its face the certificate of the Finance Officer as follows: "This
disbursement has been approved as required by the Local Government Budget and
Fiscal Control Act."
   (B)   No contract, agreement, or purchase order shall be valid unless it
bears the Finance Officer's certificate as follows: "This instrument has been
pre-audited in the manner required by the Local Government Budget and Fiscal
Control Act."
(Am. Ord. 1250, passed 5-18-95)
Statutory reference:
   Duties of Finance Officer, see G.S. § 159-2
   Local Government Budget and Fiscal Control Act, see G.S. § 159, Article 3
   Pre-audit of disbursements, see G.S. § 159-28
§ 33.05 COUNTER-SIGNATURES ON ALL DRAFTS.
   All checks and drafts issued by the town, regardless of amount, must be
signed by the Finance Officer, Town Manager, or Mayor.
(Am. Ord. 1250, passed 5-18-95)
Statutory reference:
   Dual signatures on checks, see G.S. § 159-25
§ 33.06 CAPITAL RESERVE FUND.
   (A)   Pursuant to the authority granted by G.S. § 160-425, there is hereby
created and established a Capital Reserve Fund to be maintained in addition to
all other funds now authorized by law.
   (B)   Moneys appropriated and paid into the Capital Reserve Fund shall be
expended only for those purposes as set out in G.S. § 160.432(1), (2), (4),
(5), (7), and (9).
      (1)   All of the foregoing purposes in division (B) above declared to be
necessary expenses and the cost thereof shall be deemed to include land,
easements, rights in land, water rights, contract rights, franchises, and
equipment used or useful in connection with the said purposes.
      (2)   All money deposited in accordance with the provisions of this
section shall be secured as provided by G.S. § 159-28 of the Local Government
Act.
   (C)   Moneys appropriated and paid into the Capital Reserve Fund may be
invested from time to time as prescribed by G.S. § 160-431 and 159-28.1.
(Ord., passed 7-27-72)
Statutory reference:
   The statutes cited in this section have been repealed and/or replaced. For
current provisions regarding capital reserve funds, see G.S. §§159-18 through
159.22
§ 33.07 BAD CHECKS PRESENTED TO THE TOWN.
   When the payor bank of any uncertified check tendered to the town in payment
of any obligation due to the town shall refuse payment upon such check, and
such check shall be returned to the town, a penalty of $25 shall be imposed.
The penalty shall not be waived or diminished and shall be in addition to other
charges or penalties provided for by law.
(Ord. 1106, passed 11-2-89; Am. Ord. 1158, passed 10-10-91; Am. Ord. 1377,
passed 3-22-01)
§ 33.08 CASH MANAGEMENT POLICY.
   There shall be a Board of Aldermen approved cash management policy that
outlines the town's financial and investment practices. The policy may be
amended from time to time by the Board of Aldermen.
(Ord. 1250, passed 5-18-95)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
Chapter
   
50.   WATER AND SEWERS
CHAPTER 50 WATER AND SEWERS
Section
General Provisions
   
50.001   Definitions
   
50.002   Tampering with or obstructing water and sewer lines or water meters
prohibited
   
50.003   Work on water and sewer system by authorized personnel only
   
50.004   Violations; recovery of damages
Water Use Regulations
   
50.016   Administrative authority
   
50.017   Permit for connection required
   
50.018   Tap and meter sizes required
   
50.019   Private water supply
   
50.020   Cutoff of public water supply in times of emergency
Sewer Use Regulations
   
50.030   Intent of regulation of sewer use
   
50.031   Applicability of sewer use provisions
   
50.032   Use of public sewers required
   
50.033   Discharge to natural outlets
   
50.034   Prohibition of septic tanks, privies, and the like
   
50.035   Requirement of sewer use
   
50.036   Building sewers, connections, and fees
   
50.037   Separate connections required
   
50.038   Method of sewer connection
   
50.039   Elevation of sewer connection
   
50.040   Prohibited connections
   
50.041   Public hazard
   
50.042   Grease removal
   
50.043   Sand and grit removal
   
50.044   Preliminary treatment devices
   
50.045   Industrial discharge permits
   
50.046   Time limit for obtaining industrial discharge permit
   
50.047   Industrial discharge permit application
   
50.048   Pretreatment requirements
   
50.049   Industrial discharge permit cancellation
   
50.050   Industrial discharge permit fees
   
50.051   Industrial user ownership changes
   
50.052   Effect of approvals of pretreatment facilities; wastewater
characteristics
   
50.053   Permit issuance does not convey property rights, exclusive privileges
   
50.054   Discharge of industrial or pretreated wastes to be approved
   
50.055   Prohibited discharges
   
50.056   Prohibited wastes and limitations
   
50.057   B.O.D. limit
   
50.058   Chemical oxygen demand
   
50.059   Suspended solids
   
50.060   Flow equalization
   
50.061   Deleterious discharges
   
50.062   Water quality changes
   
50.063   Standards of waste discharge and delivery
   
50.064   Septic tank and portable toilet wastes
   
50.065   Quality determination; effluent sampling
   
50.066   Quantity determination
   
50.067   Powers and authority of Inspectors
   
50.068   Sewer service connection fees; user charges
   
50.069   Extra strength wastewater surcharges
   
50.070   Discontinuance of wastewater treatment and disposal service; when
permissible
Water and Sewer Rates
   
50.080   Schedule of connection charges; usage rates
   
50.081   Reestablishment of water service which has been terminated for
nonpayment
   
50.082   Disconnection, reconnection and meter reading fees
   
50.083   Special rates
   
50.084   Billing; payment of accounts
Discontinuation, Suspension of Service
   
50.090   Procedure for discontinuation of service
   
50.091   Suspension of service
   
50.092   Discontinuation in protection of health and welfare
Extension of Service
   
50.100   Application for approval of extension
   
50.101   General extension requirements
   
50.102   General approval requirements
   
50.103   Specifications for extension; ownership
   
50.104   Additional subdivision improvement may be required
   
50.105   Approved subdivision or developed property
   
50.106   Approved extension project; assessment of costs
   
50.107   Proposed development or unapproved subdivision
   
50.108   Financing of extension within town limits
   
50.109   Surety bond; refund or reimbursement of funds
   
50.110   Exceptions from following extension procedure authorized
   
50.111   Extension outside town; application
   
50.112   Financing of extension outside town limits
   
50.113   Deposit of funds; contract for extension outside town limits
   
50.114   Surety bond or private construction for extension outside town limits
   
50.115   Annexation
   
50.116   Cutoff of public water supply at piers
Water Supply Shortage
   
50.120   Issuance of water shortage proclamation
   
50.121   Conditions deemed emergency
   
50.122   Restrictions, limitations imposed
   
50.123   Proclamation, restrictions, and the like shall be written
   
50.124   End of emergency; lifting or modification of restrictions
   
50.125   Water shortage response triggers
   
50.126   Non-essential water usage and irrigation control
   
50.127   Water shortage response
   
50.128   Water shortage response enforcement
Stormwater Management
   
50.130   Title
   
50.131   Authority
   
50.132   Findings
   
50.133   Purpose
   
50.134   Applicability and jurisdiction
   
50.135   Interpretation
   
50.136   Definitions
   
50.137   Design manual
   
50.138   Relationship to other laws, regulations, and private agreements
   
50.139   Severability
   
50.140   Effective date and transitional provisions
   
50.141   Review and decision-making entities
   
50.142   Review procedures
   
50.143   Application for approval
   
50.144   Approvals
   
50.145   Appeals
   
50.146   General standards
   
50.147   Impervious surface requirements
   
50.148   Structural stormwater control requirements
   
50.149   Standards for stormwater control measures
   
50.150   Variances
   
50.151   Additional standards for SA waters
   
50.152   General standards for maintenance
   
50.153   Operation and maintenance agreement
   
50.154   Inspection program
   
50.155   Notice to owners
   
50.156   Records of installation and maintenance
   
50.157   Nuisance
   
50.158   Enforcement
   
50.159   Remedies
   
50.160   Procedures
   
50.161   Illicit discharges and connections
   
50.162   Stormwater fees
 
   
50.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Building code, see
Ch. 151
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Terms in this
chapter not otherwise defined shall have the meaning prescribed within the
regulations of EPA/DEM.
   "AVERAGE FLOW." The total flow of wastewater in gallons during a normal
operating calendar day of 24 hours, as can be measured over a period of time of
not less than six months.
   "B.O.D.5" or "FIVE-DAY BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND." The total quantity of
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20°C. expressed in milligrams per liter
(mg/l). "B.O.D.5" shall be determined by standard methods currently approved by
EPA/DEM.
   "BUILDING SEWER." The pipe from the building to the town-owned sewer service
line or sewer lateral. The town sewer service lateral shall constitute the
publicly provided access point generally located at the property line for
residential service. However, the lateral may be located at some other access
point as provided by the town.
   "BUILDING WATER." The pipe from the building to the town-owned water service
line or water lateral. The town water service lateral shall constitute the
publicly provided access point generally located at the property line for
residential service. However, the lateral may be located at some other access
point as provided by the town.
   "C.O.D." or "CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND." The total quantity of oxygen required
for the chemical oxidation of decomposable matter under standard laboratory
conditions. "C.O.D." shall be determined by the standard methods currently
approved by EPA/DEM.
   "COMBINED SEWER." A sewer receiving both surface runoff and wastewater
flows.
   "COMMERCIAL NONRESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES." All commercial structures requiring
water and sewer service but having no habitational units.
   "COMPOSITE SAMPLE." The makeup of individual samples, so taken as to
represent the nature of wastewater or industrial wastes.
   "CONNECTION" or "TAP." The attachment of the building water or sewer to the
town's provided access point to the public sanitary sewer or public water
supply.
   "CONSTITUENTS." The combination of particles, chemicals, or measurable
environmental or chemical conditions (such as temperature, pH, or B.O.D.5)
which exist in the subject wastes.
   "CONSUMER." Shall have the same meaning as "DOMESTIC USER."
   "COOLING WATER." Any physical connection or structural arrangement between a
public or a private potable water system and any nonpotable source or system
through which an unsafe quality of water could flow or siphon from the
nonpotable source to the potable system.
   "DEBRIS SCREENS" or "DEBRIS TRAPS." Any device or structure constructed in
accordance with pretreatment requirements operated by a user or customer of the
town's wastewater system for the purpose of removing particles and undissolved
materials from the wastewater to be contributed to the public sanitary sewer.
   "DIRECTOR." The Director of Public Works of the town or his duly authorized
deputy, agent, or representative.
   "DOMESTIC USER." A person who uses the public water supply or who discharges
wastewater to the public sanitary sewer: containing a pollutant strength within
the defined range for standard strength wastewater; containing no constituents
at a quantity or concentration prohibited in this chapter; and at a rate of
average flow not to exceed 50,000 gallons per day.
   "DOMESTIC WASTEWATER." The wastewater generated from normal human living
processes which have constituent strength within the range defined for standard
strength wastewater, and which contain no constituents of a quantity or
concentration exceeding the limits stated in this chapter. Normal human living
processes include wastewater from bathrooms and toilets, non-commercial
kitchens, and non-industrial and non-commercial laundries.
   "EFFLUENT." The sewage, water, or other liquid flowing out of any basin,
pretreatment device, or facility and subsequently entering a public sewer,
unless the context specifically refers to the flow from some other facility.
   "EPA/DEM." The United States Environmental Protection Agency and the
Division of Environmental Management, Department of Natural Resources and
Community Development, State of North Carolina.
   "FEE SCHEDULE." The official privilege license tax; permit, application, and
other fee; deposit; and utilities service and rate charge schedule for the
town, as created by the fee schedule designated by the Board of Aldermen which
may be revised from time to time.
   "FLAMMABLE." The nature of material, materials, or substances which provide
the capability to burn spontaneously or to burn upon exposure to fire, sparks,
or high temperature or to burn under conditions found in the town wastewater
collection system. Combustible nature of materials and related combustible
conditions shall be determined by standard methods currently approved by the
Fire Prevention Code of the American Insurance Association, l976 Edition, as
revised.
   "GREASE INTERCEPTOR." Any device constructed in conformity to the plumbing
code, operated by the customer of the wastewater system for removing oil and
grease before contributing liquid wastes to the wastewater system.
   "HOLDING TANK." Any device or structure constructed in conformity with the
plumbing code, operated by a public sanitary sewer customer for the purpose of
moderating and controlling flows of wastewater to be discharged to a public
sewer.
   "INDUSTRIAL USER." A person who discharges to the public sanitary sewer
wastewater which prior to pretreatment has characteristics, or, because of
available operations or processes requiring water use, may potentially have
characteristics, which conform to any of the following: a pollutant strength
greater than standard strength wastewater; constituent quantity or
concentration exceeding allowable limits defined in this chapter; or an average
flow rate exceeding a quantity of 50,000 gallons per day.
   "INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER." The wastewater generated from activities,
operations, or processes which require water and which add to the water
pollutant constituents at a strength exceeding standard wastewater strength or
at a quantity or concentration exceeding allowable limits defined in this
chapter.
   "INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER SURCHARGE." The additional charge for service
provided to any user of the town's wastewater system service area which has
effluent characteristics exceeding those of standard strength wastewater.
   "INFLOW." Water other than wastewater that enters a sanitary sewer system,
including water entering through a building sewer, from sources such as roof
leaders, collar drains, yard drains, area drains, foundation drains, drains
from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross connections between storm
sewers and sanitary sewers, catch basins, cooling towers, storm waters, surface
runoff, street wash waters, or drainage.
   "INFLUENT." The wastewaters arriving at the public wastewater treatment
facility for treatment.
   "INTERFERENCE." Inhibition or disruption of public sanitary sewers or public
wastewater treatment facilities which contributes to a violation of any
requirement of the NPDES permit.
   "METERED WATER." The amounts of water used by the water and wastewater
system during the town's utility service billing periods, as measured by water
meters required and approved by the town.
   "MG/L" or "MILLIGRAM PER LITER." Ratio of weight to volume, and, for
purposes of this chapter, is interchangeable with "ppm"(parts per million).
   "NATURAL OUTLET." Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other
body or surface or groundwater.
   "OWNER" or "USER." Any property owner, or occupant or tenant who is a
customer of the public water or sanitary sewer services.
   "PPM" or "PARTS PER MILLION." Ratio of weight to volume, and, for purposes
of this chapter, is interchangeable with "mg/l"(milligrams per liter).
   "PERMIT." The document allowing attachment to the water and sewer system of
the town.
   "pH." The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution. "pH" shall be determined by standard methods
currently approved by EPA/DEM.
   "PLUMBING CODE." The North Carolina State Building Code, Volume II,
Plumbing, l980 Edition, as revised.
   "POTABLE WATER." That supplied by the public water system of the town as
approved by all public water supply monitoring agencies.
   "PRETREATMENT." Physical, biological, or chemical treatment applied to
wastewater, or the processes utilized for the purposes of pretreatment of
wastewater to reduce its B.O.D.5 requirements, suspended solids, oil and
grease, and other constituents, prior to discharge of wastewater to the public
sewer.
   "PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER." A wastewater collection pipe or sewer conduit which
services all abutting private and public properties and is owned, controlled,
operated, and maintained by the town. It shall include all appurtenances
connected and used in the wastewater collection system.
   "RECEIVING WATERS." Those waters into which wastes are discharged.
   "RESIDENTIAL" or "COMMERCIAL RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES." All single-family and
multi-family units, motels, hotels, or places used or to be used for human
habitation requiring water and sewer service and regardless of whether the unit
is owner- or tenant-occupied, and whether the user or occupant is a lessee for
a term or transient. In rooming houses or similar establishments where bath
facilities are shared, a living unit is defined as two habitable rooms.
   "SAMPLING STRUCTURE" or "CONTROL STRUCTURE." An appropriately located
structure with easy access by a pickup truck with trailer from which the
effluent discharged by a wastewater system customer can be effectively measured
for flow and strength by the town, using standard sampling methods.
   "SANITARY SEWER" or "SEWER." A pipe or conduit for carrying wastewater and
from which storm, surface, and groundwaters are excluded.
   "SEPTIC TANK WASTE" or "SEPTAGE." The liquid and semi-solid domestic waste
that results from the emptying of septic tanks. The discharge of septic tank
waste into the public sanitary sewer system by any means shall be prohibited.
   "SEWER CONNECTION FEE." The initial charge levied against a waterwater
system user or customer for connection to the publicly provided access point to
the public sewer.
   "STANDARD METHODS FOR TESTING AND MEASURING." Those procedures or methods
established or currently approved by EPA/DEM.
   "STANDARD SAMPLING METHOD." The method of collecting and storing individual
samples or composite samples of wastewater for the purpose of laboratory
analysis to determine its nature. The methods employed will be those
established and currently approved by EPA/DEM.
   "STANDARD STRENGTH WASTES." Wastes of any origin having strengths of 250 mg/
l or less of B.O.D.5, 750 mg/l or less of C.O.D, or containing 200 mg/l or less
of suspended solids.
   "SUSPENDED SOLIDS." Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
   "TOTAL SOLIDS." Total weight measured in mg/l of all solids, dissolved,
undissolved, organic, or inorganic.
   "TOXIC CONSTITUENTS." Any constituent of wastes, whether gaseous, liquid, or
solid, which when discharged into the sanitary sewer in sufficient quantities
may tend to interfere with any wastewater treatment process, to constitute a
hazard to human beings or animals, or to inhibit aquatic life or create a
hazard to recreation in the receiving waters of the effluent from the sewage
treatment plant.
   "WASTE DISCHARGE PERMIT." A permit to be issued by the Director of Public
Works as a necessary condition to being granted, or retaining, a publicly
provided access point for connection to a public sewer for any industrial user.
   "WASTEWATER" or "WASTES." A combination of the water-carried wastes from
residences, commercial establishments, institutions, and industrial
establishments. These wastes shall be treatable.
   "WATERCOURSE." A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
§ 50.002 TAMPERING WITH OR OBSTRUCTING WATER AND SEWER LINES OR WATER METERS
PROHIBITED.
   (A) It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to alter, tamper with
or manipulate any valves, lines or other equipment and appurtenances comprising
a part of the water and sewer systems belonging to the town including water
meters and backflow preventers. Those actions which constitute violations of
divisions (B) and (C) below shall not be considered violations of this
division. A person violating the provisions of this division shall be punished
in accordance with the provisions of § 10.99.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to reconnect water or
sanitary sewer connections, or otherwise turn back on either of those utilities
after they have been lawfully disconnected or turned off by an authorized
employee or agent of the town for nonpayment of water and/or sewer charges. In
addition to any fee set forth in §§ 50.080, 50.082 or elsewhere in this
chapter, any violation of the provisions of this division shall cause a
customer to pay a fee of $75 before water and/or sewer service is made
available to such customer. In the enforcement of this division, it shall be
presumed that the occupant (or owner, if the property is vacant) of any real
property serviced by a town water or sanitary sewer connection is the person
who reconnected water or sanitary sewer connections, or otherwise turned back
on either of those utilities after they had been lawfully disconnected or
turned off by an authorized employee or agent of the town. In accordance with
G.S. 160A-175(b), a violation of this division shall not be subject to the
penalty provisions of G.S. 14-4 or § 10.99 of this code and shall not be
considered a breach of the penal laws of the state.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to turn on or turn
off water and/or sanitary sewer services by using a cutoff valve or other
device which is a part of the town's water or sewer system. Violations of this
division shall subject the offender to a civil penalty of $75 to be recovered
by the town in a civil action in the nature of debt if the offender does not
pay the penalty within ten days after he has been cited for a violation of this
division. In accordance with G.S. § 160A-175(b), a violation of this division
shall not be subject to the penalty provisions of G.S. § 14-4 or § 10.99 of
this code and shall not be considered a breach of the penal laws of the state.
   (D)   The owner is responsible for ensuring the meter is not blocked or
otherwise obstructed and does not present a hazard to the meter reader. This
may mean trimming grass and bushes around the meter, not blocking by installing
a fence in front or parking a car on top of the meter, and keeping dogs
confined. The minimum hazard clearance around a water meter is not less than 36
inches. A meter reader hazard shall be considered to be items such as pampas
grass, yucca and other vegetation capable of injury. In the event of a hazard,
failure of the owner to correct the hazard after one notification shall cause
the town to correct/eliminate the hazard.
(Ord. 1119, passed 7-26-90; Am. Ord. 1683, passed 6-14-12)
§ 50.003 WORK ON WATER AND SEWER SYSTEM BY AUTHORIZED PERSONNEL ONLY.
   All work on the water and sewer system and all connections or disconnections
thereto shall be performed by the authorized employees of the town, their
representatives, or plumbers approved by the town. All work shall be performed
in accordance with the plumbing code of the town and state.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
§ 50.004 VIOLATIONS; RECOVERY OF DAMAGES.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, or any person who shall
have broken, damaged, destroyed, uncovered, defaced, or tampered with any
structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is part of the wastewater
collection system or the wastewater treatment facilities, shall be liable to
the town for any expense, loss, or damage suffered by the town by reason of
such violation including, but not limited to, the costs of investigation;
expert fees, tests, and analyses; and reasonable attorneys' fees. If such
violation results in the town's making a disconnection of a building sewer from
a public sewer pursuant to this chapter, the person shall further be liable to
the town for all expense to the town in making such disconnection.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
Penalty, see § 50.999
Cross-reference:
   Discontinuation of service, see §
50.092
WATER USE REGULATIONS
§ 50.016 ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY.
   The Director of the Department of Public Works shall have overall
supervision of the entire water and sewer system under the general direction of
the Board of Aldermen. The Board may from time to time prescribe the duties and
responsibilities of the Director. The Director and the Superintendent of the
water and sewer division at all reasonable hours shall have free access to all
premises for the purpose of examining hydrants, fixtures, or connections on
which town water pressure is maintained. The Fire Department personnel shall
have free access to fire hydrants at all times.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to operate, see G.S. § 160A-312
§ 50.017 PERMIT FOR CONNECTION REQUIRED.
   (A) No person shall connect with the water system of the town until and
unless he has applied in writing for permission to do so to the Department of
Public Works. The application shall be made before any part of the drainage
system of the house or other connection shall be laid or constructed. The
application shall be accompanied by a plan or drawing showing the location of
the building and the entire proposed connection from the public water and sewer
lines through the building to its terminus, including the location of all
fixtures, traps, ventilating pipes, and the like. The application shall state
the number of the place, the name of the street, and the name of the applicant.
A copy of the application and permit shall be retained by the Department of
Public Works. All connections shall be inspected before they are covered.
   (B) No person, firm, or corporation shall fail to connect to the town's
water and sewer system. Any disconnection of service shall make the structure
and appurtenances both unfit for human habitation and unusable for any purpose
whatsoever.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
Penalty, see § 50.999
Statutory reference:
   Power to require connections, see G.S. § 160A-317
   Permits generally, see G.S. § 160A-417
§ 50.018 TAP AND METER SIZES REQUIRED.
   The required water and sewer tap and meter sizes for all structures shall be
determined by the Department of Public Works based upon flow capacity of meters
of various sizes and water demands of appliances and equipment to be served
through the meter.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83; Am. Ord. 1036, passed 12-4-86)
Penalty, see § 50.999
§ 50.019 PRIVATE WATER SUPPLY.
   (A)   No person shall furnish, supply, or provide any water from a private
well to pump into any dwelling house, dwelling unit, boarding house, or
commercial establishment in any manner whatsoever.
   (B)   Any property owner may make application for construction of a well not
for the purpose or to be used for human consumption. Such well water shall have
a maximum depth of 40 feet. Such wells shall require a building permit to be
obtained by the property owner and submission of all appropriate forms and
documents. All electrical and plumbing work shall be inspected and must be
approved by the Inspector. In no case shall any private water supply be
connected in any way to the town's water system or to any dwelling house,
dwelling unit, boarding house, or commercial establishment.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
Penalty, see § 50.999
§ 50.020 CUTOFF OF PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY IN TIMES OF EMERGENCY.
   Upon declaration of a state of emergency as set forth in Chapter 93 of this
Code, the town shall have the authority to direct any person having public
water supply to a pier to shut off such public water supply to such pier. In
such event, the public water supply to such pier shall remain shut off until
authority is granted by the town to restore public water to the pier.
(Ord. 1291, passed 7-31-97)
SEWERS USER REGULATIONS
§ 50.030 INTENT OF REGULATION OF SEWER USE.
   (A)   It is intended that this subchapter include provisions for prohibiting
the discharge by any wastewater customer into a public sanitary sewer of
substances which may endanger the public health and safety; or of unpolluted
waters which do not require treatment and therefore reduce the effectiveness of
the biological operations of a treatment facility.
   (B)   It is further understood that the biological and chemical operations
which can be designed for wastewater treatment do, by their scientific nature,
limit the types of constituents in wastewater which may be treated by
facilities constructed and maintained within a reasonable cost to the public.
Consequently, the treatment facilities are designed for the primary purpose of
treating domestic wastewater in sufficient manner to protect public health.
   Certain industrial wastewater constituents can be treated without
interference at the wastewater facilities, but only in a limited quantity or
concentration. To ensure that discharges of industrial wastewater into the
public sanitary sewer are within such quantity and concentration limits,
reasonable and adequate regulations are provided in this subchapter.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
§ 50.031 APPLICABILITY OF SEWER USE PROVISIONS.
   All public sanitary sewer users shall comply with all applicable provisions
of this subchapter, as amended, and shall further comply with applicable
federal, state, and local laws, and ordinances and regulations, including EPA/
DEM pretreatment standards, which are at that time in effect. In the event of a
conflict, the more stringent requirement or higher standard shall apply.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
§ 50.032 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or discharge, or to permit to
be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
town or in any area under the jurisdiction of the town, any human or animal
excrement, solid waste, or other materials which are or may become hazardous,
toxic, or injurious to public health or safety.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
Penalty, see § 50.999
§ 50.033 DISCHARGE TO NATURAL OUTLETS.
   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the town or
in any area under the jurisdiction of the town, any wastewater or other
polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with requirements of EPA/DEM.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
Cross-reference:
   Pretreatment standards, see §
50.048
§ 50.034 PROHIBITION OF SEPTIC TANKS, PRIVIES, AND THE LIKE.
   After the adoption of this chapter, the construction or use of any facility
other than the public sanitary sewer for treatment or disposal of wastewater
inside the town limits shall be prohibited, except when the facility is
constructed or used under a condition set forth below:
   (A)   The construction and use of a septic tank, or similar facility as
determined by the Director of Public Works, may be permitted when it is
determined that a premise cannot, at the time the facility is considered, be
connected to a public sanitary sewer, and that there is reasonable expectation
that a septic tank can function effectively.
   (B)   Any septic tank installed prior to and operating on the date of
adoption of this chapter may continue in operation until the sanitary
facilities on the premise are connected to the public sanitary sewer pursuant
to this chapter, or until the septic tank or its field require repair,
rebuilding, reconstruction, or relocation, whichever event first occurs. No
septic tank shall be allowed except as stated in division (A) above after
January 1, 1984.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, repair, reconstruct,
or rebuild any septic tank or septic privy within the town limits unless such
act is permitted under the provisions of this section.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
Penalty, see § 50.999
§ 50.035 REQUIREMENT OF SEWER USE.
   (A)   When the owner of a property inside the town limits uses such property
in any manner which results in the generation of wastewater, and pursuant to
this chapter such wastewater is discharged into a public sanitary sewer, the
owner shall install at his expense a suitable building sewer and any other
facilities necessary to connect the building sewer directly to the public sewer
at an access point provided by the town.
   (B)   Whenever a building sewer connected to the public sanitary sewer
becomes clogged, broken, out of order, or detrimental to the use of the public
sewer, the owner having charge of any building or premise through which the
building sewer collects wastewater, shall, upon notification by the Director of
Public Works, reconstruct, alter, clean, or repair the building sewer as the
condition of such may require within 30 days after receiving notification.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
Penalty, see § 50.999
§ 50.036 BUILDING SEWERS, CONNECTIONS, AND FEES.
   All costs and expenses incident to the installation of facilities to connect
the privately owned building sewer to the public sanitary sewer system shall be
borne by the owner through a connection/tap fee levied by the town. Such fees
shall be paid upon application for connection by the owner, or prior to the
required installation of the sewer connection by the town. Sewer services
connection fees shall be set forth in the fee schedule.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
Cross-reference:
   Fee schedule, see §§
50.080 through 50.084
§ 50.037 SEPARATE CONNECTIONS REQUIRED.
   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building or unit. An exception may be granted where one building stands at the
rear of another on an interior lot and it is not economically feasible for the
town to construct a public sewer and access point to the rear of the building
through an adjoining alley, court, yard, driveway, or other access. In such
event, the building sewer may be extended to the rear building and the whole
considered as one building sewer. However, if separate water meters service
each building or unit, separate wastewater service fees shall be charged to
each building.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
Cross-reference:
   Fee schedule, see §§
50.080 through 50.084
§ 50.038 METHOD OF SEWER CONNECTION.
   (A)   All connections to the town sanitary sewer system shall be made in
accordance with provisions and requirements of the plumbing code. All such
connections shall be made at access points prescribed and provided by the town;
the applicant is responsible for constructing the building sewer in a manner
necessary to insure connection at the access point.
   (B)   If, at the time of the adoption of this chapter, any connection exists
between a building sewer and a public sanitary sewer at a point other than the
access point prescribed and provided by the town, the town may serve a notice
upon the owner immediately upon discovery. The owner shall be subject to the
provisions of this chapter, and if service is disconnected, the owner may
receive access to a public sanitary sewer only by applying for and paying a
connection fee.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
Cross-reference:
   For fee schedule, see §§
50.080 through 50.084
§ 50.039 ELEVATION OF SEWER CONNECTION.
   All building sewers shall be brought to the building at an elevation below
the lowest floor level having sanitary facilities. In all buildings in which
any building drain is below a point which will permit a minimum average slope
of the building sewer of one foot per 100-feet above the top of the street
sewer, wastewater carried by such building sewer shall be lifted by pumping
units or other approved means and discharged through a building sewer having
the minimum average slope.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
Penalty, see § 50.999
§ 50.040 PROHIBITED CONNECTIONS.
   No connections that will allow inflow to enter the town's wastewater
collection and treatment system shall be permitted. The prohibited connections
shall include but not be limited to the connection of roof downspouts, exterior
foundation drains, or other sources of storm waters or groundwater to a
building sewer which is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary
sewer.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
Penalty, see § 50.999
§ 50.041 PUBLIC HAZARD.
   All excavations for building sewer installations within the public right-of-
way shall be performed by Public Works personnel or under permit issued by the
Director of Public Works, and shall be adequately guarded with barricades and
lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, plazas, and
other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in
a manner satisfactory to the town, subject to the terms and conditions of the
permit.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
Penalty, see § 50.999
§ 50.042 GREASE REMOVAL.
   (A)   Grease and oil traps or other interceptors shall be provided at the
user's expense, when such user operates an establishment preparing, processing
or serving food and/or food products. Grease interceptors may also be required
in other industrial or commercial establishments when they are necessary for
the proper handling of liquid wastes containing oil and/or grease in amounts in
excess of 200 mg/l by weight fat soluble, or for any flammable wastes. All such
traps, tanks, chambers or other interceptors shall be of a type and capacity
approved by the Director and shall be readily and easily accessible for
cleaning and inspection. All such interceptors shall be serviced and emptied of
the waste content as required, but not less often than every 30 days, in order
to maintain their minimum design capability to intercept oils and greases from
the wastewater discharged to the public sanitary sewer.
   (B)   No waste removed from the interceptor shall be reintroduced into the
sanitary sewer or back into the interceptor, which will cause the interceptor's
discharge to exceed sewer use ordinance limits. The owner shall be responsible
for the sanitary disposal of such waste.
   (C)   The owner shall maintain a written record of trap maintenance for the
prior three years. A copy of each monthly service record shall be sent to the
Public Works Department no later than the fifteenth day of the month following
service.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83; Am. Ord. 1072, passed 4-14-88; Am. Ord. 1421, passed 8-
8-02)
Penalty, see § 50.999
§ 50.043 SAND AND GRIT REMOVAL.
   (A)   Sand and grit traps or other interceptors shall be provided at the
owner's expense when they are necessary for the proper handling and control of
liquid wastes containing sand and grit in excessive amounts. All such
interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Director of Public
Works, and shall be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
All such interceptors shall be serviced and emptied of their solids contents as
required, but not less often than every 30 days, in order to maintain their
minimum design capability to intercept grit and sand prior to the discharge of
wastewaters to the public sanitary sewer. Failure to comply may result in the
implementation of legal enforcement procedures.
   (B)   Wastes removed from sand and grit interceptors shall not be discharged
into the public sanitary sewer. The owner shall be responsible for the sanitary
disposal of such wastes.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
Penalty, see § 50.999
§ 50.044 PRELIMINARY TREATMENT DEVICES.
   Where preliminary treatment, pretreatment, flow-equalizing facilities, or
grease, oil, grit, and sand traps or other interceptors are provided for any
wastewater, they shall be continuously maintained in satisfactory condition and
effective operation by the owner at his expense.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
Penalty, see § 50.999
§ 50.045 INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGE PERMITS.
   (A)   Any person who owns or operates a facility producing or proposed to
produce wastewater of any quantity, strength, or other quality which would not,
or may not, meet the conditions and limitations set forth in this subchapter,
and who is connected to, or desires to make connection to the public sanitary
sewer, shall make application to the Director of Public Works for a waste
discharge permit authorizing continued discharge, or an industrial connection
for discharging, of the described attendant wastewater. No industrial waste,
pretreated waste, or any waste other than normal wastewater shall be permitted
to connect to the town's sanitary sewer system without the prior approval of
the Director.
   (B)   The Building Inspector will not issue a building permit or certificate
of compliance for any structure for an industrial user until the applicant
presents to him a certified copy of a completed and approved industrial sewer
connection and waste discharge application.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
Penalty, see § 50.999
§ 50.046 TIME LIMIT FOR OBTAINING INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGE PERMIT.
   All persons whose plants, buildings, or premises are connected to the public
sanitary sewer from and after the effective date of this chapter, who may be
subject to the provisions herein, and who have not heretofore obtained an
industrial waste discharge permit, shall have 30 calendar days after
notification within which to make application to the town for a permit as
required.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
§ 50.047 INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION.
   Users seeking a waste discharge permit shall complete and file with the
Director of Public Works an application on a form prescribed by the Director,
accompanied by the applicable fee. The Director may further require that the
application include any additional information deemed necessary by the Director
in order to determine if pretreatment will be required to meet the conditions
and limitations of this subchapter, or to meet EPA/DEM pretreatment standards.
The Director may further require any information which is required by EPA/DEM
or the town.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
Cross-reference:
   Fee schedule, see §§
50.080 through 50.084
§ 50.048 PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The Director of Public Works will determine through review of the
industrial discharge permit application and in cooperation with the applicant
whether the waste produced shall be pretreated by the applicant before it is
discharged into the town sewer. When appropriate, at facilities already in
operation, sampling of wastes to determine characteristics shall be performed
by the applicant at the applicant's cost as provided herein. The Director shall
advise the applicant of the level of pretreatment required and of a compliance
schedule. If the Director determines that such waste must be pretreated, the
applicant shall submit to the Director for approval, plans and specifications
of the proposed pretreatment facilities. If such plans and specifications are
approved as submitted, or amended by the Director, the applicant shall proceed
according to an agreed schedule to provide such pretreatment facilities.
   (B)   The construction plans for such pretreatment plants or facilities
shall after their approval be placed on file in permanent reproducible form
with the Director without cost to the town.
   (C)   If the pretreatment facilities are completed according to the approved
plans and specifications, and the applicant demonstrates its effective use and
provides a proper sewer connection and industrial waste discharge application,
the Director shall issue the applicant a waste discharge permit. The permit
shall authorize such connection and permit the applicant to discharge such
waste into the public sewer at the rate and in the quantity and/or connection
stated herein. These pretreatment facilities shall be maintained continuously
in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense.
   (D)   The conditions and limits in this subchapter shall be used as
pretreatment plant design criteria and shall be applied to the maximum
estimated rate of flow through the plant. Customers who are required to pass
wastewater through a grease trap or other interceptor will provide for a
minimum detention period of ten minutes between the influent and effluent
baffles with 20% of the total volume of the grease trap or interceptor being
allowed for a sludge pocket. This sludge pocket shall be serviced as required,
but at intervals of not longer than 30 days at the owner's expense. It shall be
kept free of inorganic solids which settle into the required sludge pocket, and
all grease or other floating material shall be skimmed from the trap or basin
tank at intervals of a frequency sufficient to avoid accumulation of scum
covering the surface of the liquid, but not less frequently than each 30 days.
   (E)   Upon written notification by the Director that a grease interceptor is
required for a given discharge, the user will have a period of 120 days for
compliance. Such compliance consists of the provision to the Director of
detailed plans and specifications for approval and the method of installation
and operability of a grease trap or other interceptor device. Failure to comply
will result in the implementation of the enforcement procedures of this
subchapter. There shall be a debris screen included in pretreatment facilities,
if such is required by the Director of Public Works, immediately preceding and/
or following the grease interceptor through which all industrial waste,
excepting flow from toilet and personal sanitary facilities, shall pass. A
debris screen may be required as the final feature of a pretreatment facility
with a maximum size opening necessary to protect the public sewer system.
   (F)   The solid matter removed from any interceptor or that which is
retained by the debris screen shall be disposed of in lawful manner, without
nuisance, by the owner at his expense, but shall in no case be placed in the
town's wastewater system.
   (G)   Should the wastewater system customer operate a grease trap, an
interceptor or other pretreatment device in which sludge is collected and
stored, such sludge shall not be placed in the town's wastewater system and all
effluent from such pretreatment plant or device must pass through a debris
screen if required.
   (H)   If it is determined that an applicant discharges wastewater which does
not require pretreatment, the applicant may be issued a permit permitting the
applicant to discharge wastewater to the public sewer at a publicly provided
access point at a rate, and in the quantities and qualities, stated in the
permit.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83; Am. Ord. 1072, passed 4-14-88)
Penalty, see § 50.999
§ 50.049 INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGE PERMIT CANCELLATION.
   If any industrial user is in violation of any condition of his waste
discharge permit or any other provision of this subchapter, and it is
determined pursuant to this subchapter that the user's service shall be
disconnected, the waste discharge permit shall be cancelled upon disconnection.
Any industrial user whose permit has been cancelled may receive publicly-
provided access to the public sanitary sewer only after making an application
for a new waste discharge permit.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
§ 50.050 INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGE PERMIT FEES.
   Each waste discharge permit issued under the provisions hereof shall
terminate at the expiration of one year from the date of its issuance. Permit
fees for initial permit issuance, annual permit renewal, and restoration of the
permit shall be as set forth in the fee schedule.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
Cross-reference:
   Fee schedule, see §§
50.080 through 50.084
§ 50.051 INDUSTRIAL USER OWNERSHIP CHANGES.
   In the event an industrial user authorized to connect to the wastewater
system for industrial waste disposal under the provisions hereof is sold,
leased, or its ownership is otherwise changed or the industrial operation
thereof is operated by a person other than that named in the permit, a new
application for a waste discharge permit shall be made by the new owner. No
permit issued under the provisions hereof shall be assignable to any other
person.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
Penalty, see § 50.999
§ 50.052 EFFECT OF APPROVALS OF PRETREATMENT FACILITIES; WASTEWATER
CHARACTERISTICS.
   (A)   Any approval by the Director of Public Works of a type, kind, or
capacity of a pretreatment facility installation shall not relieve a person of
the responsibility of subsequently revamping, enlarging, or otherwise modifying
the pretreatment installation to accomplish the original intended purpose or to
meet new or revised standards. Nor shall any written or oral agreement as to
limits of waste constituents or volumes of wastewaters be considered as final
approval for continuing operation or otherwise prevent the town from
subsequently withdrawing its approval. These limits will be subject to
monitoring, study, and change as considered necessary to serve their intended
purpose.
   (B)   Changes in the characteristics or volumes of wastewater of any permit
holder will constitute a basis for the Director's requiring a new application
for a waste discharge permit.
   (C)   Furthermore, permits issued may be modified as may be necessary due to
changes in pretreatment requirements by EPA/DEM.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
Cross-reference:
   Pretreatment requirements, see §
50.048
§ 50.053 PERMIT ISSUANCE DOES NOT CONVEY PROPERTY RIGHTS, EXCLUSIVE PRIVILEGES.
   The issuance of a permit by the Director of Public Works does not convey any
property rights in either real or personal property, or any exclusive
privileges, nor does it authorize any injury to private property, invasion of
personal rights, nor violation of applicable federal, state, or local laws,
ordinances or regulations.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
§ 50.054 DISCHARGE OF INDUSTRIAL OR PRETREATED WASTES TO BE APPROVED.
   No industrial waste, pretreated waste, or any waste other than normal
wastewater shall be permitted to connect to the town's sanitary sewer system
without the prior approval of the Director of Public Works.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
Penalty, see § 50.999
§ 50.055 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
   No person shall cause to be discharged inflow, groundwater, uncontaminated
cooling water, or uncontaminated process water to any public sanitary sewer.
Such water and other unpolluted water may be discharged to a sewer designated
specifically as a storm sewer, or to a natural outlet, provided such discharge
is approved by the local, state, or federal jurisdiction having authority.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
Penalty, see § 50.999
Cross-reference:
   Discharge to natural outlet, see §
50.033
§ 50.056 PROHIBITED WASTES AND LIMITATIONS.
   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged from any point any of
the following described wastewaters to any public sanitary sewers:
   (A)   Any liquid or vapor having a discharge temperature higher than 120°F.,
nor any liquid or vapor having heat in such quantities that the temperature at
the treatment plant influent exceeds 104°F.
   (B)   Any wastewater which contains more than 200 mg/l by weight of fat
soluble oil or grease, or containing any substance that will solidify or become
viscous at temperatures between 32°F. and 150°F. at the point of discharge into
the system. All petroleum based oil and/or grease discharges are prohibited.
   (C)   Liquids, solids, or gases which by reason of their nature of quantity
are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances
to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the sewerage
facilities or to the operation of the system. At no time shall two successive
readings on an explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the sewer
system, be more than 5% nor any single reading over 10% of the lower explosive
limit (LEL) of the meter. Such potentially explosive materials include, but are
not limited to gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers,
alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates,
carbides, hydrides, and methane.
   (D)   Any wastewater that contains more than two mg/l by weight, of
hydrochloric acid, hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide, or nitrous oxide.
   (E)   Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, tars,
plastics, wood, rags, and other fibrous solids, feathers, offal, whole blood,
paunch contents, manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, lime slurry and lime
residues, beer or distillery slops, chemical residues, fiberglass, paint, paint
thinners, latex, lacquers, or ink residues, cannery waste, ground paper
products, unshredded bulk solids with particles greater than l/2-inch in any
dimension, discharges from photographic laboratories, or any other solid or
viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or
other interference (as defined in § 50.001) with the proper operation of the
wastewater collection system and the wastewater treatment facilities.
   (F)   Any wastewater having a stabilized pH lower than six or higher than
ten standard units (SU), or having any wastewater that would cause the
wastewater treatment facilities' influent to exceed a minimum of six or a
maximum of eight standard units (SU), or having any other corrosive property
capable of causing damage or hazard to sewers which are constructed of
vitrified clay, cast iron, ductile iron, ABS plastic, PVC plastic, or concrete;
associated or connected structures; equipment; or personnel of the wastewater
collection system, the wastewater treatment facilities, or the treatment
process.
   (G)   Any wastewater containing toxic or poisonous substances in such
concentrations as to constitute a hazard to humans, animals, fish, or birds;
interfere with any wastewater treatment process; or create any hazard in the
receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant.
   (H)   In no event shall any person exceed the following limits on toxic or
poisonous substances:
Fixed Upper Limits for Constituents
Substance           Weight (mg/l)
Ammonia             100.00
Arsenic             1.00
Beryllium           0.20
Boron               1.00
Cadmium             0.01
Chromium            2.00
Copper              1.00
Cyanide             0.10
Iron                50.00
Lead                3.00
Manganese           60.00
Mercury             0.20
Methylene chloride  0.10
Nickel              3.00
Organic nitrogen    30.00
Selenium            0.20
Silver              0.30
Sulfates            350.00
Sulfides            8.00
Tetrachloroethylene 0.50
Trichloroethylene   0.50
Zinc                0.50
 
   (I)   The limits fixed in division (H) above shall be minimum requirements
of all industrial users but do not relieve the user from limiting
concentrations of these or other elements or chemical substances which may
constitute a public health or safety hazard, or interference with the public
wastewater treatment process, as provided for in this section.
   (J)   Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance, singly or by interaction
with other wastes, being capable of creating a public health or safety
nuisance, hazard to life, or preventing entry into public sanitary sewers for
their maintenance, inspection, and repair.
   (K)   Any wastes which are of unusual volume, concentration of solids, or
composition that may create obstruction to the flow in sewers or other
interference with the proper operation of the wastewater works and the proper
treatment of the influent.
   (L)   Wastewater containing substances which are not responsive to treatment
by the wastewater treatment processes employed, or are responsive to treatment
only to such a degree that the wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet
the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the
receiving waters.
   (M)   Any wastewater containing more than 4,000 mg/l total solids by weight.
   (N)   Wastewaters at a flow rate of containing such concentrations or
quantities of pollutants, that:
      (1) Exceed for any time period longer than 15 minutes more than five
times the average 24-hour concentration as defined during normal operation.
      (2) Would cause a treatment process upset and subsequent loss of
treatment efficiency.
   (O)   Any wastewater containing phenols or other taste-producing substances
in such concentrations as to produce odor or taste in the effluent so as to
effect the taste or odor of the receiving water.
   (P)   Any wastewater containing barium, chlorides, fluorides, phospherous,
or surfactants in such concentrations as to interfere with any operation of the
town's wastewater treatment facility, or to cause the wastewater treatment
plant effluent to fail to meet requirements of other agencies having
jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
   (Q)   Radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration that
they do not comply with regulations or orders issued by the appropriate state
or federal agency having control over their use, and which will or may cause
damage or hazards to the sewerage facilities or personnel operating the system.
   (R)   Any concentrated dye wastes, spent tanning solutions, or other wastes
with objectionable color, not removable by the treatment process.
   (S)   Any wastewater containing polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB's).
   (T)   Any wastewater containing any measurable traces of pesticides,
herbicides, or biocides.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83; Am. Ord. 1072, passed 4-14-88)
Penalty, see § 50.999
Statutory reference:
   Emission of pollutants, see G.S. § 160A-185
§ 50.057 B.O.D. LIMIT.
   The admission into the public sewers of any water or waste having a five-day
biochemical oxygen demand (B.O.D. 5) in excess of 250 mg/l by weight on a 24-
hour composite sample basis, will be subject to an excess strength surcharge as
stated in § 50.069. Any sample taken with a five-day biochemical oxygen demand
(B.O.D.5) in excess of 1,000 mg/l, by weight, will result in the discharger
meeting requirements as prescribed in § 50.048, the remedy to be assessed
surcharge rates.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83; Am. Ord. 1072, passed 4-14-88)
§ 50.058 CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND.
   The admission into the public sewers of any water or waste having a chemical
oxygen demand (C.O.D.) in excess of 750 mg/l by weight on a 24-hour composite
sample basis, will be subject to an excess strength surcharge as stated in §
50.069. Any sample taken with a chemical oxygen demand (C.O.D.) in excess of
2,500 mg/l, by weight, will result in the discharger meeting requirements as
prescribed in § 50.048.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83; Am. Ord. 1072, passed 4-14-88)
§ 50.059 SUSPENDED SOLIDS.
   The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having a
suspended solids content in excess of 200 mg/l by weight on a 24-hour composite
basis, will be subject to an excess strength surcharge as stated in § 50.069.
Any sample taken with suspended solids in excess of 700 mg/l by weight will
result in the discharger meeting requirements as prescribed in § 50.048.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83; Am. Ord. 1072, passed 4-14-88)
§ 50.060 FLOW EQUALIZATION.
   (A)   The admission into the public sewers of any wastewater in volumes, or
with constituents, such that the transportation of such wastewater through the
public sewer to the treatment facility will not sufficiently dilute such
wastewater to prevent interference with treatment or to prevent endangerment of
public health and safety at the treatment facility shall be prohibited.
   (B)   Where necessary, facilities for varying the rate of discharge may be
required as part of the building sewer in order to bring constituents or volume
of flow discharged within the limits previously prescribed or to an otherwise
acceptable level, or to hold or equalize flows such that no peak flow
conditions may hamper the operation of any unit of the public sewer or
treatment facility. Such an equalization unit shall have a capacity suitable to
serve its intended purpose, and be equipped with acceptable outlet control
facilities to provide flexibility in operation and accommodate changing
conditions in the waste flow. Equalizing facilities shall be provided to
prevent flows from exceeding the following limits:
 
Average Flow Gallons/Day Allowable Ratio of Peak to Average Flow
10,000 to 100,000        3
100,000 to 500,000       2
More than 500,000        l.5
 
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
Penalty, see § 50.999
§ 50.061 DELETERIOUS DISCHARGES.
   (A)   If any wastewater is discharged, or is proposed to be discharged, to
the public sewers, which contain the constituents or possess the characteris-
tics enumerated in the preceding sections of this subchapter, and which may
have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater collection system, wastewater
treatment processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create
a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Director of Public Works
may as a condition to the waste discharge permit:
      (1)   Reject the wastes.
      (2)    Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers.
      (3)   Require control over the quantities, concentration, or rates of
discharge.
      (4)   Require payment to cover the added cost of receiving, handling, and
treating the wastes not covered by current charges of fees for wastewater
service.
   (B)   If the Director permits or requires the pretreatment or equalization
of waste flows, the design, installation of the plants and equipment, and their
effective operation shall be subject to the prior review and approval of the
Director and the local, state, and federal agencies having jurisdiction, and
shall be subject to the requirements of all other applicable rules,
regulations, ordinances, and laws.
   (C)   In the event a spill or loss into the building sewer of any
deleterious materials is threatened or occurs, the owner shall promptly notify
the Director of the nature of the spill or threatened spill, the quantity, and
if it has occurred, the time of the spill. The cause of such spills and losses
of deleterious materials shall be corrected, and the costs of such correction,
together with all resulting damages, shall be borne by the owner.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
Penalty, see § 50.999
§ 50.062 WATER QUALITY CHANGES.
   (A)   The Director of Public Works shall, from time to time, have tests made
to determine the quality of waste being discharged into the public sewer from
individual users of the wastewater system, from connections of building sewers
carrying composite waste from domestic users or industrial users, and from
connections including the premises of industrial waste discharge permit holders
under the provisions hereof. If, at any time, such waste becomes of such a
quality or quantity that it requires pretreatment, the Director shall have the
authority to require that proper permits be obtained and proper pretreatment
facilities be installed by the permit holder at his expense.
   (B)   In the event of a significant change in a wastewater system user's
wastes being discharged to the public sanitary sewer, the user shall promptly
notify the Director of the nature of the change in quality or strength and in
volume. These changes shall be subject to verification by the town. Appropriate
remedies for the adequate treatment of such wastes thus tested may be required
by the Director. "SIGNIFICANT" is defined here to mean a change of 10% or more
in strength or volume of wastes, based on the average flow.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
Penalty, see § 50.999
§ 50.063 STANDARDS OF WASTE DISCHARGE AND DELIVERY.
   (A)   The delivery of all effluent from a user to the public sanitary sewer
shall be at a reasonable and uniform discharge rate, as produced without
storage, except that which is necessary in the pretreatment or equalization
facilities of the waste producer.
   (B)   Wastes will be accepted which have satisfactory conditions or quality
after pretreatment by the industrial user in a pretreatment facility or by a
process which has been approved by the Director of Public Works, is
continuously maintained and operated by the producer at no cost to the town,
and is continuously subject to inspection by the Director or his designated
representative.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
Penalty, see § 50.999
§ 50.064 SEPTIC TANK AND PORTABLE TOILET WASTES.
   After the date of adoption of this chapter, the discharge of septic tank
waste into the public sanitary sewer system by any means shall be prohibited.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
Penalty, see § 50.999
§ 50.065 QUALITY DETERMINATION; EFFLUENT SAMPLING.
   (A)   Periodic measurements of flow, suspended solids, B.O.D., and other
appropriate waste characteristics for surcharge determination and other
purposes shall be made by those permittees specifically designated by the
Director of Public Works. The Director shall determine the number of 24-hour
flow measurements and samples required. Continuous monitoring may be required
by the Director in cases involving large fluctuations in quantity or quality of
wastes, or if the wastewater appears to have characteristics which may damage
the receiving system.
   (B)   All public sanitary sewer users whose total average sewage discharge
is greater than 50,000 gallons per day, or whose total average discharge has a
flow or pollutant loading requiring utilization of greater than 5% of the
design capacity of the town's collection system, shall, unless exempted by the
Director, install and maintain, at the user's expense, facilities for
continuously measuring and sampling the total waste discharge. This requirement
may be waived for a particular user only when the quantity, flow rate, and
characteristics of the wastewater can be adequately determined without such
structures; when the physical arrangement of industrial plant facilities with
respect to sewer facilities make such an arrangement unusually costly and other
means of ascertaining the quantity, flow rate, and characteristics can be
devised; or when previous sampling facilities have been built by either the
town or a prior owner.
      (1)   When the Director shall determine for such facilities discharging
less than 50,000 gallons per day that the nature of the discharge or conditions
of the permit warrant continuous monitoring and sampling, the Director may
require the user to install and maintain sampling facilities as stated
heretofore.
      (2)   Any sampling facility previously built by the town shall become the
maintenance responsibility of the user after the adoption of this chapter,
unless the Director determines that it is in the best interest of the town to
continue maintenance.
   (C)   All flow measurements, sampling, and analysis shall be performed by
qualified personnel. All laboratory analyses of industrial wastewater samples
shall be performed by an EPA/DEM certified laboratory in accordance with
current standard chemical analysis methods for wastewater established by EPA/
DEM. All samples shall represent the normal wastewater flow from the premises
over a 24-hour period. The samples shall be composited according to the flow,
either manually with at least one sample collected hourly, or by automatic
integrated sampling equipment.
   (D)   Unless otherwise prescribed by the Director, self-monitoring reports
of the sampling shall be submitted to the town quarterly in accordance with the
following schedule:
 
Monitoring Period       Report Due Date
January l - March 31    April 15
April l - June 30       July 15
July l - September l    October 15
October l - December 31 January 15
 
   (E)   Where a permittee operates as an integrated complex involving varying
processes and having separate industrial waste sewer connections within the
same contributory area, the permittee may be considered as one unit with
multiple connections. An analysis for each connection may be combined in
proportion to the flow from the connection and the weighted average of the
results thus obtained may be used as the measure of the total flow and
concentration of the wasterwater discharged into the public sanitary sewer.
   (F)   The handling, storage, and analysis of all samples taken for the
determination of the characteristics of waste discharged shall be performed in
accordance with standard methods.
   (G)   The town may test for quality, to include sampling, any of the waste
being discharged to the public sanitary sewers at any time. A duly authorized
representative of the Director may enter an industrial user's facility at any
time, by appropriate application at the plant office during business or
operational hours, for this purpose or for reviewing operations in the plant to
estimate the quality of wastes being produced.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
Penalty, see § 50.999
§ 50.066 QUANTITY DETERMINATION.
   (A)   Unless otherwise provided, the quantity of wastewater delivered to the
public sanitary sewers shall be the same as the water delivered to the producer
by the town water system.
   (B)   Should the user evaporate or otherwise legally dispose of water
delivered by the town's water system, it shall be the obligation of the user to
install at his expense such meters or other flow measurement devices to
accurately determine the portion or quantity of the metered water delivered to
the wastewater system.
   (C)   The Director of Public Works may establish a constant ratio, factor,
or percentage to be applied to the metered water quantity delivered by the town
in order to estimate the quantity of wastewater delivered by the user.
Determination of this factor shall be the responsibility of the user as will be
the demonstration of the accuracy and generality of the factor to obtain the
Director's approval thereof. The value of this factor will be periodically
reviewed for accuracy and may be revised.
   (D)   All domestic and industrial users served by the town wastewater system
shall pay sewer user charges to the town. Where no payment procedure is
established, it shall be the obligation of the owner in all instances to
immediately submit to the Director a statement concerning water consumption and
disposal upon which wastewater service fees can be determined. If changes in
the consumption and disposal conditions so stated take place after billing
rates and charges have been initially established, a further statement is
required to be submitted on forms supplied by the Director.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
Penalty, see § 50.999
Cross-reference:
   Fee schedule, see §§
50.080 through 50.084
§ 50.067 POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.
   (A)   The Director of Public Works and other duly authorized agents or
employees of the town bearing proper credentials and identification shall be
permitted to enter all properties, privately and publicly owned, for the
purposes of meter reading, inspection, observation, measurement, gauging,
sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The
Director or his representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any
processes, including those of the metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining,
ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing
on the volume, nature, and source of discharges to the town's wastewater
collection system, storm sewers, or other natural outlets.
   (B)   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
above, the Director or duly authorized employees and agents of the town shall
observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the owner.
   (C)   The property owner shall not be released from liability to any extent
in the event that a town agent or employee is injured while making inspections
which are pursuant to this subchapter on privately-owned property as a result
of negligence on the part of the private property owner or any of his agents or
employees.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
§ 50.068 SEWER SERVICE CONNECTION FEES; USER CHARGES.
   (A)   Sewer service connection fees shall be charged pursuant to the fee
schedule to cover the cost of providing an access point to the public sewer for
the applicant. These fees shall be as specified in the fee schedule.
   (B)    Sanitary sewer service rates shall be as established in the fee
schedule.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
Cross-reference:
   Fee schedule, see §§
50.080 through 50.084
§ 50.069 EXTRA STRENGTH WASTEWATER SURCHARGES.
   (A)    Standard strength wastewater shall be defined as that wastewater
having a maximum B.O.D.5, C.O.D., and suspended solids concentration as
follows:
 
Type of Concentration Amount
B.O.D.5               250 mg/l
C.O.D.                750 mg/l
Suspended Solids (SS) 200 mg/l
 
   (B)   Industrial wastewater surcharges shall be assessed to any industrial
users discharging wastewater, including constituents, at a concentration
exceeding any of the limits established in this section. Surcharge rates shall
be as set forth in the fee schedule and in consultation with the Director of
Public Works.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
§ 50.070 DISCONTINUANCE OF WASTEWATER TREATMENT AND DISPOSAL SERVICE; WHEN
PERMISSIBLE.
   The town may discontinue wastewater treatment and disposal service to a
customer when:
   (A)   A government agency having jurisdiction informs the town that the
effluent from the publicly-owned wastewater treatment facility is no longer of
a quality permitted for discharge to a watercourse, and it is found that the
customer is delivering wastewater to the wastewater system that cannot be
sufficiently treated or that requires treatment that is not provided by the
town.
   (B)   The customer commits any of the following actions:
      (1)   Discharges industrial wastewater of a quality or quantity that is
in violation of the waste discharge permit; commits any action prohibited by
the permit or provision of this subchapter; or fails to comply with any
required provision of the permit or provision of this subchapter.
      (2)   Discharges waters or wastes having a deleterious effect upon the
wastewater system.
      (3)   Discharges wastewater at an uncontrolled, variable rate in
sufficient quantity to cause an imbalance in the wastewater system or the
wastewater treatment process.
      (4)   Fails to pay user charges or other fees for wastewater services
when due.
      (5)   Discharges prohibited wastes to the public sanitary sewer.
      (6)   Makes a connection of a building sewer to a public sanitary sewer
at a point other than the publicly provided access point.
      (7)   Discharges inflow, or uncontaminated cooling water or process water
into the public sanitary sewer.
      (8)   Fails to properly clean and dispose of wastes collected in grease
or grit interceptors.
      (9)   Discharges industrial wastewater under provisions of a waste
discharge permit issued to a person other than the customer discharging the
wastewater.
          (10)   Fails to renew an expired waste discharge permit.
          (11)   Fails to meet compliance schedules.
          (12)   Otherwise violates the provisions of this subchapter or fails
or omits to perform in such a manner as to constitute good cause for
disconnection contrary to the purpose and intent of this subchapter.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83; Am. Ord. 1072, passed 4-14-88)
WATER AND SEWER RATES
§ 50.080 SCHEDULE OF CONNECTION CHARGES; USAGE RATES.
   (A)    Water and sewer rates, connection charges, system development fees
and other applicable charges shall be set forth in a schedule of fees to be
determined from time to time by the Board of Aldermen and kept on file in the
office of the Town Clerk. Adjustments to water and sewer rates shall be
applicable to the first billing following the effective date of the modified
rate.
   (B)   System development fees shall be established and spent strictly in
accordance with the provisions of G.S. § 162A-206 et seq.
   (C)   Water usage charges for customers outside the Town limits shall be
double the charges set forth above.
   (D)   Billing charges shall be based on metered water usage at the
established water rate, sewer usage (based on 100% of water use) at the
established rate, water system maintenance charge and sewer system maintenance
charge.
   (E)   Tap fees (based upon meter, or user, connection size) shall include
actual construction costs, permitting costs and engineering costs plus a 15%
additional charge. However, for taps 2” and larger, water or sewer, owner/
developer may choose to have the tap(s) installed privately only if such work
meets the requirements and specifications of the town and other agencies as may
be involved.
   (F)   Minimum commercial sewer tap size in 6”.
   (G)   Tap upgrade installations shall be the actual cost of the change plus
the difference between impact fees.
   (H)   Tap installation planning cycle: The town requires a minimum of three
weeks from the receipt of an order for installation until completion. However,
for taps that may involve engineering, permitting or other agencies, the time
to completion may be considerably longer.
   (I)   All persons, firms, or corporations which construct buildings for
which building permits are issued after July 1, 2009, and such buildings are
sprinklered or contain standpipe systems where sprinkler or standpipe systems
are connected to the utility system shall not be charged a system impact fee.
   (J)    All new construction and renovations of existing buildings in excess
of 50% of the building's physical value shall be required to install taps and
meters of the size required by the town in accordance with § 50.018.
   (K)   System development fees established in the manner described in
paragraph (A) above will be charged for all new structures connecting to the
utility system for which building permits are issued after December 16, 1986.
Structures, the use of which is modified after December 16, 1986 so that a
larger water tap is required, will be charged the tap fees for the larger water
and sewer taps plus the difference between the system development fee for the
existing water tap size and the system development fee for the larger tap size
required for the new use.
   (L)   In instances where owners of existing buildings or the town install a
larger tap and meter size to meet current town standards and the installation
of such larger tap and meter size is not the result of a change in use or
expansion in use, there will be no charge made for the system development fee
or tap fees.
   (M)   When an existing building is replaced with a new building on the same
lot (and such lot is directly served by an existing water and sewer tap) and
there is no change in use or expansion of use which requires a larger tap or
meter size, there will be no charge made for the system development fee or tap
fees.
   (N)   All persons, firms, or corporations which construct buildings for
which building permits are issued after December 16, 1986, and such buildings
are sprinklered or contain standpipe systems where sprinkler or standpipe
systems are not otherwise required by the North Carolina State Building Code,
shall receive credit for the actual cost of the sprinkler and/or standpipe
system up to 25% of the system development fee, but in no case shall the credit
be less than $1,500.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83; Am. Ord. 1036, passed 12-4-86; Am. Ord. 1091, passed 3-
9-89; Am. Ord. 1156, passed 9-12-91; Am. Ord. 1182, passed 6-17-92; Am. Ord.
1297, passed 1-8-98; Am. Ord. 1418, passed 7-11-02; Am. Ord. 1512, passed 7-13-
06; Am. Ord. 1537, passed 6-28-07; Am. Ord. 1576, passed 6-25-08; Am. Ord.
1607, passed 6-25-09; Am. Ord. 1661, passed 7-14-11; Am. Ord. 1683, passed 6-
14-12; Am. Ord. 1731, passed 6-12-14; Am. Ord. 1761, passed 6-8-16; Am. Ord.
1762, passed 1-12-17; Am. Ord. 1778, passed 6-12-18)
Statutory reference:
Authority to fix rates, see G.S.§ 160A-314
§ 50.081 REESTABLISHMENT OF WATER SERVICE WHICH HAS BEEN TERMINATED FOR
NONPAYMENT.
   The town will reestablish service upon payment by the customer of the past
due balance including all late payment charges and applicable reconnection
fees.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83; Am. Ord. 1036, passed 12-4-86)
§ 50.082 DISCONNECTION, RECONNECTION AND METER READING FEES.
   (A)   Customers whose service has been terminated for nonpayment and who pay
their past due balances and late payment charges shall pay a reconnection fee
of $50 to cover the cost of reestablishing water service to the customer. The
town shall reestablish water service within a reasonable amount of time after
notification of payment by Town Hall.
   (B)   Customers who request that their water service be disconnected shall
pay a disconnect fee of $30 during normal business hours and $50 during non-
business hours. There shall be a reconnect fee of $30 during normal business
hours and $50 during non-business hours. Business hours shall be based upon
Water Division schedule, 7:00 a.m. until 4:00 p.m.
   (C)   Customers who request a meter reading without disconnection, except
for property transfers, shall pay a fee of $10 per reading.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83; Am. Ord. 1036, passed 12-4-86; Am. Ord. 1512, passed 7-
13-06; Am. Ord. 1537, passed 6-28-07; Am. Ord. 1683, passed 6-14-12)
§ 50.083 SPECIAL RATES.
   All water received as a special use shall be charged at a rate as set forth
in the fee schedule of § 50.080. A meter rental fee and installation or removal
fee for the meter shall also be assessed for the special use of water per
application as set forth in the fee schedule of § 50.080.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
§ 50.084 BILLING; PAYMENT OF ACCOUNTS.
   (A)   The owner of improved property within the town shall be liable for the
payment of all water and sewer services furnished to such premises, and if the
charges are not paid, legal action may be taken to collect these charges. All
bills for water and sewer services shall be rendered to the owner.
   (B)   Upon failure of the owner to pay the amount charged for either water
or sewer services within the time set forth on billing, both services may be
discontinued without prejudice to the right of the town to recover for services
rendered before discontinuance, as set forth in divisions (1) through (4)
below, and services shall not be restored until the account is paid. These
rates shall generally be determined on the basis of water consumption measured
for each customer through a metering device installed, maintained, and read by
the town.
      (1)    It is the policy of the town before terminating utility service,
to give the customer a fair opportunity to avoid termination either by paying
charges due or showing that the charges are in error. As soon as possible
following the past due date, written notice of delinquency shall be sent to the
customer by first-class mail.
      (2)   Notice. The notice shall contain the following information:
         (a)    The amount which must be paid to avoid termination;
         (b)    The date on which termination will occur, which must be at
least ten days after the mailing date; and
         (c)   A statement that the customer may appear at the office of the
Town Manager or his or her designated representative between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on any business day and request an informal hearing with the
Town Manager or his or her designee, for the purpose of showing error or
working out a satisfactory extended payment arrangement.
      (3)    Certification. The employee responsible for mailing the notice
shall certify the date on which the notice was mailed, on a form or in a record
book or electronic medium designed for that purpose.
      (4)    Termination. If the customer does not make acceptable payment
arrangements and fails to show cause why service should not be terminated,
service may be terminated on or after the date specified in the notice of
termination. Service may be terminated between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 400
p.m. on business days from Monday through Thursday only. If the customer fails
to comply with agreed upon extended payment arrangements, service may be
terminated without further notice.
   (C)   For the purpose of spreading more evenly the capital costs associated
with providing the required amount and quality of water and the collection and
treatment of wastewater, systems service charges shall be made according to the
size of the water meter for each billing period on both water and sewer. These
charges, for customers both inside and outside the town limits, shall be as set
forth in the fee schedule of § 50.080.
   (D)   Whenever water or sewer service is discontinued for any reason, a fee
shall be charged for such discontinuance. Charges for such service work shall
be determined from time to time by the Board of Aldermen and charge schedules
shall be kept on file in the offices of the Town Clerk and the Director of
Public Works.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
DISCONTINUATION, SUSPENSION OF SERVICE
§ 50.090 PROCEDURE FOR DISCONTINUATION OF SERVICE.
   (A)   The town shall serve a written notice to any person allegedly
violating any provision of this chapter. The notice shall state the specific
nature of the violation and provide the person not less than ten days to:
      (1)   Correct the violation; or
      (2)   Inquire regarding the notice, and, if the person feels he or she is
not in violation, or that compliance requires greater than ten days, request a
hearing before the Director of Public Works. If the person does not respond
within the time prescribed in the notice, the town may immediately discontinue
service to this person upon the expiration of the prescribed time. If the user
receives notice due to non-payment of a bill, the town may suspend service,
after notice, at the direction of the Town Clerk.
   (B)   If the person allegedly in violation of a provision of this chapter
requests a hearing before the Director, the Director shall, within five days of
the person’s claims, establish the time and place for the hearing. If, as a
result of the hearing, the Director determines that the person is in violation
of the provision as alleged in the notice, he or she shall order the person to
correct the condition giving rise to the violation, and establish a reasonable
time for compliance. If the Director cannot, at the hearing, determine the
existence or extent of the alleged violation, he or she may order the
suspension of services. In the case of suspension of services, the person is
entitled to request a second hearing following the period of suspension, and in
the event he or she does so, no further action may be taken by the town until
the conclusion of the second hearing.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
§ 50.091 SUSPENSION OF SERVICE.
   If an industrial user is suspected of discharging wastewater into a public
sanitary sewer which is causing operational problems at the public wastewater
treatment facility, pump station, or public sanitary sewer; the discharge would
be in violation of this chapter; and the user has been issued a written notice
but has denied the alleged violation, the town may require that the user cease
to discharge into a public sanitary sewer, upon a hearing by the Director of
Public Works, for up to 30 days. The suspension shall be only for the purpose
of clearly determining the operational effect of the user's discharge; the
suspension shall not be made if it will likely endanger the public health,
safety, or welfare or otherwise create a public health or safety nuisance.
Depending upon the results of the suspension on the operation of the wastewater
treatment facilities, the town may take appropriate action to either restore
service or discontinue further service.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
§ 50.092 DISCONTINUATION IN PROTECTION OF HEALTH AND WELFARE.
   When any public sanitary sewer user discharges, or threatens to discharge,
any wastewater which is prohibited by this chapter which may cause a present or
imminent and substantial endangerment to the health and welfare of persons, or
is likely to cause the disruption or inhibition of the operation of the town's
treatment facilities, the Director may immediately, upon written notice or
verbal notification to the user, discontinue service to the user. In such
event, the town shall serve a written notice to the user after discontinuation
of service and shall, where feasible, follow the procedural requirements of
this chapter. If, upon fulfillment of such requirements, it is determined that
no violation has occurred, service to the user shall be restored at no cost to
the user.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
EXTENSION OF SERVICE
§ 50.100 APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL OF EXTENSION.
   (A)   Any property owner who desires water or sanitary sewer service shall
apply in writing to the Board of Aldermen requesting the extension of water or
sanitary sewer service. No request for the extension of services shall be
considered unless submitted in writing in accordance with the requirements of
this subchapter.
   (B)   The town may require the applicant to submit as part of the written
application such information, plans, or other data to determine adequately if
the requirements of this subchapter shall be met.
   (C)   When application is made for water and sewer extensions to serve an
area or development project that is planned as part of a larger project or
subdivision, all of which is not to be developed at the time application is
made, the owner shall submit plans in sufficient detail to determine the size
and type of facilities necessary to serve the entire development or subdivision
when completed.
   (D)   No extension to the water or sanitary sewer system of the town shall
be made and no application shall be approved except in accordance with the
requirements of this subchapter.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
§ 50.101 GENERAL EXTENSION REQUIREMENTS.
   All extensions of either water or sanitary sewer service shall be governed
by the size of water lines and sanitary sewer lines to be installed and the
other required system facilities shall be determined by the Town Manager or his
designee in accordance with recognized standards and accepted engineering
practices and design.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83; Am. Ord. 1536, passed 6-14-07)
§ 50.102 GENERAL APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS.
   All water and sewer lines and appurtenances shall be designed by a licensed
registered architect or engineer and shall bear his seal. Proposed plans shall
be submitted to the Director of Public Works in the amount of seven copies. The
plans shall be reviewed by the Director and all town department heads, who
shall submit their comments to the Director. The Director shall then, in
consultation with the Water and Sewer Division Superintendent, submit a report
to the Board of Aldermen within 30 days of receipt of the plans. Any department
head who does not comment within ten working days, shall be considered to have
no adverse comment. Such extensions, if approved, shall be paid for and the
total cost borne by the property owner.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
§ 50.103 SPECIFICATIONS FOR EXTENSION; OWNERSHIP.
   (A)   Any water or sanitary sewer mains extended under the provisions of
this subchapter shall be installed and constructed in accordance with the
approved plans, specifications, and other requirements of the town. All
facilities installed, whether within or outside the town, shall become the
property of the town and shall be under its jurisdiction and control for all
purposes at the time the facilities are connected to the town system.
   (B)   When required, the property owner shall grant to the town those
utility easements the town may require. In addition, a deed to the town for
water or sewer facilities installed which are located outside the town, the
cost of which is borne by individual property owners, shall be executed prior
to the time any extension provided for in this subchapter is connected to the
town system.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
§ 50.104 ADDITIONAL SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENT MAY BE REQUIRED.
   The Board of Aldermen may, at its discretion, as a condition under which
water or sewer service shall be extended, require the owner of a proposed
subdivision to enter into an agreement to improve the proposed streets therein
at his own expense and in accordance with the provisions of this code and other
ordinances governing the acceptance of public streets for the town. If
required, this section shall apply to subdivisions which are located either
within or outside the town limits.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
§ 50.105 APPROVED SUBDIVISION OR DEVELOPED PROPERTY.
   When an application is received requesting the extension of water or
sanitary sewer service to serve property within the town which is developed or
has been previously approved as a subdivision, or where streets have previously
been dedicated and accepted by the town, and where such area is not part of a
new unapproved subdivision, the Director of Public Works or other person
designated by the Board of Aldermen shall estimate the cost of the project and
present the application for such extension, the estimated cost, and other
required information to the Board for its consideration. If the application is
approved by the Board, and subject to the availability of funds, the town shall
install the extensions which have been approved.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
§ 50.106 APPROVED EXTENSION PROJECT; ASSESSMENT OF COSTS.
   (A)   All costs associated with any extension of water or sanitary sewer
service, regardless of the length of such extension, shall be paid in full by
the property owner benefitted by such extension.
   (B)   Before undertaking any extension of water or sewer service, the
affected property owner shall provide the town with an estimate of the cost of
such work prepared by a licensed engineer.
   (C)   The Town Manager or his designee shall determine whether the
improvements shall be installed by the town or by the property owner. If such
improvements are installed by the property owner, no work shall be undertaken
until all necessary permits are acquired by the property owner and plans and
specifications acceptable to the town describing the work to be undertaken have
been approved by the town. All work carried out by the property owner shall be
performed by a licensed utility contractor.
   (D)   If such improvements are installed by the town, no work shall be
undertaken until the property owner has deposited with the town a sum equal to
the estimated cost of installation (as approved by the town in its sole
discretion) plus the amount necessary to reimburse the town for the cost of its
services associated with the extension of services.
   (E)   Upon completion of the project, if the cost of extension of such
service, to include the town's cost, exceeds the deposit made by the property
owner, the property owner shall, within ten days of receipt of written notice
from the town, pay the town the difference between its deposit and the final
cost. If the cost of the project, to include the town's fees, are less than the
amount deposited by the property owner, the town shall within ten days of a
determination of the final cost remit any unused balance to the property owner.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83; Am. Ord. 1536, passed 6-14-07)
Statutory reference:
   Power to assess, see G.S. § 160A-216
§ 50.107 PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT OR UNAPPROVED SUBDIVISION.
   When an application is received requesting the extension of water or
sanitary sewer service to a proposed development or subdivision within the town
which has not been approved by the Board of Aldermen, the Director of Public
Works or other person designated by the Board shall estimate the cost of the
project and present the application for the extension, the estimated cost, and
other required information to the Board for consideration. If the application
is approved, and subject to the approval of the development or subdivision by
the town, the town shall install the extension under the conditions set out in
this chapter.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
§ 50.108 FINANCING OF EXTENSION WITHIN TOWN LIMITS.
   (A)   Prior to the beginning of any construction, the property owner shall
advance to the town funds in an amount equal to the total estimated cost of the
proposed extension.
   (B)   Upon receipt of such funds, a written contract shall be entered into
by and between the town and the property owner under which the town shall use
such funds upon the following terms and conditions:
      (1)   The funds shall be deposited in a special account of the town for
which a separate accounting will be made.
      (2)   At the time construction of the extension is completed and the
total cost thereof is determined, if the amount deposited exceeds the total
cost, that portion in excess of the amount deposited will be refunded to the
owner without interest. If the amount deposited is less than the total cost,
the owner shall pay such additional amount to the town, and this condition
shall be a part of the written contract.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
Cross-reference:
   Financing extensions outside town limits, see §
50.112
§ 50.109 SURETY BOND; REFUND OR REIMBURSEMENT OF FUNDS.
   (A)   In lieu of depositing funds, the owner may provide a surety bond or
some other form of security that will insure payment to the town of his
proportionate share of the cost of extension.
   (B)   No refund or reimbursement of funds shall be made to the owner who
pays the total cost of extension except as provided for in § 50.108.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
§ 50.110 EXCEPTIONS FROM FOLLOWING EXTENSION PROCEDURE AUTHORIZED.
   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the Board of Aldermen from extending
water or sanitary sewer mains within the town on its own motion without receipt
of an application from property owners, and from assessing the cost of such an
extension in accordance with this chapter when, in the opinion of the Board,
the general public interest demands such an extension of service. The Board may
decline to assess the cost of such an extension and pay for the same from town
funds.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
§ 50.111 EXTENSION OUTSIDE TOWN; APPLICATION.
   All applications for water and sewer extensions outside the corporate limits
shall be made in the same manner and under the same requirements as provided
for in this chapter.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
Statutory reference:
    Special rates for water and sewer, see G.S. § 160A-58.5
§ 50.112 FINANCING OF EXTENSION OUTSIDE TOWN LIMITS.
   If an application is approved by the Board of Aldermen the owner shall pay
for the entire cost of the extension. However, the town may participate to the
extent agreed upon by the Board in the cost of larger mains which are in excess
of the size of mains required to serve the project. No reimbursement shall be
made upon annexation and all water and sewer lines connected to the town system
and located outside the town shall become the property of the town at the time
such facilities are connected.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
Cross-reference:
   Financing extensions within town limits, see §
50.108
§ 50.113 DEPOSIT OF FUNDS; CONTRACT FOR EXTENSION OUTSIDE TOWN LIMITS.
   Prior to the beginning of any construction, the owner shall deposit with the
town funds in an amount equal to the total estimated cost of such extension.
Upon receipt of such funds a written contract shall be entered into by and
between the town and the property owner in accordance with the requirements of
this chapter. The contract shall provide that in the event the amount of the
total funds deposited exceeds the amount of the extension cost when completed,
that portion in excess of the total cost shall be refunded to the owner without
interest. The contract shall also provide that if the amount deposited is less
than the total cost, the owner shall pay the additional amount to the town.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
§ 50.114 SURETY BOND OR PRIVATE CONSTRUCTION FOR EXTENSION OUTSIDE TOWN LIMITS.
   In lieu of depositing funds the owner may execute a surety bond guaranteeing
payment for such extension or the owner may have such extension work performed
under private contract with the approval of the Board of Aldermen. However, the
work shall be performed in accordance with all construction requirements of the
town and subject to inspection and approval of the town.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
§ 50.115 ANNEXATION.
   If the property for which an application has been made for water and sewer
service is contiguous to the town, the owner of such property agrees to
annexation, and if the property is annexed to the town, an extension may be
made to such property and the cost thereof financed in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter.
(Ord., passed 7-28-83)
§ 50.116 CUTOFF OF PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY AT PIERS.
   No pier shall be provided with public water unless it has installed by the
owner of such pier a device for cutting off the public water supply to such
pier. Such cutoff device shall be installed on property owned by the pier owner
and shall be installed in accordance with regulations promulgated by the
Department of Public Works. The owner of any pier having a supply of public
water for which no cutoff device currently exists shall comply with the
provisions of this section on or before April 1, 1998. Any owner failing to
comply with the provisions of this section shall have the public water supply
to that owner's pier terminated.
(Ord. 1292, passed 7-31-97)
WATER SUPPLY SHORTAGE
§ 50.120 ISSUANCE OF WATER SHORTAGE PROCLAMATION.
   In the event of an existing or threatening state of emergency endangering
the safety, health or welfare of the people of the town, or threatening damage
or destruction of property, arising from the shortage or threatened shortage of
water, the Town Manager or the Public Works Director is hereby authorized and
empowered to issue a public proclamation declaring the existence of such state
of emergency, and to define and impose such appropriate prohibitions and
restrictions resulting from the water shortage applicable to all persons within
the jurisdiction of the town in order to meet the requirements of the
predetermined state of emergency.
(Ord. 1644, passed 12-9-10)
§ 50.121 CONDITIONS DEEMED EMERGENCY.
   A state of emergency shall be deemed to exist whenever the availability and
supply of water is critical due to a mechanical malfunction or breakdown of the
town's pumps or distribution system, a rapid drawdown of the water supply {'
{'}aquifer{'}'}, salt water intrusion, or specific triggers (as defined in the
Water Shortage Response Plan) would require the reduction of water usage in
order to protect the availability of water for human consumption, for
firefighting purposes and other protection of lives and property, and the
conservation of water is necessary in order to protect lives, safety and
property within the town.
(Ord. 1644, passed 12-9-10)
§ 50.122 RESTRICTIONS, LIMITATIONS IMPOSED.
   (A)   The Town Manager or Public Works Director is hereby authorized and
empowered to issue a public proclamation declaring to all persons the existence
of such state of emergency.
   (B)   Such proclamation may specify the authorized uses of water within the
town, and may place limitations, prohibitions and restrictions upon the usage
of water for residential, business, commercial, industrial and municipal uses.
Such proclamation may limit the use of water for non-crucial uses such as the
watering of lawns, washing of automobiles, and similar activities and may be
expanded thereafter to include other activities. Specifically exempted from
restrictions are those activities by the Public Works Department deemed
necessary to maintain water quality to necessary standards. The proclamation
will use predetermined stages of water restrictions found in §
50.127.
(Ord. 1644, passed 12-9-10)
§ 50.123 PROCLAMATION, RESTRICTIONS, AND THE LIKE SHALL BE WRITTEN.
   Upon the declaration of a proclaimed state of emergency arising from the
availability or shortage of water, such proclamation and all restrictions,
prohibitions, and limitations on the use of water shall be in writing and duly
signed by the Town Manager or the Public Works Director. All restrictions,
prohibitions, and limitations upon the use of water during the proclaimed state
of emergency shall be in writing and specifically described and identified so
that the citizens and the residents of the town shall have available the
specific activities authorized and the specific activities prohibited.
(ord. 1644, passed 12-9-10)
§ 50.124 END OF EMERGENCY; LIFTING OR MODIFICATION OF RESTRICTIONS.
   The Town Manager or Public Works Director shall proclaim the end of such
state of emergency and shall have the authority to modify, lift or suspend any
restrictions, limitations or prohibitions stated in such proclamation of
emergency as soon as the circumstances warrant.
(Ord. 1644, passed 12-9-10)
§ 50.125 WATER SHORTAGE RESPONSE TRIGGERS.
 
Stage Well Operating Conditions
1     Aquifer level > 25' below msl for 3 weeks
2     Aquifer level > 27' below msl for 3 weeks
3     Weekly average pumping time > 14 hrs and aquifer level > 27' msl for 3
      weeks
4     Weekly average pumping time > 18 hrs and aquifer level > 27' msl for 3
      weeks
5     Weekly average pumping time > 20 hrs and aquifer level > 27' msl for 3
      weeks
 
(Ord. 1644, passed 12-9-10)
§ 50.126 NON-ESSENTIAL WATER USAGE ND IRRIGATION CONTROL.
   For the purposes of controlling non-essential (irrigation) water usage, the
Town of Wrightsville Beach shall be divided into the following zones.
   (A)   Zone 1. The north end of Wrightsville Island beginning at the center
of Salisbury Street (East and West) and continuing north past 2700 N Lumina;
this shall include all properties north of the aforementioned dividing line.
   (B)   Zone 2. The south end of Wrightsville Island beginning at the center
of Stone Street to the center of the Causeway bridge on Wrightsville Island and
continuing south to Jack Parker Blvd; this shall include all properties south
of the aforementioned dividing line.
   (C)   Zone 3. The center of Wrightsville Beach beginning at the center of
Salisbury Street (East and West) and continuing south to the center of Stone
Street to the center of the Causeway bridge on Wrightsville Island; this shall
include all properties between the dividing lines for Zones 1 and 2 and all of
Harbor Island and the annexed areas on the west side of the Intracoastal
Waterway.
(Ord. 1644, passed 12-9-10)
§ 50.127 WATER SHORTAGE RESPONSE.
   (A)   STAGE 1: Voluntary Reductions. All water users will be asked to reduce
their normal water use by 5%. Customer education and outreach programs will
encourage water conservation and efficiency measures including: irrigating
landscapes a maximum of one inch per week; preventing water waste, runoff and
watering impervious surfaces; watering plants deeply to encourage root growth;
washing only full loads in clothes and dishwashers; using spring-loaded nozzles
on garden hoses; and identifying and repairing all water leaks.
   (B)   STAGE 2: Mandatory Reductions I. All customers are expected to reduce
their water use by 10% in comparison to their previous month's water usage/or
monthly average of previous water bills. In addition to continuing to encourage
all voluntary reduction actions, the following restrictions apply: outdoor use
of drinking water for washing impervious surfaces is prohibited; all testing
and training purposes requiring drinking water (e.g. fire protection) will be
limited; watering of lawns, grass, shrubbery, trees, flowers or vegetable
gardens shall be limited to an inch per week as follows:
      (1)   Zone 1 - Sunday and Wednesday between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and
8:00 a.m.
      (2)   Zone 2 - Monday and Thursday between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 8:
00 a.m.
      (3)   Zone 3 - Tuesday and Friday between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 8:
00 a.m.
      (4)   There shall be no watering on Saturday.
   (C)   STAGE 3: Mandatory Reductions II. Customers must continue actions from
all previous stages and further reduce water use by 20% compared to their
previous month's water usage/or monthly average of previous water bills;
watering of lawns, grass, shrubbery, trees, flowers or vegetable gardens shall
be limited to a half inch per week as follows:
      (1)   Zone 1 - Wednesday between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m.
      (2)   Zone 2 - Monday between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m.
      (3)   Zone 3 - Tuesday between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m.
      (4)   There shall be no watering on Thursday, Friday, Saturday and
Sunday.
   (D)   STAGE 4: Emergency Reductions. Customers must continue all actions
from previous stages and further reduce their water use by 25% compared to
their previous month's water usage/or monthly average of previous water bills.
A ban on all use of drinking water except to protect public health and safety
is implemented.
   (E)   STAGE 5: Water Rationing. Is to provide drinking water to protect
public health. All customers are only permitted to use water at the minimum
required for public health protection. Firefighting is the only allowable
outdoor water use.
(Ord. 1644, passed 12-9-10)
§ 50.128 WATER SHORTAGE RESPONSE ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The provisions of the water shortage response plan will be enforced by
Town of Wrightsville Beach Utility Department and police personnel. Violators
may be reported to the town's dedicated water emergency hotline or the e-mail
contact listed on the town's website through the online work order system;
entries may remain anonymous. Citations are assessed according to the following
schedule depending on the number of prior violations and current level of water
shortage.
 
Water Shortage Level      First Violation Second Violation   Third
                                                             Violation
Voluntary Reduction       N/A             N/A                N/A
(Stage 1)
Mandatory Reductions      Warning         $250               Discontinuation of
(Stages 2 and 3)                                             service
Emergency Reduction       $250            Discontinuation of Discontinuation of
(Stage 4)                                 service            service
Water Rationing (Stage 5) $500            Discontinuation of Discontinuation of
                                          service            service
 
   (B)   Drought surcharge rates, if applicable, are effective in Stages 3, 4
and 5.
(Ord. 1644, passed 12-9-10)
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
§ 50.130 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be officially known as the "Stormwater Management
Ordinance." It is referred to herein as "this subchapter."
(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)
§ 50.131 AUTHORITY.
   The town is authorized to adopt this subchapter pursuant to North Carolina
law, including but not limited to Article 14, Section 5 of the Constitution of
North Carolina; G.S. § 143-214.7 and rules promulgated by the Environmental
Management Commission thereunder; Session Law 2006-246; Chapter 160A, §§ 174,
185 and Chapter 153A, Article 18.
(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)
§ 50.132 FINDINGS.
    (A)   It is hereby determined that:
      (1)   Development and redevelopment alter the hydrologic response of
local watersheds and increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, flooding,
soil erosion, stream channel erosion, nonpoint and point source pollution, and
sediment transport and deposition, as well as reducing groundwater recharge;
      (2)   These changes in stormwater runoff contribute to increased
quantities of water-borne pollutants and alterations in hydrology that are
harmful to public health and safety as well as to the natural environment; and
      (3)   These effects can be managed and minimized by applying proper
design and well-planned controls to manage stormwater runoff from development
sites.
   (B)   Further, the Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1972 ("Clean Water
Act") and Federal Phase II Stormwater Rules promulgated under it, as well as
rules of the North Carolina Environmental Management Commission promulgated in
response to Federal Phase II requirements, compel certain urbanized areas,
including this jurisdiction, to adopt minimum stormwater controls such as those
included in this subchapter.
   (C)   Therefore, the town establishes this set of water quality and quantity
regulations to meet the requirements of state and federal law regarding control
of stormwater runoff and discharge.
(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)
§ 50.133 PURPOSE.
    (A)   General. The purpose of this subchapter is to protect, maintain and
enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare by
establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects
of increased post-development stormwater runoff and nonpoint and point source
pollution associated with new development and redevelopment and illicit
discharges into municipal stormwater systems. It has been determined that
proper management of construction-related and post-development stormwater
runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure;
safeguard the public health, safety, and general welfare; and protect water and
aquatic resources.
   (B)   Specific. This subchapter seeks to meet its general purpose through
the following specific objectives and means:
      (1)    Establishing decision-making processes for development that
protect the integrity of watersheds and preserve the health of water resources;
      (2)   Requiring that new development and redevelopment maintain the pre-
development hydrologic response in their post-development state as nearly as
practicable for the applicable design storm to reduce flooding, stream bank
erosion, non-point and point source pollution and increases in stream
temperature, and to maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic
habitats;
      (3)   Establishing minimum post-development stormwater management
standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater
runoff quantity and quality;
      (4)   Establishing design and review criteria for the construction,
function, and use of structural stormwater BMPs that may be used to meet the
minimum post-development stormwater management standards;
      (5)   Encouraging the use of better management and site design practices,
such as the use of vegetated conveyances for stormwater and the preservation of
greenspace, riparian buffers and other conservation areas to the maximum extent
practicable;
      (6)   Establishing provisions for the longterm responsibility for and
maintenance of structural and nonstructural stormwater BMPs to ensure that they
continue to function as designed, are maintained appropriately, and pose no
threat to public safety;
      (7)   Establishing administrative procedures for the submission, review,
approval and disapproval of stormwater management plans, for the inspection of
approved projects, and to assure appropriate long-term maintenance;
      (8)   Controlling illicit discharges into the municipal separate
stormwater system;
      (9)   Controlling erosion and sedimentation from construction activities;
and
      (10)   Assigning responsibility and processes for approving the creation
and maintenance of adequate drainage and flood damage prevention measures.
(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)
§ 50.134 APPLICABILITY AND JURISDICTION.
   (A)   General. Beginning with and subsequent to its effective date, this
subchapter shall be applicable to all development and redevelopment, including,
but not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision applications, and
grading applications.
   (B)   No development or redevelopment until compliance and permit. No
development or redevelopment shall occur except in compliance with the
provisions of this subchapter or unless exempted. Development for which a
permit is required pursuant to this subchapter shall not occur except in
compliance with the provisions, conditions, and limitations of the permit.
      (1)   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply within the areas
designated on the map titled "USMP Stormwater Map of the Town of Wrightsville
Beach, North Carolina" (the "stormwater map"), which is adopted simultaneously
herewith. The stormwater map and all explanatory matter contained thereon
accompanies and is hereby made a part of this subchapter.
      (2)   The stormwater map shall be kept on file by the Stormwater Manager
and shall be updated to take into account changes in the land area covered by
this subchapter and the geographic location of all structural BMPs permitted
under this subchapter. In the event of a dispute, the applicability of this
subchapter to a particular area of land or BMP shall be determined by reference
to the North Carolina Statutes, the North Carolina Administrative Code, and
local zoning and jurisdictional boundary ordinances.
(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)
§ 50.135 INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   Meaning and intent. All provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions
contained in this subchapter shall be construed according to the general and
specific purposes set forth in §50.133. If a different or more specific meaning
is given for a term defined elsewhere in the Town of Wrightsville Beach or New
Hanover County's code of ordinances, the meaning and application of the term in
this subchapter shall control for purposes of application of this subchapter.
   (B)   Text controls in event of conflict. In the event of a conflict or
inconsistency between the text of this subchapter and any heading, caption,
figure, illustration, table, or map, the text shall control.
   (C)   Authority for interpretation. The Stormwater Manager or his designee
has authority to determine the interpretation of this subchapter. Any person
may request an interpretation by submitting a written request to the Stormwater
Manager, who shall use his best efforts to respond in writing within 30 days.
The Stormwater Manager shall keep on file a record of all written
interpretations of this subchapter.
   (D)   References to statutes, regulations, and documents. Whenever reference
is made to a resolution, ordinance, statute, regulation, manual, including the
design manual, or document, it shall be construed as a reference to the most
recent edition of such that has been finalized and published with due provision
for notice and comment, unless otherwise specifically stated.
   (E)   Computation of time. The time in which an act is to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first day and including the last day. If a deadline
or required date of action falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday observed by
the Town of Wrightsville Beach, the deadline or required date of action shall
be the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday or holiday observed by the town.
References to days are calendar days unless otherwise stated.
   (F)   Delegation of authority. Any act authorized by this subchapter to be
carried out by the Stormwater Manager of the town may be carried out by his or
her designee.
   (G)   Usage.
      (1)   Mandatory and discretionary terms. The words "shall", "must", and
"will" are mandatory in nature, establishing an obligation or duty to comply
with the particular provision. The words "may" and "should" are permissive in
nature.
      (2)   Conjunctions. Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary,
conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows: The word "and" indicates that all
connected items, conditions, provisions and events apply. The word "or"
indicates that one or more of the connected items, conditions, provisions or
events apply.
      (3)   Tense, plurals, and gender. Words used in the present tense include
the future tense. Words used in the singular number include the plural number
and the plural number includes the singular number, unless the context of the
particular usage clearly indicates otherwise. Words used in the masculine
gender include the feminine gender, and vice versa.
   (H)   Measurement and Computation. Lot area refers to the amount of
horizontal land area contained inside the lot lines of a lot or site.
(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)
§ 50.136 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   "BUILT-UPON AREA (BUA)." That portion of a development project that is
covered by impervious or partially impervious surface including, but not
limited to, buildings; pavement and gravel areas such as roads, parking lots,
and paths; and recreation facilities such as tennis courts. "Built-upon area"
does not include a wooden slatted deck, the water area of a swimming pool, or
pervious or partially pervious paving material to the extent that the paving
material absorbs water or allows water to infiltrate through the paving
material.
   "COASTAL AREA MANAGEMENT ACT (CAMA)." An act that requires the establishment
of a cooperative program of coastal land management between local government
and the State of North Carolina for preparing, adopting and enforcing local
land use plans. CAMA requires that local governments within the 20 coastal
counties prepare land use plans that provide for the protection, preservation,
orderly development, and management of the coastal area of North Carolina.
   "DESIGN MANUAL." The stormwater design manual approved for use by the town
for the proper implementation of the requirements of the Federal Phase II
Stormwater Program. All references herein to the design manual are to the
latest published edition or revision.
   "DEVELOPMENT." Any land-disturbing activity that increases the amount of
built-upon area or that otherwise decreases the infiltration of precipitation
into the soil.
   "FLOODPLAIN." The 1% Annual Chance Floodplain as delineated by the North
Carolina Floodplain Mapping Program in the Division of Emergency Management.
   "HIGH QUALITY WATERS (HQW)." Supplemental classification intended to protect
waters with quality higher than state water quality standards. In general,
there are two means by which a water body may be classified as HQW:
      (1)   By definition; or
      (2)   They may be supplementally classified as HQW through the rule-
making process.
   "LARGER COMMON PLAN OF DEVELOPMENT OR SALE." Any area where multiple
separate and distinct construction or land-disturbing activities will occur
under one plan. A plan is any announcement or piece of documentation (including
but not limited to a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch,
advertisement, loan application, drawing, permit application, zoning request,
or computer design) or physical demarcation (including but not limited to
boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings) indicating that construction
activities may occur on a specific plot.
   "OWNER." The legal or beneficial owner of land, including but not limited to
a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, or long-term
or commercial lessee, or any other person or entity holding proprietary rights
in the property or having legal power of management and control of the
property. "Owner" shall include long-term commercial tenants; management
entities, such as those charged with or engaged in the management of properties
for profit; and every person or entity having joint ownership of the property.
A secured lender not in possession of the property does not constitute an
owner, unless the secured lender is included within the meaning of "owner"
under another description in this definition, such as a management entity.
   "REDEVELOPMENT." Any development on previously-developed land, other than a
rebuilding activity that results in no net increase in built-upon area and
provides equal or greater stormwater control than the previous development.
   "SA WATERS." Surface waters that are used for shellfishing or marketing
purposes and all SC and SB uses. All SA waters are also HQW by definition.
Stormwater controls are required under CAMA. No domestic discharges are
permitted in these waters.
   "SB WATERS." Surface waters that are used for primary recreation, including
frequent or organized swimming and all SC uses. Stormwater controls are
required under CAMA and there are no categorical restrictions on discharges.
   "SC WATERS." All tidal salt waters protected for secondary recreation such
as fishing, boating and other activities involving minimal skin contact;
aquatic life propagation and survival; and wildlife. Stormwater controls are
required under CAMA and there are no categorical restrictions on discharges.
   "STRUCTURAL BMP." A physical device designed to trap, settle out, or filter
pollutants from stormwater runoff; to alter or reduce stormwater runoff
velocity, amount, timing, or other characteristics; to approximate the pre-
development hydrology on a developed site; or to achieve any combination of
these goals. Structural BMP includes physical practices such as constructed
wetlands, vegetative practices, filter strips, grassed swales, and other
methods installed or created on real property. "Structural BMP" is synonymous
with "structural practice," "stormwater control facility," "stormwater control
practice," "stormwater treatment practice," "stormwater management practice,"
"stormwater control measures," "structural stormwater treatment systems," and
similar terms used in this subchapter.
   "SUBSTANTIAL PROGRESS." For the purposes of determining whether sufficient
progress has been made on an approved plan, one or more of the following
construction activities toward the completion of a site or subdivision plan
shall occur: obtaining a grading permit and conducting grading activity on a
continuous basis and not discontinued for more than 30 days; or installation
and approval of on-site infrastructure; or obtaining a building permit for the
construction and approval of a building foundation. "Substantial progress" for
purposes of determining whether an approved plan is null and void is not
necessarily the same as "substantial expenditures" used for determining vested
rights pursuant to applicable law.
(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)
§ 50.137 DESIGN MANUAL.
   (A)   Reference to design manual.
      (1)   The Stormwater Manager shall use the policy, criteria, and
information, including technical specifications and standards, in the design
manual as the basis for decisions about stormwater permits and about the
design, implementation and performance of structural and non-structural
stormwater BMPs.
      (2)   The design manual includes a list of acceptable stormwater
treatment practices, including specific design criteria for each stormwater
practice. Stormwater treatment practices that are designed, constructed, and
maintained in accordance with these design and sizing criteria will be presumed
to meet the minimum water quality performance standards of the Phase II and
other applicable stormwater laws.
   (B)   Relationship of design manual to other laws and regulations. If the
specifications or guidelines of the design manual are more restrictive or apply
a higher standard than other laws or regulations, that fact shall not prevent
application of the specifications or guidelines in the design manual.
   (C)   Changes to standards and specifications. If the standards,
specifications, guidelines, policies, criteria, or other information in the
design manual are amended subsequent to the submittal of an application for
approval pursuant to this subchapter but prior to approval, the new information
shall control and shall be utilized in reviewing the application and in
implementing this subchapter with regard to the application.
   (D)   Amendments to design manual. The Design manual may be updated and
expanded from time to time, based on advancements in technology and
engineering, improved knowledge of local conditions, or local monitoring or
maintenance experience. Prior to amending or updating the design manual,
proposed changes shall be generally publicized and made available for, review,
and an opportunity for comment by interested persons shall be provided.
(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)
§ 50.138 RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAWS, REGULATIONS AND PRIVATE AGREEMENTS.
   (A)   Conflict of laws. This subchapter is not intended to modify or repeal
any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law. The
requirements of this subchapter are in addition to the requirements of any
other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law. Where any
provision of this subchapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed
by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever
provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human
or environmental health, safety, and welfare shall control.
   (B)   Private agreements. This subchapter is not intended to revoke or
repeal any easement, covenant, or other private agreement. However, where the
regulations of this subchapter are more restrictive or impose higher standards
or requirements than such an easement, covenant, or other private agreement,
the requirements of this subchapter shall govern. Nothing in this subchapter
shall modify or repeal any private covenant or deed restriction, but such
covenant or restriction shall not legitimize any failure to comply with this
subchapter. In no case shall the town be obligated to enforce the provisions of
any easements, covenants, or agreements between private parties.
(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)
§ 50.139 SEVERABILITY.
   If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or
clause of this subchapter shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any
section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this subchapter.
(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)
§ 50.140 EFFECTIVE DATE AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Effective date. This subchapter shall take effect on June 28, 2007.
   (B)   Final approvals, complete applications.
      (1)   All development and redevelopment projects for which complete and
full applications were submitted and approved by the town prior to the
effective date of this subchapter and which remain valid, unexpired, unrevoked
and not otherwise terminated at the time of development or redevelopment shall
be exempt from complying with all provisions of this subchapter dealing with
the control and/or management of discharge provisions.
      (2)   A phased development plan shall be deemed approved prior to the
effective date of this subchapter if it has been approved by all necessary
government units, it remains valid, unexpired, unrevoked and not otherwise
terminated, and it shows:
         (a)   For the initial or first phase of development, the type and
intensity of use for a specific parcel or parcels, including at a minimum, the
boundaries of the project and a subdivision plan that has been approved.
         (b)   For any subsequent phase of development, sufficient detail so
that implementation of the requirements of this subchapter to that phase of
development would require a material change in that phase of the plan.
   (C)   Violations continue. Any violation of provisions existing on the
effective date of this subchapter shall continue to be a violation under this
subchpater and be subject to penalties and enforcement under this subchapter
unless the use, development, construction, or other activity complies with the
provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)
§ 50.141 REVIEW AND DECISION-MAKING ENTITIES.
   (A)   Stormwater Manager.
      (1)   Designation. A Stormwater Manager shall be designated by the Board
of Aldermen to administer and enforce this subchapter.
      (2)   Powers and duties. In addition to the powers and duties that may be
conferred by other provisions of the town ordinances and other laws, the
Stormwater Manager shall have the following powers and duties under this
subchapter:
         (a)   To review and approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove
applications for approval of plans pursuant to this subchapter.
         (b)   To make determinations and render interpretations of this
subchapter.
         (c)   To establish application requirements and schedules for
submittal and review of applications and appeals, to review and make
recommendations to the Board of Aldermen on applications for development or
redevelopment approvals.
         (d)   To enforce the provisions of this subchapter in accordance with
its enforcement provisions.
         (e)   To maintain records, maps, forms and other official materials as
relate to the adoption, amendment, enforcement, and administration of this
subchapter.
         (f)   To provide expertise and technical assistance to the Board of
Aldermen, upon request.
         (g)   To designate appropriate other person(s) who shall carry out the
powers and duties of the Stormwater Manager.
         (h)   To take any other action necessary to administer the provisions
of this subchapter.
(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)
§ 50.142 REVIEW PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Permit required; must apply for permit. A stormwater permit is
required for all development and redevelopment unless exempt pursuant to this
subchapter. A permit may only be issued subsequent to a properly submitted and
reviewed permit application, pursuant to this section.
   (B)   Effect of permit. A stormwater permit shall govern the design,
installation, and construction of stormwater management and control practices
on the site, including structural BMPs and elements of site design for
stormwater management other than structural BMPs. The permit is intended to
provide a mechanism for the review, approval, and inspection of the approach to
be used for the management and control of stormwater for the development or
redevelopment site consistent with the requirements of this subchapter, whether
the approach consists of structural BMPs or other techniques such as low-impact
or low-density design. The permit does not continue in existence indefinitely
after the completion of the project; rather, compliance after project
construction is assured by the maintenance provisions of this subchapter.
   (C)   Authority to file applications. All applications required pursuant to
this subchapter shall be submitted to the Stormwater Manager by the land owner
or the land owner's duly authorized agent.
   (D)   Establishment of application requirements, schedule, and fees.
      (1)   Application contents and form. The Stormwater Manager shall
establish requirements for the content and form of all applications and shall
amend and update those requirements from time to time. At a minimum, the
stormwater permit application shall describe in detail how post-development
stormwater runoff will be controlled and managed, the design of all stormwater
facilities and practices, and how the proposed project will meet the
requirements of this subchapter.
      (2)   Submission schedule. The Stormwater Manager shall establish a
submission schedule for applications. The schedule shall establish deadlines by
which complete applications must be submitted for the purpose of ensuring that
there is adequate time to review applications, and that the various stages in
the review process are accommodated.
      (3)   Permit review fees. The Board of Aldermen shall establish permit
review fees as well as policies regarding refund of any fees upon withdrawal of
an application, and may amend and update the fees and policies from time to
time.
      (4)   Administrative manual. For applications required under this
subchapter, the Stormwater Manager shall compile the application requirements,
submission schedule, fee schedule, a copy of this subchapter, and information
on how and where to obtain the design manual in an administrative manual, which
shall be made available to the public.
   (E)   Submittal of Complete Application.
      (1)   Applications shall be submitted to the Stormwater Manager pursuant
to the application submittal schedule in the form established by the Stormwater
Manager, along with the appropriate fee established pursuant to this section.
      (2)   An application shall be considered as timely submitted only when it
contains all elements of a complete application pursuant to this subchapter,
along with the appropriate fee. If the Stormwater Manager finds that an
application is incomplete, the applicant shall be notified of the deficient
elements and shall be provided with an opportunity to submit a complete
application. However, the submittal of an incomplete application shall not
suffice to meet a deadline contained in the submission schedule established
above.
   (F) Review. Within 45 calendar days after a complete application is
submitted, the Stormwater Manager shall review the application and determine
whether the application complies with the standards of this subchapter.
      (1)   Approval. If the Stormwater Manager finds that the application
complies with the standards of this subchapter, the Stormwater Manager shall
approve the application. The Stormwater Manager may impose conditions of
approval as needed to ensure compliance with this subchapter. The conditions
shall be included as part of the approval.
      (2)   Fails to comply. If the Stormwater Manager finds that the
application fails to comply with the standards of this subchapter, the
Stormwater Manager shall notify the applicant and shall indicate how the
application fails to comply. The applicant shall have an opportunity to submit
a revised application.
      (3)   Revision and subsequent review.
         (a)   A complete revised application shall be reviewed by the
Stormwater Manager within 45 calendar days after its re-submittal and shall be
approved, approved with conditions or disapproved.
         (b)   If a revised application is not resubmitted within 30 calendar
days from the date the applicant was notified, the application shall be
considered withdrawn and a new submittal for the same or substantially the same
project shall be required along with the appropriate fee for a new submittal.
         (c)   One re-submittal of a revised application may be submitted
without payment of an additional permit review fee. Any re-submittal after the
first re-submittal shall be accompanied by an additional permit review fee, as
established pursuant to this subchapter.
(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)
§ 50.143 APPLICATIONS FOR APPROVAL.
   (A)   Concept plan and consultation meeting.
      (1)   Before a stormwater management permit application is deemed
complete, the Stormwater Manager or developer may request a consultation on a
concept plan for the post-construction stormwater management system to be
utilized in the proposed development project. This consultation meeting should
take place at the time of the preliminary plan of subdivision or other early
step in the development process. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss the
post-construction stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed
project, as well as to discuss and assess constraints, opportunities and
potential approaches to stormwater management designs before formal site design
engineering is commenced. Local watershed plans, the CAMA Land Use Plan, and
other relevant resource protection plans should be consulted in the discussion
of the concept plan.
      (2)   To accomplish this goal, the following information should be
included in the concept plan, which should be submitted in advance of the
meeting:
         (a)   Existing conditions/proposed site plans. Existing conditions and
proposed site layout sketch plans, which illustrate at a minimum: existing and
proposed topography; perennial and intermittent streams; mapping of predominant
soils from soil surveys (if available); boundaries of existing predominant
vegetation; proposed limits of clearing and grading; and location of existing
and proposed roads, buildings, parking areas and other impervious surfaces.
         (b)   Natural resources inventory. A written or graphic inventory of
natural resources at the site and surrounding area as it exists prior to the
commencement of the project. This description should include a discussion of
soil conditions, geologic features, topography, wetlands, and native vegetative
areas on the site, as well as the location and boundaries of other natural
feature protection and conservation areas such as ponds, floodplains, stream
buffers and other setbacks. Particular attention should be paid to
environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or
constraints for development and stormwater management.
         (c)    Stormwater management system concept plan. A written or graphic
concept plan of the proposed post-development stormwater management system
including: preliminary selection and location of proposed structural stormwater
controls; low-impact design elements; location of existing and proposed
conveyance systems such as grass channels, swales, and storm drains; flow
paths; location of floodplain/floodway limits; relationship of site to upstream
and downstream properties and drainages; and preliminary location of any
proposed stream channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings.
   (B)   Stormwater management permit application.
      (1)   The stormwater management permit application shall detail how post-
development stormwater runoff will be controlled and managed and how the
proposed project will meet the requirements of this subchapter, including the
section entitled Standards. All such plans shall be prepared by a qualified
registered North Carolina professional engineer, surveyor, soil scientist or
landscape architect, and the engineer, surveyor, soil scientist or landscape
architect shall perform services only in their area of competence, and shall
verify that the design of all stormwater management facilities and practices
meets the submittal requirements for complete applications, that the designs
and plans are sufficient to comply with applicable standards and policies found
in the Design Manual, and that the designs and plans ensure compliance with
this subchapter.
      (2)   The submittal shall include all of the information required in the
submittal checklist established by the Stormwater Manager. Incomplete
submittals shall be treated pursuant to §
50.142(E).
   (C)   As-built plans and final approval.
      (1)   Upon completion of a project, and before a certificate of occupancy
shall be granted, the applicant shall certify that the completed project is in
accordance with the approved stormwater management plans and designs, and shall
submit actual "as built" plans (both hardcopy and electronic format) for all
stormwater management facilities or practices after final construction is
completed.
      (2)   The plans shall show the final design specifications for all
stormwater management facilities and practices and the field location, size,
depth, and planted vegetation of all measures, controls, and devices, as
installed. The designer of the stormwater management measures and plans shall
certify, under seal, that the as-built stormwater measures, controls, and
devices are in compliance with the approved stormwater management plans and
designs and with the requirements of this subchapter. A final inspection and
approval by the Stormwater Manager shall occur before the release of any
performance securities.
   (D)   Other permits. No certificate of compliance or occupancy shall be
issued by the Town of Wrightsville Beach Planning and Inspections Department
without final as-built plans and a final inspection and approval by the
Stormwater Manager, except where multiple units are served by the stormwater
practice or facilities, in which case the Town of Wrightsville Beach Planning
and Inspections Department may elect to withhold a percentage of permits or
certificates of occupancy until as-built plans are submitted and final
inspection and approval has occurred.
(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)
§ 50.144 APPROVALS.
   (A)   Effect of approval. Approval authorizes the applicant to go forward
with only the specific plans and activities authorized in the permit. The
approval shall not be construed to exempt the applicant from obtaining other
applicable approvals from local, state, and federal authorities.
   (B)   Time limit/expiration.
      (1)   An approved plan shall become null and void if the applicant fails
to make substantial progress on the site within one year after the date of
approval. The Stormwater Manager may grant a single, one-year extension of this
time limit, for good cause shown, upon receiving a written request from the
applicant before the expiration of the approved plan.
      (2)   In granting an extension, the Stormwater Manager may require
compliance with standards adopted since the original application was submitted
unless there has been substantial reliance on the original permit and the
change in standards would infringe the applicant's vested rights.
(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)
§ 50.145 APPEALS.
   (A)   Right of appeal. Any aggrieved person affected by any decision, order,
requirement, or determination relating to the interpretation or application of
this subchapter made by the Stormwater Manager, may file an appeal to the Board
of Adjustment within 30 days.
   (B)   Filing of appeal and procedures. Appeals shall be taken within the
specified time period by filing a notice of appeal and specifying the grounds
for appeal on forms provided by the Town of Wrightsville Beach. The Stormwater
Manager shall transmit to the Town Manager all documents constituting the
record on which the decision appealed from was taken. The hearing conducted by
the Board of Adjustment shall be conducted in the nature of a quasi-judicial
proceeding with all findings of fact supported by competent, material evidence.
   (C)   Review by superior court. Every decision of the Board of Adjustment
shall be subject to superior court review by proceedings in the nature of
certiorari. Petition for review by the superior court shall be filed with the
clerk of superior court within 30 days after the latter of the following:
      (1)   The written decision of the Board of Adjustment is filed; or
      (2)   A written copy of the decision is delivered to every aggrieved
party who has filed a written request for such copy with the Board of
Adjustment at the time of its hearing of the case.
(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)
§ 50.146 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   All development and redevelopment to which this subchapter applies shall
comply with the standards of this section.
(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)
§ 50.147 IMPERVIOUS SURFACE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Setback requirement.
      (1)   All impervious surfaces, except for roads, paths, and water
dependent structures, shall be located at least 30 feet landward of all
perennial and intermittent surface waters.
      (2)   A perennial or intermittent surface water shall be deemed present
if the feature is shown on either the most recent version of the soil survey
map prepared by the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the United States
Department of Agriculture (USDA) or the most recent complete version of the 1:
24,000 scale (7.5 minute) quadrangle topographic maps prepared by the United
States Geologic Survey (USGS). An exception to this requirement may be allowed
when surface waters are not present in accordance with the provisions of 15A
NCAC 2B .0233 (3)(a) or similar site-specific determination made by the
Division of Water Quality, using Division-approved methodology.
   (B)   Land draining to shellfish waters. All development activities that are
located within 75 feet of waters designated by the Environmental Management
Commission as estuarine shellfishing waters or 575 feet from designated
Outstanding Resource Waters shall be limited to a maximum impervious surface
density of 36%.
(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)
§ 50.148 STRUCTURAL STORMWATER CONTROL REQUIREMENTS.
   Owners of property subject to this subchapter and required to install
structural stormwater control measures shall implement those measures in
compliance with each of the following standards:
   (A)   The measures shall control and treat runoff from the first one and
one-half inches of rain. Runoff volume drawdown time for wet detention ponds
shall be a minimum of 48 hours, but not more than 120 hours.
   (B)   All structural stormwater treatment systems used shall be designed to
have a minimum of 90% average annual removal for Total Suspended Solids (TSS).
   (C)   General engineering design criteria for all projects shall be in
accordance with 15A NCAC 2H .1008(c), as explained in the design manual.
   (D)   The measure shall discharge the storage volume at a rate equal or less
than the pre-development discharge rate for the one-year, 24-hour storm, or as
specified in the design manual.
   (E)   The approval of the stormwater permit shall require enforceable
restrictions on property usage that runs with the land, including recorded deed
restrictions and protective covenants, to ensure that future development and
redevelopment maintains the site consistent with the approved project plans.
(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)
§ 50.149 STANDARDS FOR STORMWATER CONTROL MEASURES.
   (A)   Evaluation according to contents of design manual. All stormwater
control measures and stormwater treatment practices (also referred to as Best
Management Practices, or BMPs) required under this subchapter shall be
evaluated by the Stormwater Manager according to the policies, criteria, and
information, including technical specifications and standards and the specific
design criteria for each stormwater practice, in the design manual. The
Stormwater Manager shall determine whether proposed BMPs will be adequate to
meet the requirements of this subchapter.
   (B)   Determination of adequacy; presumptions and alternatives. Stormwater
treatment practices that are designed, constructed, and maintained in
accordance with the criteria and specifications in the design manual will be
presumed to meet the minimum water quality and quantity performance standards
of this subchapter. Whenever an applicant proposes to utilize a practice or
practices not designed and constructed in accordance with the criteria and
specifications in the design manual, the applicant shall have the burden of
demonstrating that the practice(s) will satisfy the minimum water quality and
quantity performance standards of this subchapter. The Stormwater Manager may
require the applicant to provide the documentation, calculations, and examples
necessary for the Stormwater Manager to determine whether such an affirmative
showing is made.
   (C)   Separation from seasonal high water table. For BMPs that require a
separation from the seasonal high-water table, the separation shall be provided
by at least 12 inches of naturally occurring soil above the seasonal high-water
table.
(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)
§ 50.150 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Any person may petition the town for a variance granting permission to
use the person's land in a manner otherwise prohibited by this subchapter. To
qualify for a variance, the petitioner must show all of the following:
      (1)   Unnecessary hardships would result from strict application of this
subchapter.
      (2)   The hardships result from conditions that are peculiar to the
property, such as the location, size, or topography of the property.
      (3)   The hardships did not result from actions taken by the petitioner.
      (4)   The requested variance is consistent with the spirit, purpose, and
intent of this subchapter; will secure public safety and welfare; and will
preserve substantial justice.
   (B)   The town may impose reasonable and appropriate conditions and
safeguards upon any variance it grants.
   (C)   Statutory exceptions. Notwithstanding division (A) of this section,
exceptions from the 30-foot landward location of built-upon area requirement as
well as the deed restrictions and protective covenants requirements shall be
granted in any of the following instances:
      (1)   When there is a lack of practical alternatives for a road crossing,
bridge, or utility crossing as long as it is located, designed, constructed,
and maintained to minimize disturbance, provide maximum nutrient removal,
protect against erosion and sedimentation, have the least adverse effects on
aquatic life and habitat, and protect water quality to the maximum extent
practicable through the use of BMPs.
      (2)   When there is a lack of practical alternatives for a stormwater
management facility; a stormwater management pond; or a utility, including, but
not limited to, water, sewer, or gas construction and maintenance corridor, as
long as it is located 15 feet landward of all perennial and intermittent
surface waters and as long as it is located, designed, constructed, and
maintained to minimize disturbance, provide maximum nutrient removal, protect
against erosion and sedimentation, have the least adverse effects on aquatic
life and habitat, and protect water quality to the maximum extent practicable
through the use of BMPs.
      (3)   A lack of practical alternatives may be shown by demonstrating
that, considering the potential for a reduction in size, configuration, or
density of the proposed activity and all alternative designs, the basic project
purpose cannot be practically accomplished in a manner which would avoid or
result in less adverse impact to surface waters.
(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)
§ 50.151 ADDITIONAL STANDARDS FOR SA WATERS.
   (A)   In addition to the standards for stormwater handling set out in the
Design Manual, development and redevelopment that is located within one-half
mile of and that drains in whole or part to class SA waters shall design and
implement the best stormwater practices that ensure reduction of fecal coliform
loading. The best practices are ones that result in the highest degree of fecal
die-off and control sources of fecal coliform to the maximum extent practicable
while still meeting the other requirements of this subchapter.
   (B)   No direct discharge or expansion of discharges to SA waters. No new
direct points of stormwater discharge to SA waters or increases in the volume
of stormwater flow through conveyances or increases in capacity of conveyances
in existing stormwater conveyance systems that drain to Class SA waters are
permitted. Any modification or redesign of a stormwater conveyance system
within the contributing drainage basin must not increase the net amount or rate
of stormwater discharge through existing outfalls to Class SA waters. Diffuse
flow of stormwater at a nonerosive velocity to a vegetated buffer or other
natural area capable of providing effective infiltration of the runoff from the
one-year, 24-hour storm shall not be considered a direct point of stormwater
discharge. Consideration shall be given to soil type, slope, vegetation, and
existing hydrology when evaluating infiltration effectiveness.
(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)
§ 50.152 GENERAL STANDARDS FOR MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Function of BMPs as intended. The owner of each structural BMP
installed pursuant to this subchapter shall maintain and operate it so as to
preserve and continue its function in controlling stormwater quality and
quantity at the degree or amount of function for which the structural BMP was
designed.
   (B)   Annual maintenance inspection and report.
      (1)   The Stormwater Manager will conduct annual inspections of all
structural BMPs installed pursuant to this subchapter. At the Stormwater
Manager's discretion, the town may require the person responsible for
maintenance of any structural BMP installed to submit to the Stormwater Manager
an inspection report from one of the following persons performing services only
in their area of competence: a qualified registered North Carolina professional
engineer, surveyor, landscape architect, soil scientist, aquatic biologist, or
person certified by the North Carolina Cooperative Extension Service for
stormwater treatment practice inspection and maintenance.
      (2)   The inspection report shall contain all of the following:
         (a)   The name and address of the land owner;
         (b)   The recorded book and page number of the lot of each structural
BMP;
         (c)   A statement that an inspection was made of all structural BMPs;
         (d)   The date the inspection was made;
         (e)   A statement that all inspected structural BMPs are performing
properly and are in compliance with the terms and conditions of the approved
maintenance agreement required by this subchapter; and
         (f)   The original signature and seal of the engineer, surveyor, or
landscape architect.
      (3)   All inspection reports shall be on forms supplied by the Stormwater
Manager. An original inspection report shall be provided to the Stormwater
Manager, if requested, beginning one year from the date of as-built
certification and each year thereafter on or before the date of the as-built
certification.
(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)
§ 50.153 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT.
   (A)   In general.
      (1)   Prior to the conveyance or transfer of any lot or building site to
be served by a structural BMP pursuant to this subchapter, and prior to
issuance of any permit for development or redevelopment requiring a structural
BMP pursuant to this subchapter, the applicant or owner of the site must
execute an operation and maintenance agreement that shall be binding on all
subsequent owners of the site, portions of the site, and lots or parcels served
by the structural BMP. Until the transference of all property, sites, or lots
served by the structural BMP, the original owner or applicant shall have
primary responsibility for carrying out the provisions of the maintenance
agreement.
      (2)   The operation and maintenance agreement shall require the owner or
owners to maintain, repair and, if necessary, reconstruct the structural BMP,
and shall state the terms, conditions, and schedule of maintenance for the
structural BMP. In addition, it shall grant to the Town of Wrightsville Beach a
right of entry in the event that the Stormwater Manager has reason to believe
it has become necessary to inspect, monitor, maintain, repair, or reconstruct
the structural BMP; however, in no case shall the right of entry, of itself,
confer an obligation on the town to assume responsibility for the structural
BMP.
      (3)   The operation and maintenance agreement must be approved by the
Stormwater Manager prior to plan approval, and it shall be referenced on the
final plat and shall be recorded with the county Register of Deeds upon final
plat approval. A copy of the recorded maintenance agreement shall be given to
the Stormwater Manager within 14 days following its recordation.
   (B)   Special requirement for homeowners' and other associations. For all
structural BMPs required pursuant to this subchapter and that are to be or are
owned and maintained by a homeowners' association, property owners'
association, or similar entity, the required operation and maintenance
agreement shall include all of the following provisions:
      (1)   That the association shall continuously operate and maintain the
stormwater control and management facilities.
      (2)   That the town shall have a right of entry to inspect, monitor,
maintain, repair, and reconstruct structural BMPs.
      (3)   That the town shall be allowed to recover from the association and
its members any and all costs the town expends to maintain or repair the
structural BMPs or to correct any operational deficiencies. Failure to pay the
town all of its expended costs, after 45 days written notice, shall constitute
a breach of the agreement. In case of a deficiency, the town shall thereafter
be entitled to bring an action against the association and its members to pay,
or foreclose upon the lien hereby authorized by the agreement against the
property, or both. Interest, collection costs, and attorney fees shall be added
to the recovery.
      (4)   That this agreement shall not obligate the town to maintain or
repair any structural BMPs, and the town shall not be liable to any person for
the condition or operation of structural BMPs.
      (5)   That this agreement shall not in any way diminish, limit, or
restrict the right of the town to enforce any of its ordinances as authorized
by law.
      (6)   That the association, or similar entity, shall indemnify and hold
harmless the Town of Wrightsville Beach for any costs and injuries arising from
or related to the structural BMP, unless the town has agreed in writing to
assume the maintenance responsibility for the BMP and has accepted dedication
of any and all rights necessary to carry out that maintenance.
(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)
§ 50.154 INSPECTION PROGRAM.
   (A)   Inspections and inspection programs by the Town of Wrightsville Beach
may be conducted or established on any reasonable basis, including but not
limited to routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon
complaints or other notice of possible violations; and joint inspections with
other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may
include, but are not limited to, reviewing maintenance and repair records;
sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in BMPs;
and evaluating the condition of BMPs.
   (B)   If the owner or occupant of any property refuses to permit such
inspection, the Stormwater Manager shall proceed to obtain an administrative
search warrant pursuant to G.S. § 15-27.2 or its successor. No person shall
obstruct, hamper or interfere with the Stormwater Manager while carrying out
his or her official duties.
(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)
§ 50.155 NOTICE TO OWNERS.
    (A)   Deed recordation and indications on plat. The applicable operations
and maintenance agreement pertaining to every structural BMP shall be
referenced on the final plat and shall be recorded with the county Register of
Deeds upon final plat approval. If no subdivision plat is recorded for the
site, then the operations and maintenance agreement shall be recorded with the
county Register of Deeds so as to appear in the chain of title of all
subsequent purchasers under generally accepted searching principles.
   (B)   Signage. Where appropriate in the determination of the Stormwater
Manager to assure compliance with this subchapter, structural BMPs shall be
posted with a conspicuous sign stating who is responsible for required
maintenance. The sign shall be maintained so as to remain visible and legible.
(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)
§ 50.156 RECORDS OF INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE ACTIVITIES.
   The owner of each structural BMP shall keep records of inspections,
maintenance, and repairs for at least five years from the date of creation of
the record and shall submit the same upon reasonable request to the Stormwater
Manager.
(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)
§ 50.157 NUISANCE.
    The owner of each stormwater BMP, whether structural or non-structural BMP,
shall maintain it so as not to create or result in a nuisance condition.
(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)
§ 50.158 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Authority to enforce. The provisions of this subchapter shall be
enforced by the Stormwater Manager, his or her designee, or any authorized
agent of the Town of Wrightsville Beach. Whenever this section refers to the
Stormwater Manager, it includes his or her designee as well as any authorized
agent of the Town of Wrightsville Beach.
   (B)   Violation unlawful. Any failure to comply with an applicable
requirement, prohibition, standard, or limitation imposed by this subchapter,
or the terms or conditions of any permit or other development or redevelopment
approval or authorization granted pursuant to this subchapter, is unlawful and
shall constitute a violation of this subchapter.
   (C)   Each day a separate offense. Each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate and distinct violation or offense.
   (D)   Responsible persons/entities.
      (1)   Any person who erects, constructs, reconstructs, alters (whether
actively or passively), or fails to erect, construct, reconstruct, alter,
repair or maintain any structure, BMP, practice, or condition in violation of
this subchapter shall be subject to the remedies, penalties, and/or enforcement
actions in accordance with this section. Persons subject to the remedies and
penalties set forth herein may include any architect, engineer, builder,
contractor, developer, agency, or any other person who participates in,
assists, directs, creates, causes, or maintains a condition that results in or
constitutes a violation of this subchapter, or fails to take appropriate
action, so that a violation of this subchapter results or persists; or an
owner, any tenant or occupant, or any other person, who has control over, or
responsibility for, the use or development of the property on which the
violation occurs.
      (2)   For the purposes of this section, responsible person(s) shall
include but not be limited to:
         (a)   Person maintaining condition resulting in or constituting
violation. An architect, engineer, builder, contractor, developer, agency, or
any other person who participates in, assists, directs, creates, causes, or
maintains a condition that constitutes a violation of this subchapter, or fails
to take appropriate action, so that a violation of this subchapter results or
persists.
         (b)   Responsibility for land or use of land. The owner of the land on
which the violation occurs, any tenant or occupant of the property, any person
who is responsible for stormwater controls or practices pursuant to a private
agreement or public document, or any person, who has control over, or
responsibility for, the use, development or redevelopment of the property.
(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)
§ 50.159 REMEDIES.
   The remedies and penalties provided herein are not exclusive; may be
exercised singly, simultaneously, or cumulatively; may be combined with any
other remedies authorized under the law; and may be exercised in any order.
   (A)   Withholding of certificate of occupancy. The Stormwater Manager or
other authorized agent may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the
building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site and
served by the stormwater practices in question until the applicant or other
responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of
violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein.
   (B)   Disapproval of subsequent permits and development approvals. As long
as a violation of this subchapter continues and remains uncorrected, the
Stormwater Manager or other authorized agent may withhold, and the Board of
Aldermen may disapprove, any request for permit or development approval or
authorization provided for by this subchapter or the (zoning, subdivision, and/
or building regulations, as appropriate) for the land on which the violation
occurs.
   (C)   Injunction, abatements, etc. The Stormwater Manager, with the written
authorization of the Town Manager, may initiate an action in a court of
competent jurisdiction for a mandatory or prohibitory injunction and order of
abatement to correct a violation of this subchapter. Any person violating this
subchapter shall be subject to the full range of equitable remedies provided in
the General Statutes or at common law.
   (D)   Correction as public health nuisance, costs as lien, etc. If the
violation is deemed dangerous or prejudicial to the public health or public
safety and is within the geographic limits prescribed by North Carolina G.S. §
160A-193, the Stormwater Manager, with the written authorization of the Town
Manager, may cause the violation to be corrected and the costs to be assessed
as a lien against the property.
   (E)   Stop work order. The Stormwater Manager may issue a stop work order to
the person(s) violating this subchapter. The stop work order shall remain in
effect until the person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice
of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described
therein. The stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the person
to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations.
(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07; Am. Ord. 1590, passed 1-29-09)
§ 50.160 PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Initiation/complaint. Whenever a violation of this subchapter occurs,
or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such
complaint shall state fully the alleged violation and the basis thereof, and
shall be filed with the Stormwater Manager, who shall record the complaint. The
complaint shall be investigated promptly by the Stormwater Manager.
   (B)   Inspection. The Stormwater Manager shall have the authority, upon
presentation of proper credentials, to enter and inspect any land, building,
structure, or premises to ensure compliance with this subchapter.
   (C)   Notice of violation and order to correct.
      (1)   When the Stormwater Manager finds that any building, structure, or
land is in violation of this subchapter, the Stormwater Manager shall notify,
in writing, the property owner or other person violating this subchapter. The
notification shall indicate the nature of the violation, contain the address or
other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring, order the
necessary action to abate the violation, and give a deadline for correcting the
violation. If civil penalties are to be assessed, the notice of violation shall
also contain a statement of the civil penalties to be assessed, the time of
their accrual, and the time within which they must be paid or be subject to
collection as a debt.
      (2)   The Stormwater Manager may deliver the notice of violation and
correction order personally, by the Code Enforcement Administrator, by
certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, or by any means
authorized for the service of documents by Rule 4 of the North Carolina Rules
of Civil Procedure.
      (3)   If a violation is not corrected within a reasonable period of time,
as provided in the notification, the Stormwater Manager may take appropriate
action under this subchapter to correct and abate the violation and to ensure
compliance with this subchapter.
   (D)   Extension of time.
      (1)   A person who receives a notice of violation and correction order,
or the owner of the land on which the violation occurs, may submit to the
Stormwater Manager a written request for an extension of time for correction of
the violation. On determining that the request includes enough information to
show that the violation cannot be corrected within the specified time limit for
reasons beyond the control of the person requesting the extension, the
Stormwater Manager may extend the time limit as is reasonably necessary to
allow timely correction of the violation, up to, but not exceeding 90 days. The
Stormwater Manager may grant 30-day extensions in addition to the foregoing
extension if the violation cannot be corrected within the permitted time due to
circumstances beyond the control of the person violating this subchapter.
      (2)   The Stormwater Manager may grant an extension only by written
notice of extension. The notice of extension shall state the date prior to
which correction must be made, after which the violator will be subject to the
penalties described in the notice of violation and correction order.
   (E)   Enforcement after time to correct. After the time has expired to
correct a violation, including any extension(s) if authorized by the Stormwater
Manager, the Stormwater Manager shall determine if the violation is corrected.
If the violation is not corrected, the Stormwater Manager may act to impose one
or more of the remedies and penalties authorized by this subchapter.
   (F)   Emergency enforcement. If delay in correcting a violation would
seriously threaten the effective enforcement of this subchapter or pose an
immediate danger to the public health, safety, or welfare, then the Stormwater
Manager may order the immediate cessation of a violation. Any person so ordered
shall cease any violation immediately. The Stormwater Manager may seek
immediate enforcement, without prior written notice, through any remedy or
penalty authorized by this section.
(Ord. 1538,passed 5-24-07)
§ 50.161 ILLICIT DISCHARGES AND CONNECTIONS.
   (A) Illicit discharges. No person shall cause or allow the discharge,
emission, disposal, pouring, or pumping directly or indirectly to any
stormwater conveyance, the waters of the state, or upon the land in manner and
amount that the substance is likely to reach a stormwater conveyance or the
waters of the State, any liquid, solid, gas, or other substance, other than
stormwater. Prohibited substances include but are not limited to: oil, anti-
freeze, chemicals, fertilizer, animal waste, paints, garbage, litter and
rubbish. It is also prohibited to deposit in any manner (sweeping, blowing,
etc) yard waste, to include but not limited to: grass and plant trimmings,
leaves and thatch. Non-stormwater discharges associated with the following
activities are allowed provided that they do not significantly impact water
quality:
      (1)   Water line flushing;
      (2)   Landscape irrigation;
      (3)   Rising ground waters;
      (4)   Uncontaminated ground water infiltration (as defined at 40 CFR
35.2005(20));
      (5)   Uncontaminated pumped ground water;
      (6)   Discharges from potable water sources;
      (7)   Foundation and footing drains;
      (8)   Air conditioning condensation;
      (9)   Irrigation water;
      (10)   Lawn watering;
      (11)   Individual residential car washing;
      (12)   Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;
      (13)   Street wash water; and
      (14)   Other non-stormwater discharges for which a valid NPDES discharge
permit has been approved and issued by the State of North Carolina, and
provided that any such discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system
shall be authorized by the Town of Wrightsville Beach.
   (B)   Illicit connections.
      (1)   Connections to a stormwater conveyance or stormwater conveyance
system that allow the discharge of non-stormwater, other than the exclusions
described in division (A) above, are unlawful. Prohibited connections include,
but are not limited to: floor drains, waste water from washing machines or
sanitary sewers and wash water from commercial vehicle washing or steam
cleaning.
      (2)   Where such connections exist in violation of this section and said
connections were made prior to the adoption of this provision or any other
ordinance prohibiting such connections, the property owner or the person using
said connection shall remove the connection within one year following the
effective date of this subchapter. However, the one-year grace period shall not
apply to connections which may result in the discharge of hazardous materials
or other discharges which pose an immediate threat to health and safety, or are
likely to result in immediate injury and harm to real or personal property,
natural resources, wildlife, or habitat.
      (3)   Where it is determined that said connection:
         (a)   May result in the discharge of hazardous materials or may pose
an immediate threat to health and safety, or is likely to result in immediate
injury and harm to real or personal property, natural resources, wildlife, or
habitat, or
         (b)   Was made in violation of any applicable regulation or ordinance,
other than this section; the Stormwater Manager shall designate the time within
which the connection shall be removed. In setting the time limit for
compliance, the Stormwater Manager shall take into consideration:
            1.   The quantity and complexity of the work,
            2.   The consequences of delay,
            3.   The potential harm to the environment, to the public health,
and to public and private property, and
            4.   The cost of remedying the damage.
   (C)   Spills.
      (1)   Spills or leaks of polluting substances released, discharged to, or
having the potential to released or discharged to the stormwater conveyance
system, shall be contained, controlled, collected, and properly disposed. All
affected areas shall be restored to their preexisting condition.
      (2)   Persons in control of the polluting substances immediately prior to
their release or discharge, and persons owning the property on which the
substances were released or discharged, shall immediately notify the Town of
Wrightsville Beach Public Works Department of the release or discharge, as well
as making any required notifications under state and federal law. Notification
shall not relieve any person of any expenses related to the restoration, loss,
damage, or any other liability which may be incurred as a result of said spill
or leak, nor shall such notification relieve any person from other liability
which may be imposed by state or other law.
   (D)   Nuisance. Illicit discharges and illicit connections which exist
within the Town of Wrightsville Beach are hereby found, deemed, and declared to
be dangerous or prejudicialed to the public health or public safety and are
found, deemed, and declared to be public nuisances. Such public nuisances shall
be abated in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 130: Offenses
Against Public Peace And Safety.
(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)
§ 50.162 STORMWATER FEES.
   (A)   Stormwater fees as set forth in the Schedule of Fees listed below
shall be determined from time to time by the Board of Aldermen and kept on file
in the office of the Town Clerk. Adjustments to the stormwater fees shall be
applicable to the first building following the effective date of the modified
rate.
   (B)   The following fees are hereby established by the Board of Aldermen:
 
Parcel size in square feet Monthly fee
<2,000                     $6
>2,000 and <8,000          $15
>8,000 and <20,000         $18
>20,000 and <100,000       $30
>100,000                   $60
 
   For the purposes of this section, “parcel” shall mean a tax parcel as
identified on the records of the New Hanover County Tax Office.
(Ord. 1516, passed 8-24-06; Am. Ord. 571B, passed 6-20-22)
§ 50.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
the penalties set forth in this section. If the violation is continued, each
day's violation shall be a separate offense.
   (B)   Any violation of this chapter shall subject the offender to a civil
penalty to be recovered by the town in a civil action in the nature of a debt
if the offender does not pay any penalty called for hereunder within the
prescribed period of time after notice of violation of the chapter. Penalties
shall be as prescribed herein but in no case less than $10 per day.
   (C)   This chapter may be enforced by an appropriate equitable remedy such
as an injunction or order of abatement issuing from any court of competent
jurisdiction.
   (D)   This chapter may be enforced by any, all, or a combination of the
remedies as authorized and prescribed above.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of §§
50.120 through
50.126, including any mandatory water conservation measure.
   (F)   A violation of §§
50.130 through
50.162 may subject the violator to a civil penalty to be recovered in a civil
action in the nature of a debt if the violator does not pay the penalty within
30 days after notice of the violation is issued by the Stormwater Manager.
      (1)   Civil penalties.
         (a)   Any person who allows, acts in concert, participates, directs,
or assists directly or indirectly in the creation of a violation of §§
50.130 through
50.162 is subject to a civil penalty. A civil penalty may be assessed from the
date the violation first occurs.
         (b)   Civil penalties may be assessed up to the full amount of penalty
to which the town is subject for violations of its NPDES stormwater permit, or
up to $5,000 for each violation of §§
50.130 through
50.162, whichever is greater. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate
violation.
         (c)   No penalty shall be assessed until the person alleged to be in
violation has been served notice of the violation as described in §
50.160(C). Refusal to accept the notice shall not relieve the violator of the
obligation to pay such penalty.
         (d)   Penalties may be assessed concurrently with a notice of
violation for any of the following:
            1.   Obstructing, hampering or interfering with an authorized town
representative who is in the process of carrying out official duties under §§
50.130 through
50.162;
            2.   A repeated violation for which a notice of violation was
previously given to the person responsible for the violation; or
            3.   Willful violation of §§
50.130 through
50.162.
         (e)   In determining the amount of a civil penalty, the Stormwater
Manager shall consider any relevant mitigating and aggravating factors
including, but not limited to the following:
            1.   Degree and extent of harm caused by the violation;
            2.   Cost of rectifying the damage;
            3.   Amount of money saved through noncompliance;
            4.   Whether the violator took reasonable measures to comply with
this chapter;
            5.   Knowledge of the requirements by the violator and/or
reasonable opportunity or obligation to obtain such knowledge;
            6.   Whether the violator voluntarily took reasonable measures to
restore any areas damaged by the violation;
            7.   Whether the violation was committed willfully;
            8.   Whether the violator reported the violation to an appropriate
authority;
            9.   Technical and economic reasonableness of reducing or
eliminating the discharge; and
            10.   Prior record of the violator in complying or failing to
comply with §§
50.130 through
50.162 or any other water pollution control ordinance or regulation.
         (f)   The Stormwater Manager shall determine the amount of the civil
penalty to be assessed under this section and shall make written demand for
payment upon the person in violation and shall set forth in detail a
description of the violation for which the penalty was imposed. Notice of said
assessment shall be by registered or certified mail or other means reasonably
calculated to give adequate notice. If a violator does not pay a civil penalty
assessed by the town within 30 days after it is due, the Stormwater Manager
shall request the Town Attorney to institute a civil action to recover the
amount of the assessment. The civil action shall be brought in New Hanover
County Superior Court or in any other court of competent jurisdiction. Such
civil action must be filed within three years of the date the notice of
assessment was served on the violator.
         (g)   An assessment that is not contested is due when the violator is
served with a notice of assessment. An assessment that is contested is due at
the conclusion of the administrative and judicial review of the assessment.
         (h)   Civil penalties collected pursuant to this chapter shall be
credited to the town’s water and sewer fund as a non-tax revenue.
         (i)   A violation of §§
50.130 through
50.162 shall not constitute a misdemeanor or infraction punishable under G.S. §
14-4, but instead shall be subject to the civil penalties fixed by this
section.
      (2)   Cost recovery. The town may also recover from the violator:
         (a)   Costs to restore damaged property based on restoration costs,
which include, but are not limited to, cleanup costs, value of animal and plant
life damaged, and town administrative costs;
         (b)   Compensation for damage to or destruction of the stormwater
system.
   (G)   In no case shall the maximum penalty per day exceed the amount as
specified in §
50.999(F)(1)(b).
(Ord., passed 7-28-83; Am. Ord. 1422, passed 8-8-02; Am. Ord. 1538, passed 5-
24-07; Am. Ord. 1590, passed 1-29-09)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
Chapter
   
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
   
71.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
   
72.   BICYCLE REGULATIONS
   
73.   PEDESTRIANS
   
74.   STOPPING, STANDING, AND PARKING
   
75.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
      
SCHEDULE I:   SPEED LIMITS
      
SCHEDULE II:   TRUCKS PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS
      
SCEHEDULE III:   ESTABLISHMENT OF ONE-WAY STREETS
   
76.   PARKING SCHEDULES
      
SCHEDULE I:   PARKING LIMITED TO CERTAIN TIMES
      
SCHEDULE II:   DIAGONAL PARKING
      
SCHEDULE III:   PROHIBITED PARKING
      
SCHEDULE IV:   PENALTIES FOR OVERTIME PARKING IN A METERED SPACE AND OTHER
VIOLATIONS OF THE PARKING ORDINANCES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   Definitions
   
70.02   Compliance with title
   
70.03   Obedience to police
   
70.04   Authority of police and fire officials
   
70.05   Public employees to obey traffic regulations
   
70.06   Exemptions for authorized emergency vehicles
   
70.07   Regulations to apply to push carts; bicycles
Traffic Control Devices
   
70.15   Obedience to traffic devices required
   
70.16   Standards for signs and signs required for enforcement of chapter
   
70.17   One-way streets and alleys; signs required
   
70.18   No turn signs and turning markers
   
70.19   Stop signs; location; design
   
70.20   Yield signs
   
70.21   Zones of quiet; school zones
   
70.22   No parking and safety zone markers
   
70.23   Traffic control signal legend
   
70.24   Flashing signals
   
70.25   Traffic lanes
   
70.26   Display of unauthorized signs, signals, or markings
   
70.27   Interference with traffic control devices prohibited
   
70.28   Schedule of traffic and parking regulations
Registration; Display of Decal
   
70.35   License tax imposed
   
70.36   Display of decal
   
70.37   Payment of tax
   
70.38   Amount of tax
   
70.39   Nonresident owners
Trailers, Motor Homes, Travel Trailers, and Campers
   
70.46   Definitions
   
70.47   Parking prohibitions
   
70.48   Parking on public property for the purpose of habitation prohibited
   
70.49   Parking on private property; permit required
 
   
70.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Traffic regulations, see
Ch. 71
Statutory reference:
   Power of local authorities, see G.S. § 20-169
   Registration of vehicles, see G.S. § 20-84
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this title the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   "ALLEY." A thoroughfare through the middle of a block.
   "AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE." Vehicles of the Fire Department, police
vehicles and ambulances, and emergency vehicles of municipal departments or
public service corporations as are designated or authorized by the Chief of
Police.
   "BICYCLE." Every device propelled by human power upon which any person may
ride, having two tandem wheels either of which is over 20 inches in diameter.
   "BLOCK." A portion of any street located between two intersections adjacent
to each other.
   "BUSINESS DISTRICT." The territory contiguous to a highway when 75% or more
of frontage thereon for a distance of 300 feet or more is occupied by buildings
in use for business.
   "COMMERCIAL VEHICLE." Every vehicle designed, maintained, or used primarily
for the transportation of property. (See also "MOTOR VEHICLE" and "VEHICLE.")
   "CROSSWALK." That portion of a roadway ordinarily included within the
prolongation or connection of the lateral lines of sidewalks at intersections.
Any portion of a roadway distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines
or other markings on the surface.
   "CURB LOADING ZONE." A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive
use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.
(See also "FREIGHT CURB LOADING ZONE" and "PASSENGER CURB LOADING ZONE.")
   "DRIVER." Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
   "FREIGHT CURB LOADING ZONE." A space adjacent to a curb for the exclusive
use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight or passengers. (See
also "CURB LOADING ZONE" and "PASSENGER CURB LOADING ZONE.")
   "INTERSECTION." The area embraced within the prolongation of the lateral
curb lines or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of two or more highways
which join one another at an angle, whether or not one highway crosses the
other.
   "LANED ROADWAY." A roadway which is divided into two or more clearly-marked
lanes for vehicular traffic.
   "MOTORCYCLE." Every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider
and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the
ground, but excluding a tractor.
   "MOTOR VEHICLE." Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle
which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but
not operated upon rails. (See also "COMMERCIAL VEHICLE" and "VEHICLE.")
   "OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES." All signs, signals, markings, and
devices not inconsistent with this title placed or erected by authority of the
Board of Aldermen or official having jurisdiction for the purpose of
regulating, warning, or guiding traffic.
   "OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNALS." Any device, whether manually, electrically, or
mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to
proceed.
   "PARK." The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than
temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or
unloading.
   "PASSENGER CURB LOADING ZONE." A place adjacent to a curb reserved for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers.
   "PEDESTRIAN." Any person afoot.
   "POLICE OFFICER." Every officer of the Police Department or any officer
authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of
traffic regulations.
   "PRIVATE ROAD" or "DRIVEWAY." Every road or driveway not open to the use of
the public as a matter of right for purposes of vehicular travel.
   "PUBLIC CONVEYANCE." Any vehicle other than a taxicab or railroad train for
transporting for fare.
   "RESIDENCE DISTRICT." The territory contiguous to a highway not comprising a
business district, where 75% or more of the frontage on the highway for a
distance of 300 feet or more is mainly occupied by dwellings and buildings in
use for business.
   "RIGHT-OF-WAY." The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway.
   "ROADWAY." That portion of a street improved, designed, or ordinarily used
for vehicular travel, exclusive of the shoulder.
   "SAFETY ZONE." The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for
the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or
indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set
apart as a safety zone.
   "SIDEWALK." That portion of a street between the curb lines or the lateral
lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of
pedestrians.
   "STANDING." Any stopping of a vehicle, whether occupied or not.
   "STOP."
      (1)    "STOP." When required, means complete cessation of movement.
      (2)   "STOP" or "STOPPING." When prohibited, means any stopping of a
vehicle except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the direction of a police officer or traffic control sign or
signal.
   "STREET" or "HIGHWAY." The entire width between property lines of every way
or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public, as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular traffic.
   "THROUGH HIGHWAY." Every street or highway or portion thereof at the
entrances to which vehicular traffic from intersecting streets or highways is
required by law to stop before entering or crossing the same and when stop
signs are erected as provided in this chapter.
   "TRAFFIC." Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars, and
other conveyances either singly or together while using any street for purposes
of travel.
   "VEHICLE." Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn, except devices moved by human power or used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks; provided, that a bicycle or a
ridden animal shall be deemed a "VEHICLE." (See also "COMMERCIAL VEHICLE" and
"MOTOR VEHICLE")
(Am. Ord. 1626, passed 4-22-10; Am. Ord. 1823, passed 3-11-21)
§ 70.02 COMPLIANCE WITH TITLE.
   No person shall do any act forbidden or shall fail to perform any act
required in this title.
('72 Code, § ll-2)
Penalty, see § 70.99
Statutory reference:
   Violation of ordinances, see G.S. § 14-4
§ 70.03 OBEDIENCE TO POLICE.
   No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction by a police officer.
('72 Code, § ll-3)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.04 AUTHORITY OF POLICE AND FIRE OFFICIALS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the police officers to enforce all street
traffic laws and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic.
   (B)   Police officers are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand,
or signal in conformance with traffic laws. However, in the event of a fire or
other emergency, to expedite traffic, or to safeguard pedestrians, police
officers may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the
provisions of the traffic laws.
('72 Code, § 11-4)
   (C)   Fire Department officials when at the scene of a fire, may direct or
assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity.
Statutory reference:
   Firemen as traffic officers, see G.S § 20-114.1
§ 70.05 PUBLIC EMPLOYEES TO OBEY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   The provisions of this title shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned
by, or used in the service of the United States government, this state, county,
or town. No driver shall violate any of the provisions of this title, except as
otherwise permitted in this title or by state statute.
('72 Code, § 11-5)
§ 70.06 EXEMPTIONS FOR AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   (A)   The provisions of this title regulating the operation, parking, and
standing of vehicles shall apply to authorized emergency vehicles. However, a
driver when operating the vehicle in any emergency, unless otherwise directed
by a police officer, may:
      (1)   Park or stand, notwithstanding the provisions of this title.
      (2)   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation.
      (3)    Exceed the prima facie speed limits so long as he does not
endanger life or property.
      (4)   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in
specified directions so long as he does not endanger life or property.
   (B)   The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, protect the driver of any
authorized emergency vehicle from the consequences of his reckless disregard of
the safety of others.
('72 Code, § 11-6)
Statutory reference:
   Emergency vehicles, see G.S. § 20-156
§ 70.07 REGULATIONS TO APPLY TO PUSH CARTS; BICYCLES.
   Every person propelling any push cart or riding a bicycle or an animal upon
a roadway and every person driving any animal-driven vehicle shall be subject
to the provisions of this title applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except
those provisions which, by their very nature, can have no application.
('72 Code, § 11-7)
Cross-reference:
   Bicycle regulations, see
Ch. 72
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
§ 70.15 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC DEVICES REQUIRED.
   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the directions of any official traffic
control device applicable thereto and placed in accordance with the traffic
ordinances of this town, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject
to the exceptions (as set forth in § 70.06) granted the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle.
('72 Code, § 11-9)
Penalty, see § 70.99
Statutory reference:
   Traffic control, see G.S. § 160A-300
§ 70.16 STANDARDS FOR SIGNS AND SIGNS REQUIRED FOR ENFORCEMENT OF CHAPTER.
   (A)   Signs utilized for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this
chapter shall be placed in locations as approved by the Town Manager or his
designee and consistent with standards promulgated by the Manual of Uniform
Traffic Devices promulgated by the U.S. Department of Transportation. In the
event a series of signs are placed (for example, a series of "no parking"
signs), such signs shall be located so that a sign can be read from the
preceding sign taking into consideration the line of sight and field
conditions. All such signs shall be installed in accordance with guidelines
provided for in the Manual of Uniform Traffic Devices promulgated by the U.S.
Department of Transportation. Except where circumstances dictate otherwise,
signs shall be installed on the right side of the road and at a height of at
least seven feet.
   (B)   No provisions of this title for which signs are required shall be
enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the alleged
violation, a sign as required by the provisions of this chapter has not been
installed. Whenever a particular section does not state that signs are
required, the section shall be effective without signs being placed to give
notice thereof.
('72 Code, § 11-10) (Am. Ord. 1330, passed 4-8-99)
§ 70.17 ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS; SIGNS REQUIRED.
   Whenever any ordinance designates any one-way street or alley there shall be
signs giving notice thereof, and no regulation shall be effective unless the
signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement
shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite
direction is prohibited.
Cross-reference:
   One-way streets, see §
71.04
Statutory reference:
   One-way traffic, see G.S. § 20-165.1
§ 70.18 NO TURN SIGNS AND TURNING MARKERS.
   Whenever authorized signs are placed, erected, or installed indicating that
no right, left, or "U" turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey
the directions of the sign. When authorized markers, buttons, or other
indications are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be
traveled by vehicles traversing or turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle
shall disobey the directions of the indications.
('72 Code, § 11-11)
Penalty, see § 70.99
Cross-reference:
   No right- or left-turn streets, see §
71.07
   "U" turns restricted, see § 71.08
Statutory reference:
   Turning at intersections, see G.S. § 20-153
§ 70.19 STOP SIGNS; LOCATION; DESIGN.
   (A)   On through streets located within the town, there shall be a stop sign
on each street intersecting such through street or intersecting a portion
thereof unless traffic at any intersection is controlled at all times by
traffic control signals. However, at the intersection of two through streets or
at the intersection of a through street and a heavy traffic street not so
designated, stop signs shall be erected at the approaches of either of the
streets.
   (B)   The Board of Aldermen may determine and designate intersections where
a particular hazard exists upon other than through streets and may determine
whether vehicles shall stop at one or more entrances to any stop intersection,
and shall erect a stop sign at every place where a stop is required.
   (C)   Every sign erected pursuant to this title shall bear the word "Stop"
in letters not less than eight inches in height and the signs shall at
nighttime be rendered luminous by steady or flashing internal illumination, or
by a fixed floodlight projected on the face of the sign, or by efficient
reflecting elements on the face of the sign. Every stop sign shall be located
as near as practicable at the nearest line of the crosswalk on the side of the
intersection or, if none, at the nearest line of the roadway.
(Am. Ord. 1330, passed 4-8-99)
Cross-reference:
   Stopping at through streets, see §
71.01
   Stopping at certain intersections, see §
71.02
Statutory reference:
   Stop signs, see G.S. § 20-158
§ 70.20 YIELD SIGNS.
   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall, in obedience to the
sign, slow down and yield the right-of- way to any pedestrian crossing the
roadway on which he is driving and to any vehicle in movement on the main
traveled or through highway or street which is approaching, so as to arrive at
the intersection at approximately the same time as the vehicle entering the
main traveled or through street or highway.
Penalty, see § 70.99
Statutory reference:
   Erection of yield signs, see G.S. § 20-158.l
§ 70.21 ZONES OF QUIET; SCHOOL ZONES.
   (A)   Whenever authorized signs are placed indicating a zone of quiet, the
person operating a motor vehicle within the zone shall not sound the horn or
any other warning device, except in an emergency.
   (B)   Whenever authorized signs are placed designating any street or part
thereof as a school zone, drivers of motor vehicles using the street shall
exercise the greatest care for protection of children.
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.22 NO PARKING AND SAFETY ZONE MARKERS.
   Whenever authorized signs or markings are placed, erected, or installed
indicating no parking zones or safety zones, no driver of a vehicle shall
disobey the regulations in connection therewith.
('72 Code, § ll-12)
Penalty, see § 70.99
Cross-reference:
   Stopping, standing, or parking regulations, see
Ch. 74
Statutory reference:
   Safety zone defined, see G.S. § 20-4.01
§ 70.23 TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND.
   Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals exhibiting the
words "Go," "Caution," "Stop," or exhibiting differently colored lights,
successively, one at a time, the following colors only shall be used, and the
terms and lights shall indicate as follows:
   (A)   "Green" or "Go."
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight through or
turn right or left unless a sign at the place prohibits either turn. But
vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to
pedestrians lawfully within the intersection at the time the signal is
exhibited.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within
any marked or unmarked crosswalk.
   (B)   "Yellow" or "Caution", when shown following the green or "Go" signal.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the
nearest crosswalk at the intersection, but if the stop cannot be made in
safety, a vehicle may be driven cautiously through the intersection.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing the signal are advised that there is
insufficient time to cross a roadway, and any pedestrian then starting to cross
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles.
   (C)   "Red" or "Stop."
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the
nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at the point as may be indicated by a
clearly visible line and shall remain standing until green or "Go" is shown
alone.
      (2)   No pedestrian facing the signal shall enter the roadway unless he
can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic.
   (D)   "Red with green arrow."
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal may cautiously enter the
intersection only to continue the movement in the direction indicated by the
arrow but shall not interfere with other traffic.
      (2)   No pedestrian facing the signal shall enter the roadway unless he
can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic.
('72 Code, § ll-13)
Penalty, see § 70.99
Statutory reference:
   Vehicle control signs and signals, see G.S. § 20-158
§ 70.24 FLASHING SIGNALS.
   Whenever flashing red or yellow signals are used they shall require
obedience by vehicular traffic as follows:
   (A)   Flashing red stop signal. When a red lens is illuminated by rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the
nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked, and the
right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop
at a stop sign.
   (B)   Flashing yellow caution signal. When a yellow lens is illuminated with
rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the
intersection or past the signal only with caution.
('72 Code, § ll-14)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.25 TRAFFIC LANES.
   When traffic lanes have been marked, it shall be unlawful for the operator
of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep the vehicle within the boundaries of
any lane except when lawfully passing another vehicle or preparatory to making
a lawful turning movement.
Penalty, see § 70.99
Statutory reference:
   Driving within lanes, see G.S. § 20-146
§ 70.26 DISPLAY OF UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS, SIGNALS, OR MARKINGS.
   (A)   No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of any
street or highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device which
purports to be, is in imitation of, or resembles an official traffic control
device, sign, or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic,
or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official
traffic control device, sign, or signal.
   (B)   No person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority
permit upon any street or highway any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon
any commercial advertising.
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.27 INTERFERENCE WITH TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall without lawful authority attempt to or in fact alter,
deface, injure, knock down, or remove any official traffic control device,
sign, or signal or any inscription, shield, or insignia thereon, or any other
part thereof.
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.28 SCHEDULE OF TRAFFIC AND PARKING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   In addition to the provisions of this title which establish specific
traffic and parking regulations and restrictions, such traffic and parking
regulations and restrictions and the locations and/or times where and when the
same are effective may be set out upon official traffic and parking schedules
as amended from time to time by the Board of Aldermen and as set forth in
Chapters 75 and 76 of this title. Provided, that the Town Manager shall have
the authority to establish traffic and parking regulations and restrictions
where he deems necessary due to emergency situations or other situations
requiring the immediate establishment of such regulations and restrictions
where he deems necessary due to emergency situations or other situations
requiring the immediate establishment of such regulations and restrictions in
order to protect the public health, safety and welfare. Any such regulations
and restrictions enacted by the Town Manager shall be effective for a period of
30 days, at which time such regulations or restrictions shall expire.
   (B)   No person shall operate any vehicle in violation of traffic and
parking regulations and restrictions as established and set forth in the
traffic and parking schedules contained in Chapter 75 and 76 of this title.
(Ord. 1136, passed 2-14-91; Am. Ord. 1330, passed 4-8-99)
REGISTRATION; DISPLAY OF DECAL
§ 70.35 LICENSE TAX IMPOSED.
   (A)   Subject to division (B) of this section, each owner of a motor vehicle
that displays a current North Carolina license plate and resides within the
town shall pay an annual license tax for each such vehicle in the amounts set
forth in § 70.38. For purposes of this section, the owner of a motor vehicle
shall be that person owning the motor vehicle on January 1 of each year.
   (B)   The requirements of division (A) of this section shall not apply to:
      (1)   Motor vehicles owned by the town, New Hanover County, the State of
North Carolina, or the United States of America.
      (2)   Trailers.
   (C)   The term "RESIDES WITHIN THE TOWN", when referring to motor vehicles,
includes but is not limited to the following:
      (1)   Those vehicles owned or principally used by a person who
establishes a residence within the town, temporarily or permanently, for a
period of 30 days, and which vehicle is used in the town, or normally stored in
the town when not in use.
      (2)   Those vehicles used and maintained and normally stored within the
town in connection with a business located in the town. It shall be a rebuttal
presumption that when a vehicle is registered by the North Carolina Department
of Motor Vehicles at an address within the town, such address is a place of
residence for the vehicle.
(Ord. 1274, passed 6-13-96)
§ 70.36 DISPLAY OF DECAL.
   Each motor vehicle subject to the annual license tax as described in § 70.35
shall display an identification decal inside the lower left-hand corner of the
windshield of such motor vehicle. Each decal shall contain an identification
number which shall be registered with the owner's name and a record thereof
shall be maintained by the town.
(Ord. 1274, passed 6-13-96)
§ 70.37 PAYMENT OF TAX.
   The annual license tax imposed in accordance with § 70.35 shall be paid
annually on or before the first day of April of each year. Payment shall be
made at the Wrightsville Beach Police Department at 321 Causeway Drive,
Wrightsville Beach, North Carolina. At the time payment is made, a decal as
described in § 70.36 shall be issued for each vehicle subject to the tax.
(Ord. 1274, passed 6-13-96)
§ 70.38 AMOUNT OF TAX.
   The annual license tax as required in §
70.35 shall be $15. If paid after April 1, the tax shall be $30.
(Ord. 1274, passed 6-13-96; Am. Ord. 1736, passed 12-11-14; Am. Ord. 1757,
passed 2-11-16)
§ 70.39 NONRESIDENT OWNERS.
   Payment of the annual license tax and display of the decals as described in
§ 70.36 shall be permitted but not required for motor vehicles owned by
nonresident property owners.
(Ord. 1274, passed 6-13-96)
TRAILERS, MOTOR HOMES, TRAVEL TRAILERS, AND CAMPERS
§ 70.46 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   "CAMPER." A separate vehicle designed for human habitation and which can be
attached to or detached from a pickup truck, automobile, or other motor
vehicle.
   "MOTOR HOME." A self-contained vehicle designed for human habitation, with
its own motive power and with a passageway from the body of the home to the
driver's and front passenger's seats (including vehicles commonly termed
"vans.")
   "MOTOR VEHICLE." Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle
designed to run upon the highways which is pulled by a self-propelled vehicle.
   "PICKUP TRUCK CAMPER." A motor vehicle designed primarily for the
transportation of property which has been modified for human habitation by the
erection of a weather-type canopy roof, or cover over the rear bed of the
vehicle.
   "TRAILER." A vehicle without motive power designed for human habitation on
its own structure and to be drawn by a vehicle with motive power.
(Ord. 1043, passed 3-26-87; Am. Ord. 1245, passed 1-12-95)
§ 70.47 PARKING PROHIBITIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any of the vehicles defined in §
70.46 within the corporate limits of the town, except in accordance with the
provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 1043, passed 3-26-87)
Penalty, see § 151.999
§ 70.48 PARKING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle as defined in
this chapter for the purpose of habitation overnight upon any public property
within the corporate limits of the town, including but not being limited to,
public streets and street rights-of-way, sidewalks, parking lots, and any other
public areas.
(Ord. 1043, passed 3-26-87; Am. Ord. 1245, passed 1-12-95)
Penalty, see § 151.999
§ 70.49 PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY FOR PURPOSE OF HABITATION PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a camper, motor home, pickup
camper or trailer for the purpose of habitation overnight upon any private
property located within the corporate limits of the town.
(Ord. 1256, passed 8-17-95; Am. Ord. 1257, passed 9-14-95)
Penalty, see § 151.999
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A) Failure to comply with §§ 70.35 through 70.37 in a timely manner shall
subject the violator to a civil penalty of $15 for each offense. (Ord., passed
12-13-79)
   (B) In accordance with G.S. § 160A-175, and unless provided otherwise,
violation of any provision of this title for which a penalty is not already
otherwise provided shall be a misdemeanor as provided in G.S. § 14-4,
punishable upon conviction by a fine not exceeding $50 or by imprisonment not
exceeding 30 days.
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
   
71.01   Stopping; through streets
   
71.02   Stopping; certain intersections
   
71.03   Stopping when traffic obstructed
   
71.04   One-way streets
   
71.05   Driving through funeral processions
   
71.06   Left turns at certain intersections
   
71.07   No right- or left-turn streets
   
71.08   "U" turns restricted
   
71.09   Backing a vehicle
   
71.10   Emerging from alley or private driveway
   
71.11   Driving on sidewalk prohibited
   
71.12   Riding coasters, roller skates, and skateboards; restricted
   
71.13   Moving cars from parked position
   
71.14   Driving within designated traffic lanes
   
71.15   Boarding or alighting from vehicles
   
71.16   Riding on vehicles not designed for passenger use
   
71.17   Entering or jumping on vehicles without permission
   
71.18   Persons required to stay inside vehicles
   
71.19   Limit of three persons in front seat
   
71.20   Right turn on red
   
71.21   Definition of truck
   
71.22   Trucks prohibited on certain streets
Cross-reference:
   Traffic schedules, see
Ch. 75
Statutory reference:
   Operation of vehicles and rules of the road, see G.S. § 20-138 et seq.
§ 71.01 STOPPING; THROUGH STREETS.
   (A)   Those streets and parts of streets designated on the official map are
declared to be through streets for the purpose of this section.
   (B)   When stop signs are placed, erected, or installed upon highways
intersecting a through street at the entrance thereto or at the entrance to any
intersection, every driver of a vehicle shall stop in obedience to the signs
before entering the intersection and shall not proceed into or across the
through street until he has first determined that no conflict with traffic will
be involved.
('72 Code, § 11-35)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.02 STOPPING; CERTAIN INTERSECTIONS.
   Those intersections designated on the official map are declared to be stop
intersections when entered from the streets first named. When stop signs are
placed, erected, or installed at the intersections, every driver of a vehicle
or streetcar shall stop in obedience to the signs before entering the
intersections and shall not proceed into or across the through street until he
has first determined that no conflict with traffic will be involved.
('72 Code, § 11-36)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.03 STOPPING WHEN TRAFFIC OBSTRUCTED.
   No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk, unless there is
sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of
other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal
indication to proceed.
('72 Code, § 11-37)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.04 ONE-WAY STREETS.
   Upon those streets and parts of streets designated on the official map,
vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction when signs
indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every
intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited.
('72 Code, § 11-38)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.05 DRIVING THROUGH FUNERAL PROCESSIONS.
   No vehicle shall be driven through a funeral procession, except Fire
Department vehicles, police patrols, and ambulances when they are responding to
calls.
('72 Code, § 11-39)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.06 LEFT TURNS AT CERTAIN INTERSECTIONS.
   In making left turns at the street intersections designated on the official
map, all traffic shall travel to the left of the center of the intersections as
may indicated by buttons, markers, or other directing signs.
('72 Code, § 11-40)
Penalty, see § 70.99
Statutory reference:
   Turning at intersections, see G.S. § 20-153
§ 71.07 NO RIGHT- OR LEFT-TURN STREETS.
   No vehicle shall make a left turn or a right turn respectively at any street
intersection designated on the official map as a no right- or left-turn street.
('72 Code, § 11-41)
§ 71.08 "U" TURNS RESTRICTED.
   (A)    No driver shall turn any vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite
direction in the business district, except at street intersections, in the
streets or portions of streets designated in the official map.
('72 Code, § 11-42)
   (B)    No "U" turns shall be permitted at the intersectionof North Lumina
Avenue and Salisbury Street when entering said intersection from east or west
Salisbury Street. (Ord. 1009, passed 4-24-86)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.09 BACKING A VEHICLE.
   The driver of a vehicle shall not back it into any intersection or over a
crosswalk and shall not in any event back a vehicle unless the movement can be
made in safety. He shall have given ample warning to those who may be behind,
by hand and horn or other signal.
('72 Code, § 11-43)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.10 EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR PRIVATE DRIVEWAY.
   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway, or building shall
stop the vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into the
sidewalk areas extending across any alleyway, and upon entering the roadway he
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway.
('72 Code, § 11-44)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.11 DRIVING ON SIDEWALK PROHIBITED.
   The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk.
(Ord. 1105, passed 10-12-89)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.12 RIDING COASTERS, ROLLER SKATES, AND SKATEBOARDS; RESTRICTED.
   No person upon roller skates or a skateboard or riding in or by means of any
coaster, toy vehicle, or similar device shall go upon any roadway, unless to
cross a street at a crosswalk or intersection, except upon streets set aside as
play streets.
('72 Code, § 11-49)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.13 MOVING CARS FROM PARKED POSITION.
   Cars parked shall move out in the direction headed, or if they are parked at
an angle with the curb they shall back out on that angle until they have
cleared the other cars and shall then proceed in the direction they are most
nearly headed in.
('72 Code, § 11-50)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.14 DRIVING WITHIN DESIGNATED TRAFFIC LANES.
   All vehicles operated on any roadway which has been clearly marked with
lanes for traffic shall be driven as nearly as practical entirely within a
single lane and shall not be moved from the lane until the driver has first
ascertained that the movement can be made with safety.
('72 Code, § 11-51)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.15 BOARDING OR ALIGHTING FROM VEHICLES.
   No person shall board or alight from any public conveyance or other vehicle
while the vehicle is in motion.
('72 Code, § 11-52)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.16 RIDING ON VEHICLES NOT DESIGNED FOR PASSENGER USE.
   No person shall ride on any public conveyance or vehicle or any portion
thereof not designed or intended for the use of passengers. This provision
shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty or
to persons riding within truck bodies in spaces intended for merchandise.
('72 Code, § 11-53)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.17 ENTERING OR JUMPING ON VEHICLES WITHOUT PERMISSION.
   No person shall enter, jump on, or ride any automobile or other vehicle
without the consent of the owner or driver.
('72 Code, § 11-54)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.18 PERSONS REQUIRED TO STAY INSIDE VEHICLES.
   No person when riding shall allow any part of his body to protrude beyond
the limits of the vehicle in which he is riding, except to give signals as are
by law required, and no person shall hang on to any vehicle whatsoever.
('72 Code, § 11-55)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.19 LIMIT OF THREE PERSONS IN FRONT SEAT.
   No driver or person in charge of any motor vehicle shall permit more than
three persons, including the driver, to ride in the front or driver's seat of a
motor vehicle.
('72 Code, § 11-56)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.20 RIGHT TURN ON RED.
   Any vehicle after coming to a complete stop for a red light facing the
vehicle, may make a right turn after yielding to pedestrians and other vehicles
except at those intersections where right turns are prohibited.
(Ord., passed 1-9-75)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.21 DEFINITION OF TRUCK.
   For the purposes of title 7 of the Code, the term "TRUCK" shall mean trucks
that have any of the following characteristics:
   (A)   Tractor-trailer units, with or without trailers attached.
   (B)   Trucks exceeding 25 feet in length.
   (C)   Trucks exceeding seven feet in width.
   (D)   Trucks having a gross weight of 2½ tons or more.
(Ord. 1287, passed 7-10-97)
§ 71.22 TRUCKS PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS.
   No person may drive any truck over the streets set forth in Ch. 75, Sch. II.
(Ord. 1287, passed 7-10-97)
CHAPTER 72: BICYCLE REGULATIONS
Section
   
72.01   Effect of regulations
   
72.02   Traffic laws apply to persons riding bicycles
   
72.03    Obedience to traffic control devices
   
72.04   Riding on bicycles
   
72.05   Riding on roadways and bicycle paths
   
72.06   Speed
   
72.07   Carrying articles
   
72.08   Riding on sidewalks; prohibited
   
72.09   Lamps required at night
   
72.10   Clinging to motor vehicles
   
72.11   Riding on handlebars; prohibited
   
72.12   Riding without hands; prohibited
Statutory reference:
   Racing prohibited on highway, see G.S. § 20-171.2
   State definition, see G.S. § 20-171.l
§ 72.01 EFFECT OF REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not
authorize or knowingly permit any child or ward to violate any of the
provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   These regulations applicable to bicycles shall apply whenever a
bicycle is operated upon any street or upon any public path set aside for the
exclusive use of bicycles, subject to those exceptions stated herein.
§ 72.02 TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY TO PERSONS RIDING BICYCLES.
   Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the
rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a
vehicle by the laws of this state declaring rules of the road applicable to
vehicles or by this title applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except as to
special regulations in this chapter and except as to those provisions of laws
and ordinances which by their nature can have no application.
Cross-reference:
   Traffic regulations, see
Ch. 71
§ 72.03 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official
traffic control signals, signs, and other control devices applicable to
vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
   (B)   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right, left,
or U-turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey the
direction of any sign, except where the person dismounts from the bicycle to
make any turn, in which event the person shall then obey the regulations
applicable to pedestrians.
Penalty, see § 70.99
Cross-reference:
   Pedestrian regulations, see
Ch. 73
   Traffic control devices, see §§
70.15 through 70.27
§ 72.04 RIDING ON BICYCLES.
   (A)   A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a
permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
   (B)   No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the
number for which it is designed and equipped.
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.05 RIDING ON ROADWAYS AND BICYCLE PATHS.
   (A)   Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to
the right-hand side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when
passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.
   (B)   Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two
abreast, except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use
of bicycles.
   (C)   Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a
roadway, bicycle riders shall use the path and shall not use the roadway.
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.06 SPEED.
   No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and
prudent under the conditions then existing.
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.07 CARRYING ARTICLES.
   No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle, or article
which prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the handlebars.
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.08 RIDING ON SIDEWALKS; PROHIBITED.
   No person shall ride a bicycle upon any sidewalk or walkway within the town.
('72 Code, § 11-48)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.09 LAMPS REQUIRED AT NIGHT.
   No person shall ride a bicycle on any street or highway between sunset on
any day and sunrise on the following day, unless it is equipped with an
operating and lighted lantern or lamp.
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.10 CLINGING TO MOTOR VEHICLES.
   No person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller skates,
or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself to any public conveyance or
moving vehicle upon any roadway.
('72 Code, § 11-46)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.11 RIDING ON HANDLEBARS; PROHIBITED.
   No operator of a motorcycle, or bicycle, when upon a street, shall carry any
person upon the handlebar, frame, or tank of any such vehicle, nor shall any
person so ride upon any such vehicle.
('72 Code, § ll-47)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.12 RIDING WITHOUT HANDS; PROHIBITED.
   No person shall ride a bicycle or motorcycle on any street without having
his hands upon the handlebars.
('72 Code, § 11-48)
Penalty, see § 70.99
CHAPTER 73: PEDESTRIANS
Section
   
73.01   Traffic control signals
   
73.02   Crosswalk use
   
73.03   Crossing at right angles
   
73.04   Pedestrian shall yield right of-way
   
73.05   Walking along roadway
   
73.06   Drivers to exercise due care
Cross-reference:
   Traffic control devices, see
Ch. 70
Statutory reference:
   Blind person's right-of-way, see G.S. § 20-175.l
   Standing, sitting, lying on streets prohibited, see G.S. § 20-174.l
§ 73.01 TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNALS.
   Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic control signals as declared in §
70.23 but at all other places pedestrians shall be granted those rights and be
subject to the restrictions stated in this chapter.
Statutory reference:
   Pedestrians subject to traffic
    devices, see G.S. § 20-172
§ 73.02 CROSSWALK USE.
   Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of
crosswalks.
Penalty, see § 70.99
Statutory reference:
   Right-of-way at crosswalks, see G.S. § 20-173
§ 73.03 CROSSING AT RIGHT ANGLES.
   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at
right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb, except
in a crosswalk.
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 73.04 PEDESTRIAN SHALL YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked
crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
Penalty, see § 70.99
Statutory reference:
   Crossing at other than crosswalk, see G.S. § 20-174
§ 73.05 WALKING ALONG ROADWAY.
   (A)   Where sidewalks are provided it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian
to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
   (B)   Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and
upon a highway shall, when practicable, walk only on the left side of the
roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the opposite
direction.
(G.S. § 20-174)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 73.06 DRIVERS TO EXERCISE DUE CARE.
   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this chapter every driver of a
vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any
roadway; shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary; and shall
exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or
incapacitated person upon a roadway.
(G.S. § 20-174)
Penalty, see § 70.99
CHAPTER 74: STOPPING, STANDING, AND PARKING
Section
General Provisions
   
74.01   Stopping in streets prohibited; exceptions
   
74.02   Obstructing passage of other vehicles
   
74.03    Unattended vehicles
   
74.04    Parking restrictions; all times
   
74.05   Parking restrictions; certain hours
   
74.06    Reserved
   
74.07    Parking restrictions; one hour
   
74.08   Parking restrictions; twelve minutes
   
74.09   Parking in stands; prohibited
   
74.10   Parking parallel to curb
   
74.11   Backing vehicle to curb; prohibited
   
74.12   Vehicle parked with left side to curb prohibited
   
74.13    Parking within lines
   
74.14   Parking and standing; purposes prohibited
   
74.15   Parking and standing; certain places prohibited
   
74.16   Moving vehicle of another into restricted area
   
74.17   Paid parking; overtime prohibited
   
74.18   Obstructing street end water access; prohibited
   
74.19   Loading and unloading zones
   
74.20   Passenger and commercial zones
   
74.21   Operator to comply with chapter; effect of proof of ownership of
vehicle
   
74.22   Fire lanes
   
74.23   Handicapped parking
   
74.24   Regulation of parking on private property pursuant to G.S. § 160A-301
   
74.25   Designated lifeguard parking
   
74.26   Designated tow-away zone
   
74.27   Limitation on time a vehicle may remain in a parking space
Parking Meters
   
74.35   Definitions
   
74.36   Authorization; responsibility
   
74.37   Operation of meters
   
74.38   Hours of operation
   
74.38.1   Limitation on number of vehicles per parking space
   
74.39   Designation of parking meters zones
   
74.40   Parking without paying the required fee
   
74.41   Rates
   
74.42   Residential parking permits
   
74.43   Commercial I and II and contractor parking permits
   
74.44   Fraudulent use of parking permit
   
74.45   Creation of Harbor Island Residential Parking District
   
74.46   Parking restrictions in the Harbor Island Residential Parking District
   
74.47   Exceptions
   
74.48   Old Causeway Drive, Keel Street and Marina Street
   
74.49   Parking restrictions for Gene Floyd Drive, the public parking lot
adjacent to tennis courts located on the Town Hall complex and the town’s
historic square adjacent to Salisbury Street, and the South Channel Drive Park
Enforcement
   
74.50   Notice to violator
   
74.51   Contents of notice
   
74.52   Settlement of claim
   
74.53   Other remedies
   
74.54   Fines to be paid to General Fund
   
74.55   Immobilization of vehicles
   
74.56   Appeal of parking violations
 
   
74.99 Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Parking schedules, see
Ch. 76
Statutory reference:
   Off street parking facilities, see G.S. § 160A-536
   Signals on stopping, standing, or turning, see G.S. § 20-154
   Stopping on highway prohibited, see G.S. § 20-161
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 74.01 STOPPING IN STREETS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
   No vehicle shall stop in any street except for the purpose of parking as
prescribed in this chapter, unless the stop is made necessary by the approach
of fire apparatus, by the approach of a funeral or other procession which is
given the right-of-way, by the stopping of a public conveyance, by the lowering
of railway gates, by the giving of traffic signals, by the passing of some
other vehicle or a pedestrian, or by some emergency. In any case covered by
these exceptions the vehicle shall stop so as not to obstruct any footway,
pedestrian aisle, safety zone, crossing, or street intersection if it can be
avoided.
('72 Code, § ll-15)
Penalty, see § 74.99
§ 74.02 OBSTRUCTING PASSAGE OF OTHER VEHICLES.
   No vehicle shall so stand on any street as to interrupt or interfere with
the passage of public conveyances or other vehicles.
('72 Code, § ll-16)
Penalty, see § 74.99
§ 74.03 UNATTENDED VEHICLES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave the engine or motor of any
motor vehicle running while it is standing parked upon the streets.
Penalty, see § 74.99
Statutory reference:
   Leaving vehicle unattended prohibited, see G.S. § 20-163
§ 74.04 PARKING RESTRICTIONS; ALL TIMES.
   When signs are placed, erected, or installed giving notice thereof, or the
curbing has been painted yellow in lieu of signs, no person shall park a
vehicle at any time upon such streets located within the town.
('72 Code, § 11-17) (Am. Ord. 1331, passed 4-8-99)
Penalty, see § 74.99
§ 74.05 PARKING RESTRICTIONS; CERTAIN HOURS.
   When signs are placed, erected, or installed in each block giving notice
thereof, no person shall park a vehicle between the hours of l:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m., upon any of the streets designated on the official map, unless other
hours are designated. However, this section shall not apply to vehicles parked
on the streets between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. when the owners
thereof are at work in the building or on the premises in front of or near
which the vehicles are parked.
('72 Code, § 11-18)
Penalty, see § 74.99
§ 74.06 (RESERVED)
§ 74.07 PARKING RESTRICTIONS; ONE HOUR.
   When signs are placed, erected, or installed in each block giving notice
thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for longer than one hour at any time
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. of any day upon any of the streets
designated on the official map. The changing of the position of a vehicle from
one point directly to another point within the same block shall be deemed to be
one continuous parking period.
('72 Code, § 11-20)
Penalty, see § 74.99
§ 74.08 PARKING RESTRICTIONS; TWELVE MINUTES.
   When signs and/or parking meters are placed, erected or installed in each
block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for longer than 12
minutes at any time upon any streets or other locations designated in the
parking schedule set forth in Chapter 76. The changing of the position of a
vehicle from one point directly to another point within the same block shall be
deemed to be one continuous parking.
('72 Code, § 11-21) (Am. Ord. 1442, passed 4-24-03)
Penalty, see § 74.99
§ 74.09 PARKING IN STANDS; PROHIBITED.
   Those streets or parts of streets designated on the official map shall be
reserved as stands for that specific purpose and at that exact location. No
automobile or other vehicle shall park therein, except those for which the
space or stand has been designated.
('72 Code, § 11-23)
Penalty, see § 74.99
§ 74.10 PARKING PARALLEL TO CURB.
   Where not otherwise indicated by this chapter and where the street is not
marked to show how vehicles shall park, all vehicles shall park parallel to the
curb and not more than 12 inches therefrom.
('72 Code, § 11-25)
Penalty, see § 74.99
§ 74.11 BACKING VEHICLE TO CURB; PROHIBITED.
   Except as provided herein, no vehicle shall remain backed up to a curb
except when actually loading or unloading. Provided, however, that this
prohibition shall not apply to motorcycles which shall be permitted to park
with the rear of the motorcycle backed up to a curb. The provisions of this
section shall not apply to events sponsored by the Town.
('72 Code, § 11-26) (Am. Ord. 1574, passed 4-24-08; Am. Ord. 1602, passed 6-11-
09)
Penalty, see § 74.99
§ 74.12 VEHICLE PARKED WITH LEFT SIDE TO CURB PROHIBITED.
   No vehicle shall stop with its left side to the curb in the business
district. However, on one-way streets vehicles shall stop headed in the
direction of traffic.
('72 Code, § 11-27) (Am. Ord. 1442, passed 4-24-03)
Penalty, see § 74.99
§ 74.13 PARKING WITHIN LINES.
   On any street or public parking lot which is marked off with lines
indicating the parking spaces for cars, the cars shall be parked between the
lines.
('72 Code, § 11-28; Am. Ord. 1337, passed 6-24-99)
Penalty, see § 74.99
§ 74.14 PARKING AND STANDING; PURPOSES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any street for the principal
purposes of:
   (A)   Displaying it for sale.
   (B)   Washing, greasing, or repairing the vehicle, except for repairs
necessitated by an emergency.
   (C)   Storage thereof by garages, dealers, or other persons when the storage
is not incident to the bona fide use and operation of the automobile or other
vehicles.
   (D)   Storage in any marked parking space of any detached trailer or van
when the towing unit has been disconnected or for the purpose of transferring
merchandise or freight from one vehicle to another.
   (E)   Advertising.
('72 Code, § 11-31) (Am. Ord. 1570, passed 2-25-08)
Penalty, see § 74.99
§ 74.15 PARKING AND STANDING; CERTAIN PLACES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a
police officer or traffic control device in any of the following places:
   (A)   On the sidewalk.
   (B)   Within an intersection.
   (C)   On a crosswalk.
   (D)   Within 30 feet of any flashing beacon, stop sign, or traffic control
signal located at the side of a street or roadway.
   (E)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic.
   (F)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure or within any underbase
structure.
   (G)   Within 15 feet in either direction of the entrance to a hotel,
theater, hospital, sanatorium, or any public building.
   (H)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped, standing, or parked at the
edge or curb of a street.
   (I)   On any town property that is not clearly designated for parking
purposes. Designation for parking purposes shall be accomplished by the use of
signs indicating that the property is available for parking purposes. Provided,
that the provisions of this section shall not apply to town property on which
parking is authorized by ordinance, to parking in connection with special
events sponsored or approved by the town, to parking by town owned vehicles and
to parking authorized by a permit issued by the Town Manager or his or her
designee.
('72 Code, § 11-33) (Am. Ord. 1633, passed 7-15-10)
Penalty, see § 74.99
§ 74.16 MOVING VEHICLE OF ANOTHER INTO RESTRICTED AREA.
   No person shall move a vehicle which he does not own into any prohibited
area or sufficiently away from the curb to constitute a violation of this
chapter.
('72 Code, § 11-32)
Penalty, see § 74.99
§ 74.17 PAID PARKING; OVERTIME PROHIBITED.
   Any person parking any vehicle overtime nearby, abreast of, or in front of
any parking sign/paystation shall be subject to a penalty as set forth in §
74.99.
(Ord., passed 5-10-79; Am. Ord. 1857, passed 2-8-24)
§ 74.18 OBSTRUCTING STREET END WATER ACCESS; PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to park, leave, place, or cause to be parked,
left, or placed, either permanently or temporarily on any street ends or street
rights-of-way between the paved or traveled portion of the street and the
waters of the sounds, creeks, channels, and ocean contiguous to the shores of
the town any motor vehicles, trailers of any kind, boats, or personal property
of any kind unless otherwise designated by the Board of Aldermen.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to launch any boats or vessels from street ends
or street rights-of-way between the paved or traveled portion of the street and
the waters of the sounds, creeks, channels, and ocean contiguous to the shores
of the town, by trailer or vehicle of any kind, and no vehicle or trailer shall
be driven, pulled, or trailed in any way across street ends or street rights-
of-way as described hereinabove.
   (C)   Notwithstanding the provisions of (A) and (B) above, boats may be
launched from street ends and transported to the ocean or sound at street ends
by sand dolly. Sand dollies may be left at street ends during daylight hours
only, and then only if they do not block or impede access of others over street
ends to the water.
   (D)   All sand dollies left at street ends under the provisions of (C) above
shall have the owner's name and address clearly displayed and attached thereto.
(Ord., passed 8-9-79)
Penalty, see § 74.99
§ 74.19 LOADING AND UNLOADING ZONES.
   (A)   Whenever vehicle loading and unloading zones are designated in
Chapter 76 and when signs are placed, erected, or installed giving notice
thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand, or park any
vehicle for any purpose or period of time except in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Whenever a passenger loading and unloading zone is designated and
signed, no person may park any vehicle in any such zone for any purpose other
than the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers, and then only for a
period not to exceed 15 minutes. The driver of such vehicle must remain in or
at the vehicle.
   (C)   Whenever a commercial vehicle loading and unloading zone is designated
and signed, no person may park any vehicle in any such zone for any purpose
other than the expeditious loading or pick up of material and goods or
unloading and delivery. No person shall park any vehicle in a commercial
loading zone for more than one hour unless the person obtains a permit for
loading or unloading from the Chief of Police as provided herein.
   (D)   The Chief of Police is authorized to issue permits for parking in a
commercial vehicle loading and unloading zone for more than one hour for the
purpose of loading and unloading when he or she finds that such parking is
necessary to complete the loading or unloading and the extended parking will
not endanger the public's safety.
(Am. Ord. 1444, passed 4-24-03; Am. Ord. 1545, passed 8-9-07)
Penalty, see § 74.99
§ 74.20 PASSENGER AND COMMERCIAL ZONES.
   The streets, or parts thereof, designated on the official map, are
designated as passenger and commercial loading and unloading zones, and no
person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle therein during the hours of 8:00
a.m. to 6:00 p.m. for any purpose other than the expeditious loading or
unloading of passengers or commercial products, and then only for a period not
to exceed one hour.
Penalty, see § 74.99
§ 74.21 OPERATOR TO COMPLY WITH CHAPTER; EFFECT OF PROOF OF OWNERSHIP OF
VEHICLE.
   The person actually operating or in control of the operation of the vehicle
at the time the vehicle is parked, shall be charged with the duty of complying
with the provisions of this chapter. However, proof of ownership of any vehicle
found parked in violation of this chapter shall be prima facie evidence that
the owner parked the vehicle.
§ 74.22 FIRE LANES.
   Pursuant to the provisions of G.S. § 20-162(b), and for the protection and
safety of the lives and property of the citizens of the town, there are hereby
established certain fire lanes as set forth in this section. Fire lanes may be
designated on private property which constitutes a public vehicular area as
that term is defined by G.S. § 20-4.01(32) (or by a subsequent statute amending
this statutory section) and on any highway or street as that term is defined in
G.S. § 20-4.01(13)(or by a subsequent statute amending this statutory section).
   (A)    Fire lanes may be designated on any portion of a highway or street or
public vehicular area as those terms are defined herein when the parking or
placing of vehicles or obstructions in the area designated as a fire lane would
interfere with the proper ingress or egress of fire fighting trucks or other
emergency vehicles, equipment or personnel.
   (B)    Fire lanes shall be clearly marked by appropriate aboveground signs,
or signs and pavement markings. The person or legal entity in possession of the
property on which a designation of a fire lane is made shall be responsible for
installation and maintenance of the required signs or pavement markings. All
signs and pavement markings utilized under the provisions of this section shall
be approved by the town.
   (C)    No person shall park a vehicle or permit it to stand, whether
attended or unattended, or put or place any object, structure, or obstruction,
in a fire lane which has been established under the provisions of this section;
however, persons loading or unloading supplies or merchandise may park
temporarily in a fire lane located in a shopping center or mall parking lot as
long as the vehicle is not left unattended. It shall be lawful for governmental
vehicles or nongovernmental emergency vehicles, including rescue squad
vehicles, to stop, stand, or travel within such fire lanes when required to do
so in the performance of their official duties.
   (D)    The following fire lanes are hereby established in accordance with
this section: That portion of the Galleria at Wrightsville Shopping Center
property designated as fire lanes by signs, pavement markings, or other
appropriate markings.
(Ord. 1012, passed 4-24-86)
Penalty, see § 74.99
§ 74.23 HANDICAPPED PARKING.
   (A)   No person shall park or leave standing a vehicle in any parking space
located on a public street or in an off-street parking facility owned or leased
by the town and designated for use by the public as parking facilities and
which has been appropriately designated for the handicapped when the vehicle so
parked does not display the distinguishing license plate, placard or
identification card as provided in G.S. § 20-37.6.
   (B)   Vehicles displaying the distinguishing license plate, placard or
identification card as provided in G.S. § 20-37.6 may park in designated
handicapped parking spaces at any location in the Town without the payment of
any fee. However, it shall be unlawful for such vehicles to park in any parking
meter space not designated for handicapped parking without paying the required
fee.
(Ord. 1131, passed 1-10-91; Am. Ord. 1782, passed 1-15-19)
Penalty, see § 74.99
§ 74.24 REGULATION OF PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY PURSUANT TO G.S. § 160A-301.
   (A)   In accordance with the provisions of G.S. § 160A-301(d), the Board of
Aldermen hereby regulates the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles in
those areas identified in division (E) below.
   (B)   No person may mark any vehicle in any part of an area designated in
division (E) below in which parking is prohibited. No parking areas shall be
designated by yellow curb markings, no parking signs, or other traffic control
devices which indicate that parking is prohibited in the locations and under
the circumstances described therein. The owner or person in general charge of
the operation and control of the areas shall designated all areas in which
parking is prohibited.
   (C)   Parking is permitted only at specified times or for a specific
duration within those portions of the areas designated in division (E) below
which have been designated as limited parking areas. Limited parking areas
shall be designated by signs or other traffic control devices which indicate
the circumstances and times during which parking shall be allowed. No person
may park a vehicle in any limited parking areas except as allowed by the sign
or traffic control device regulating that area. The owner or person in general
charge of the operation and control of the area shall designated all areas in
which the duration or time of parking is limited or in which parking is
restricted to certain vehicles.
   (D)   A change of position of a vehicle from one point directly to another
point within the same parking lot shall be deemed one continuous parking
period. The parking period shall be as designated on traffic signs erected
within the parking lot regulating the parking time limit. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner or person in general control of the operation and
control of that area to erect such signs.
   (E)   The designated areas subject to the provisions of this section are as
follows:
      (1)   Parking lot of the United States Post Office located at 26 Causeway
Drive, Wrightsville Beach, North Carolina.
(Ord. 1307, passed 4-23-98)
§ 74.25 DESIGNATED LIFEGUARD PARKING.
   Designated lifeguard parking spaces shall be used only by Town of
Wrightsville Beach municipal vehicles or those vehicles appropriately
identified as being operated by a member of the Town of Wrightsville Beach
Ocean Rescue. All other vehicles will be subject to penalties outlined in
Chapter 76, Schedule IV.
(Ord. 1597, passed 5-14-09)
§ 74.26 DESIGNATED TOW-AWAY ZONE.
   Bob Sawyer Drive, extending from the intersection with Causeway Drive to a
point immediately north of the Public Safety Building Emergency Vehicle Exit
Driveway is designated as a tow-away zone. Any vehicle parked on the roadside
or roadway will be issued a parking citation and the vehicle will be subject to
removal at owner expense.
(Ord. 1660, passed 7-14-11)
§ 74.27 LIMITATION ON TIME A VEHICLE MAY REMAIN IN A PARKING SPACE.
   No vehicle shall park in a parking meter space, a space designated for
parking or any location in which parking is permitted for more than seven
consecutive 24 hour periods. This limitation shall apply even though all fees
required for such parking are paid in a timely manner.
(Ord 1773, passed 3-8-18; Am. Ord. 1774, passed 4-12-18) Penalty, see §
74.99
PARKING METERS
§ 74.35 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   “COMPACT PARKING SPACE.” A parking space marked as a compact parking space
and intended for use by a small vehicle where the entire vehicle fits within
the marked lines of the parking space.
   “METERED PARKING.” Parking that is regulated through the use of parking
meters, pay stations, pay by telephone or any other electronic or mechanical
means.
   "OPERATOR." Every person who shall operate a vehicle as the owner thereof,
or as the agent, employee or by permission of the owner, or who is in actual
physical control of a vehicle.
   "PARK" or "PARKING." The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
upon a street otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of, and while actually
engaged in, receiving or discharging passengers or loading or unloading
merchandise or in obedience to traffic regulations, signals, or signs or an
involuntary stopping of a vehicle by reason of causes beyond the control of the
operator of the vehicle.
   “PARKING DISTRICT.” An area encompassing specific streets in which special
parking rules and procedures apply.
   "PARKING METER." Any mechanical device or meter, not inconsistent with this
subchapter, placed or erected for the regulation of parking by authority of
this subchapter, installed in such a manner as to indicate, by proper legend,
the legal parking time established by the town and which, when operated, shall
at all times indicate the balance of legal parking time and, at the expiration
of such period, shall indicate illegal or overtime parking.
   “PARKING METER SPACE.” Any space within a parking meter zone where the
available time for parking is regulated either through a parking meter or other
means and duly designated for the parking of a single vehicle by lines painted
or otherwise durably marked on the curb or on the surface of the street.
   “PARKING METER ZONE.” The portion of any street wherein parking is regulated
through the use of parking meters, pay stations, pay by telephone or any other
electronic or mechanical means.
   “STREET.” Any public street, avenue, road, alley, highway, lane, path or
other public place located in the town and established for the use of vehicles.
   “VEHICLE.” Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is taken
or may be transported upon a highway, except a device which is operated upon
rails or tracks.
(Ord. 1081, passed 7-14-88; Am. Ord. 1678, passed 5-10-12; Am. Ord. 1745,
passed 5-28-15)
§ 74.36 AUTHORIZATION; RESPONSIBILITY.
   The Board of Aldermen shall have the authority and responsibility to order
the installation, operation, setting of rates and maintenance of paid parking
on public streets and in off-street parking facilities operated by the town.
(Ord. 1081, passed 7-14-88; Am. Ord. 1782, passed 1-15-19; Am. Ord. 1857,
passed 2-8-24)
§ 74.37 OPERATION OF METERS.
   (A)   All persons parking a vehicle in a parking meter space shall deposit a
valid coin or coins of the United States of America in the adjacent parking
meter in order to activate such meter immediately after the vehicle is parked
in such parking meter space. Coin or coins of sufficient value may be inserted
in such meter at the time to cause the indicator to indicate the maximum
permissible legal parking duration permitted for that parking space, or an
amount of time less than the maximum allowable time.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit in any parking meter
any slug, device, or substitute for coins of the United States of America.
   (C)   The purposes of the parking meters are to provide a readily viable
means of enforcing the parking duration regulations in effect for the parking
space and to facilitate the frequent turnover of space usage.
(Ord. 1806, passed 7-17-20)
§ 74.38 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (A)   Paid parking shall be in effect for the regulation of parking within
the town from March 1 through October 31 daily between the hours of 9:00 a.m.
and 7:00 p.m. except as set forth hereinafter.
   (B)   In the South Lumina parking lot (624 S. Lumina Ave.) at access #36; on
the north and south sides of East and West Salisbury Street to include the area
extending from the eastern end of Salisbury Street at Johnnie Mercer's Pier at
access #16 westward to the end of Salisbury Street at the foot of the bridge
located on the east side of Banks Channel; in the Shell Island lot (2398 N.
Lumina Ave.) at access #4 (the L-shaped lot); in the Shell Island lot (2698 N.
Lumina Ave.) at access #2; in the Ocean View Lot at access #3; in the Moore’s
Inlet Lot at access #8; along Jack Parker Blvd. at access #44, and in the Wynn
Plaza lot, metered parking shall be in effect for the regulation of parking
from March 1 through October 31 daily between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 8:00
p.m.
   (C)   Parking restrictions for Gene Floyd Drive, the public parking lot
adjacent to the tennis courts and the parking adjacent in the town's historic
square adjacent to Salisbury Street shall be as set forth in §
74.49 hereinafter.
   (D)   In all other locations designated as paid parking zones, except as
otherwise provided in this chapter, paid parking shall be in effect for the
regulation of parking from March 1 through October 31 daily between the hours
of 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
(Ord. 1081, passed 7-14-88; Am. Ord. 1085, passed 9-8-88; Am. Ord. 1366, passed
7-13-00; Am. Ord. 1379, passed 5-10-01; Am. Ord. 1385, passed 6-14-01; Am. Ord.
1458, passed 3-25-04; Am. Ord. 1625, passed 4-8-10; Am. Ord. 1757, passed 2-11-
16; Am. Ord. 1763, passed 2-9-17; Am. Ord. 1773, passed 3-8-18; Am. Ord. 1782,
passed 1-15-19; Am. Ord. 1857, passed 2-8-24)
§ 74.38.1 LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF VEHICLES PER PARKING SPACE.
   (A)   No more than one motor vehicle or vehicle as defined in §
70.01 may park in any marked parking space within the town limits of the Town
of Wrightsville Beach with the following exceptions:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this code, up to four motorcycles
as defined in §
70.01 may legally park in a single marked parking space. From March 1 until
October 31 and between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., up to four
motorcycles as defined in §
70.01 may legally park in a single marked parking space provided the
appropriate meter has been activated or one such vehicle displays appropriate
receipts indicating that the required fee has been paid for parking through the
appropriate pay station. This exception shall not apply to any marked parking
space that would normally require a motor vehicle to park parallel to the flow
of traffic or parallel to the curb of a sidewalk.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this code, motor vehicles with
attached trailers requiring more than one marked parking space to accommodate
their length during the period March 1 through October 31 and between the hours
of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., may park in any parking space where parking is
regulated through the use of parking meters, pay stations, pay by telephone or
any other electronic or mechanical means provided the required payment is made
for each marked parking space occupied by the vehicle and the attached trailer.
No such vehicle may park in any fashion that will block or partially block the
normal flow of traffic.
      (3)   Recreational vehicles requiring more than one marked parking space
to accommodate their length during the period March 1 through October 31 and
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., may park in parking meter spaces
or on streets where parking is controlled through the use of pay stations
provided that the required payment is made for each marked parking space
occupied by the vehicle. Such vehicles may not park in any fashion that will
block or partially block the normal flow of traffic.
   (B)   Additional provisions.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this code, during the period March
1 through October 31 and between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., if more
than one motor vehicle is parked in a parking meter space and the meter
controlling such parking meter space is registering as having paid time, the
motor vehicle closest to the meter shall be considered the vehicle legally
occupying such space. Any other motor vehicle occupying such space shall be
issued an appropriate civil citation for violation of the provisions of this
section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this code, during the period March
1 through October 31 and between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., if more
than one motor vehicle as defined herein is parked in a marked parking space
regulated through the use of a pay station, the motor vehicles parked in such
marked parking space not displaying an appropriate receipt indicating that the
required fee has been paid for parking through the appropriate pay station
shall be issued a civil citation for violation of the provisions of this
section.
      (3)   During the period March 1 through October 31 and between the hours
of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., motor vehicles with attached trailers and
recreational vehicle requiring more than one marked parking space because of
length shall be issued civil citations for each unpaid marked parking space
where parking is controlled by parking meters or pay stations.
(Ord. 1551, passed 9-27-07; Am. Ord. 1572, passed 3-13-08; Am. Ord. 1723,
passed 3-25-14; Am. Ord. 1745, passed 5-28-15)
§ 74.39 DESIGNATION OF PARKING METER ZONES.
   The following parking meter zones are hereby established on those streets
within the town as specified below:
   (A)   South Lumina Avenue, east and west side, Stone Street to Snyder
Street.
   (B)   North Lumina Avenue, west side, Columbia Street to Sweeney Street.
   (C)   Jack Parker Boulevard, south side, all.
   (D)   South Lumina Avenue, east and west sides, Iula Street to Sunset
Street.
   (E)   Stone Street, south side, all.
   (F)   East Salisbury Street, north and south sides, all spaces.
   (G)   West Salisbury Street, north and south sides.
   (H)   Town parking lots as follows: South Lumina at 624 S. Lumina Avenue at
access #36; Wynn Plaza; Moore’s Inlet at 1800 N. Lumina Avenue and north of
Holiday Inn at access #8; Shell Island at 2398 N. Lumina Avenue - the L-shaped
lot at access #4; Shell Island at 2498 N. Lumina Avenue at access #3; Shell
Island at 2698 N. Lumina Avenue and south of Shell Island Resort at access #2.
   (I)   North Lumina Avenue, west side, from Parmele Boulevard to West
Salisbury Street.
   (J)   North Lumina Ave., east side, East Salisbury Street to Mallard Street.
   (K)   Waynick Boulevard, west side, all.
   (L)   South Lumina Ave., west side, Sunset Boulevard to Jack Parker
Boulevard.
   (M)   North Lumina Ave., east side, Parmele Boulevard to South Ridge Road.
   (N)   Circle Drive, south side.
   (O)   North and south sides of East and West Columbia Street.
   (P)   North and south sides of East and West Atlanta Street.
   (Q)   North and south sides of East Charlotte Street.
   (R)   North and south sides of East Augusta Street.
   (S)   North and south sides of East and West Asheville Street.
   (T)   North and south sides of East and West Fayetteville Street.
   (U)   North and south sides of East and West Oxford Street.
   (V)   North and south sides of East and West Greensboro Street.
   (W)   North and south sides of Seagull Street.
   (X)   North and south sides of Shearwater Street.
   (Y)   North and south sides of Heron Street.
   (Z)   North and south sides of Sandpiper Street.
   (AA)   North and south sides of Mallard Street.
   (BB)   East and west sides of North Lumina Avenue from Oceanic Street to
Salisbury Street.
   (CC)   300 block of South Lumina Avenue.
   (DD)   400 block of South Lumina Avenue.
   (EE)   500/600 block of South Lumina Avenue to Iula Street.
   (FF)   North and south sides of Nathan Street.
   (GG)   North and south sides of East and West Henderson Street.
   (HH)   Old Causeway Drive.
   (II)   East and west sides of Keel Street from Old Causeway Drive to the
northern line of Seacrest Drive.
   (JJ)   East side of Marina Street from Old Causeway Drive to the northern
line of Short Street.
   (KK)   North and south sides of Gene Floyd Drive located south of the Town
Hall complex.
   (LL)   All of the public parking lot located adjacent to the tennis courts
on the Town Hall complex.
   (MM)   W. Columbia Street from North Lumina Avenue to its western terminus
at Banks Channel.
   (NN)   The town’s entire historic square located adjacent to Salisbury
Street.
(Ord. 1081, passed 7-14-88; Am. Ord. 1320, passed 10-8-98; Am. Ord. 1373-A,
passed 2-28-01; Am. Ord. 1405, passed 2-28-02; Am. Ord. 1442,passed 4-24-03;
Am. Ord. 1496, passed 2-22-06; Am. Ord. 1614, passed 10-29-09; Am. Ord. 1620,
passed 2-11-10; Am. Ord. 1651, passed 3-10-11; Am. Ord. 1708, passed 5-9-13;
Am. Ord. 1745, passed 5-28-15; Am. Ord. 1757, passed 2-11-16; Am. Ord. 1783,
passed 2-14-19)
§ 74.40 PARKING WITHOUT PAYING THE REQUIRED FEE.
   Any person parking a vehicle registered in his or her name or which vehicle
is under his or her control in a parking meter space located in a designated
parking meter zone shall pay the required fee. It shall be unlawful for any
person to park as described in the preceding sentence without paying the
required fee. For the purposes of this chapter and the attached schedules, a
reference to parking in a “metered space”, “parking meter space” or “meter
space” shall include parking in a parking meter space or any other space for
which payment of a fee is required.
(Ord. 1081, passed 7-14-88; Am. Ord. 1571, passed 2-25-08; Am. Ord. 1757,
passed 2-11-16) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.41 RATES.
   (A)   For any vehicle to be deemed legally parked in any parking space for
which a fee is charged: (i) the appropriate fee shall be paid via pay by cell
platforms or automated pay station where applicable. All payment platforms
require license plat inforrmation to be entered as vehicle registration of paid
parking; or(ii) the vehicle shall display a daily or weekly parking pass as
described in division (C) below; or (iii) the vehicle shall display a current
residential parking permit, commercial parking permit or contractor parking
permit as described in §§
74.42 and
74.43.
   (B)   The fee to be paid for parking in a marked parking space shall be as
established from time to time by the Board of Aldermen.
   (C)   The Town Manager is authorized to implement a program for the issuance
of daily and weekly parking passes, the fee for which shall be as established
from time to time by the Board of Aldermen.
(Ord. 1081, passed 7-14-88; Am. Ord. 1309, passed 5-28-98; Am. Ord. 1316-B,
passed 6-25-98; Am. Ord. 1366, passed 7-13-00; Am. Ord. 1405, passed 2-28-02;
Am. Ord. 1442, passed 4-24-03; Am. Ord. 1496, passed 2-22-06; Am. Ord. 1535,
passed 5-10-07; Am. Ord. 1571, passed 2-25-08; Am. Ord. 1619, passed 2-11-10;
Am. Ord. 1723, passed 3-25-14; Ord. 1857, passed 2–8-24)
§ 74.42 RESIDENTIAL PARKING PERMITS.
   The Town Manager is authorized to implement a program for the issuance of
parking permits for residents of the town when authorized by the Board of
Aldermen. Such program shall include the following:
   (A)   The owner(s) of each residential unit located within the town shall be
entitled to purchase two parking permits. For purposes of this section, a
residential unit shall not include a hotel or motel room or a vacant lot.
Residential structures containing multiple residential units owned by the same
entity (i.e. an apartment building) shall be entitled to purchase only two
permits for the entire residential structure.
   (B)   The fee to be paid for such permit shall be $50 per year per permit.
   (C)   A vehicle properly displaying a current authorized permit shall be
permitted to remain in a parking meter space without paying the required fee.
Provided that the provisions of this division (C) shall not apply to:
      (1)   Off-street parking lots or on- street parking meter spaces
providing a maximum metered parking time (without the payment of an additional
fee) of one hour or less;
      (2)   Any parking meter space located on the north and south side of East
and West Salisbury Street to include the area extending from the eastern end of
Salisbury Street at Johnnie Mercer’s Pier westward to the western end of
Salisbury Street located at the eastern end of the bridge crossing Banks
Channel; and
      (3)   Any parking meter space located on east and west sides of South
Lumina Avenue extending from its intersection with the southern line of Sunset
Avenue northwardly to its intersection with the norther line of Iula Street.
Provided, that vehicles properly displaying a current authorized permit shall
be permitted to remain in the following designated parking spaces without
paying the required fee: the four parallel parking spaces located on the
western side of South Lumina Avenue immediately south of the intersection of
Iula Street and South Lumina Avenue and the six angled parking spaces located
on the eastern side of South Lumina Avenue immediately south of the
intersection of Iula Street and South Lumina Avenue.
   (D)   The property owner to whom such permit is issued is authorized to
permit such permit to be used by a resident of or visitor to such residential
unit. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section (i) for any person
to permit use of such permit by any person other than one residing in or
visiting such residential unit; (ii) for any person to sell such permit or to
accept anything of value in return for the use of such permit (other than
payment of rent by a tenant in such residential unit); and (iii) for any person
to use such permit other than one residing in or visiting such residential
unit.
   (E)   Lost permits may be replaced upon payment of a fee of $100 and receipt
of a sworn statement from the property owner that such permit has been lost and
not transferred or otherwise used in a manner not permitted by this section. If
a lost permit is replaced in one calendar year, then the cost of replacing a
lost permit in the succeeding calendar year shall be $250. No permit may be
replaced more than once in any calendar year.
   (F)   A vehicle properly displaying a current authorized permit shall not
park in the same parking meter space without being moved for a period of more
than 7 consecutive 24-hour periods. At the end of such 7 consecutive 24-hour
periods, such vehicle must be moved to another parking meter space that is at
least 500 yards distance from the parking meter space in which the vehicle was
previously parked.
   (G)   A violation of the provisions of division (C) above shall be deemed a
violation of the provisions of §
74.40 of this code and shall subject the offender to a penalty as set forth in
§
74.99 of this code. A violation of the provisions of division (D) of this
section shall subject the offender to a civil penalty in the amount of $500. A
violation of the provisions of division (F) of this section shall subject the
offender to a civil penalty in the amount of $150. Such civil penalties may be
recovered by the town in a civil action in the nature of debt if the offender
does not pay the penalty within 10 days after having been cited for violation
of the section. Each day’s continuing violation of any provisions of this
section shall be a separate and distinct offense.
(Ord. 1375-A, passed 2-28-01; Am. Ord. 1462, passed 6-10-04; Am. Ord. 1675,
passed 3-8-12; Am. Ord. 1757, passed 2-11-16; Am. Ord. 1763, passed 2-9-17; Am.
Ord. 1782, passed 1-15-19; Am. Ord. 1783, passed 2-14-19)
§ 74.43 COMMERCIAL I AND II AND CONTRACTOR PARKING PERMITS.
   (A)   The Town Manager is authorized to implement a program for the issuance
of commercial parking permits for businesses operating within the town. Such
program shall be subject to the following restrictions:
      (1)   Commercial parking passes shall only be issued to employees of
businesses located in an existing building that is surrounded in part by paid
parking spaces.
      (2)   The owner or operator of each such business shall be entitled to
purchase commercial parking permits.
      (3)   No more than ten commercial I parking permits shall be issued for
one business location. The number of commercial I permits available for such
business location (up to a maximum of ten) shall be determined by the Town
Manager or his or her designee.
      (4)   The number of commercial II parking permits shall be determined by
the Town Manager or his or her designee. Parking for holders of commercial II
parking permits shall be restricted to the assigned parking area at the Town
Hall complex in the vicinity of the office of the NC Coastal Federation located
on Salisbury Street.
      (5)   The number of commercial I parking permits issued to a business
location shall not exceed the total number of commercial parking permits issued
to that business location in 2013. After calendar year 2019, the number of
commercial I parking permits that any business may purchase shall be limited to
the number of commercial I parking permits purchased by such business in the
preceding calendar year. Provided that in no event may a business purchase more
commercial I parking permits than it purchased in 2013.
      (6)   The fee to be paid for such permits shall be as established from
time to time by the Board of Aldermen. Permits shall be effective for that
portion of the calendar year that parking is regulated by meters.
      (7)   A vehicle properly displaying a current authorized commercial I
permit shall be permitted to remain in a marked parking space without
activating the meter or pay station. Provided that holders of commercial I
parking permits may not park in off-street parking lots or in on-street parking
spaces providing a maximum meter time of one hour or less. Provided further
that holders of commercial II parking permits may only park in the area
designated in division (A)(4) above.
   (B)   The Town Manager is authorized to implement a program for the issuance
of parking permits to contractors doing business within the town. Such program
shall be subject to the following restrictions:
      (1)   A contractor or subcontractor working on property located within
the town limits of the Town of Wrightsville Beach shall be entitled to purchase
contractor parking permits.
      (2)   Contractor parking permits are intended to allow contractors,
subcontractors and their employees to only park for the duration of the work
that they are performing within the town limits of the Town of Wrightsville
Beach.
      (3)   The number of permits issued for any one construction location and
the duration of such permits shall be determined by the Town Manager or his or
her designee.
      (4)   The fee to be paid for such permit shall be as established from
time to time by the Board of Aldermen. Permits shall be effective for that
portion of the calendar year that parking is regulated by meters.
      (5)   A vehicle properly displaying a current authorized permit shall be
permitted to remain in a marked parking space without activating the meter or
pay station. Provided that holders of contractor parking permits may not park
in off-street parking lots or in on-street parking spaces providing a maximum
meter time of one hour or less.
   (C)   Additional restrictions applicable to commercial and contractor
permits.
      (1)   The business owner or operator or contractor or subcontractor to
whom such permit is issued is authorized to permit such permit to be used by
employees of such business. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this
section for any person to permit use of such permit by any person other than an
employee of the business and for any person to sell such permit or to accept
anything of value in return for the use of such permit.
      (2)   Lost permits may be replaced upon payment of a fee of $600 and
receipt of a sworn statement from the business owner or operator or contractor
or subcontractor that such permit has been lost and not transferred or
otherwise used in a manner not permitted by this section. No permit may be
replaced more than once in any 12-month period.
      (3)   A violation of the provisions of this section (with the exception
of division (C)(1)) above shall be deemed a violation of the provisions of §
74.40 of this code and shall subject the offender to a penalty as set forth in
§
74.99 of this code. A violation of the provisions of division (C)(1) above
shall subject the offender to a civil penalty in the amount of $500. Such
penalty may be recovered by the town in a civil action in the nature of debt if
the offender does not pay the penalty within ten days after having been cited
for violation of the section. Each day’s continuing violation of any provisions
of this section shall be a separate and distinct offense.
(Ord. 1384, passed 6-14-01; Am. Ord. 1637, passed 8-12-10; Am. Ord. 1723,
passed 3-25-14; Am. Ord. 1745, passed 5-28-15; Am. Ord. 1782, passed 1-15-19)
§ 74.44 FRAUDULENT USE OF PARKING PERMIT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Engage in parking permit forgery;
      (2)   Engage in parking permit fraud; or
      (3)   Possess a forged parking permit.
   (B)   A person is guilty of parking permit forgery when:
      (1)   With intent to defraud the town, a person falsely makes a purported
parking permit; or
      (2)   With intent to defraud the town, a person alters or duplicates an
existing parking permit.
   (C)   A person falsely makes a parking permit when he or she makes or draws,
in whole or in part, a device or instrument which purports to be a parking
permit issued by the town which is not such a parking permit because the town
did not authorize the making or drawing, or alters a parking permit which was
validly issued.
   (D)   A person is guilty of parking permit fraud when, with intent to
defraud the town, a person uses a parking permit obtained or retained in
violation of this section or which he or she knows is forged, altered or
revoked, for the purpose of parking without depositing any required payment
into a parking meter.
   (E)   A person is guilty of possessing a forged parking permit when he
possesses, with knowledge of its character, a parking permit made, altered or
duplicated in violation of the provisions of this section.
(Ord. 1424, passed 8-22-02)
§ 74.45 CREATION OF HARBOR ISLAND RESIDENTIAL PARKING DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   It is in the best interest of the Town of Wrightsville Beach to
reduce vehicular congestion on residential streets located on Harbor Island and
to facilitate the efficient movement of traffic on such streets by providing
for residential parking preference during certain hours of the day and months
of the year.
      (2)   Creation of a residential parking district on Harbor Island is
necessary to promote the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the
Town of Wrightsville Beach by providing adequate parking spaces for residents
adjacent to or close by their place of residence.
      (3)   It is in the public interest to reduce hazardous traffic conditions
resulting from the use of streets located within congested residential areas
for the parking of vehicles by persons using such residential areas to gain
access to other places; to protect those areas from unreasonable burdens in
gaining access to their residences; to preserve the character of those areas as
residential districts; to promote efficiency in the maintenance of those
streets in a clean and safe condition; to preserve the value of the property in
those areas; to preserve the safety of children and other pedestrians and to
promote traffic safety, clean air and the comfort, health, convenience and
welfare of the inhabitants of the town.
   (B)   Designation of area. A Residential Parking District is hereby
established on those streets located on Harbor Island and described below which
will limit on-street parking to those vehicles displaying a residential parking
pass during the period specified in §
74.46. The following streets on Harbor Island are located within the
Residential Parking District:
      (1)   Auditorium Circle;
      (2)   Coral Drive;
      (3)   Cypress Avenue;
      (4)   Fifth Avenue;
      (5)   First Avenue;
      (6)   Fourth Avenue;
      (7)   Island Drive; except for the eastern (northbound) section between
Causeway Drive and Jasmine Place which shall be designed as no parking;
      (8)   Jasmine Court;
      (9)   Jasmine Place;
      (10)   Lindy Lane;
      (11)   Live Oak Drive;
      (12)   Myrtle Court;
      (13)   North Channel Drive;
      (14)   Point Place;
      (15)   Second Avenue;
      (16)   Shore Drive;
      (17)   Sixth Avenue;
      (18)   South Channel Drive;
      (19)   Third Avenue;
      (20)   Trent Court;
      (21)   Pelican Drive.
(Ord. 1678, passed 5-10-12; Ord. 1745, passed 5-28-15; Am. Ord. 1868, passed 9-
11-25)
§ 74.46 PARKING RESTRICTIONS IN THE HARBOR ISLAND RESIDENTIAL PARKING DISTRICT.
   (A)   During the period March 1 through October 31 between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 7:00 p.m. daily, except as provided in §
74.47 below, no person shall park any vehicle on the streets designated in §
74.45 unless the vehicle displays a current residential parking pass issued in
accordance with the provisions of §
74.42 of this code or a decal issued in accordance with the provisions of §
70.36 of this code.
   (B)   During the period March 1 through October 31, no trailers of any kind,
whether attached or unattached, may be parked on Pelican Drive.
   (C)   During the period November 1 through February 28, no unattached
trailers of any kind may be parked at any time on Pelican Drive. During this
same period, it shall be lawful to park attached trailers at any time on
Pelican Drive.
(Ord. 1678, passed 5-10-12; Am. Ord. 1702, passed 2-14-13; Am. Ord. 1703,
passed 3-14-13; Am. Ord. 1745, passed 5-28-15; Am. Ord. 1763, passed 2-9-17;
Am. Ord. 1782, passed 1-15-19; Am. Ord. 1783, passed 2-14-19)
§ 74.47 EXCEPTIONS.
   The following exceptions to the restrictions set forth in §
74.46 shall apply:
   (A)   Such restrictions shall not be in effect until 1:00 p.m. on Sundays.
   (B)   Such restrictions shall not be in effect during special events
authorized by the Board of Aldermen.
   (C)   Such restrictions shall not apply to vehicles engaged in maintenance
or construction activities approved by the Town Manager or his or her designee.
   (D)   Such restrictions shall not apply to vehicles owed by the town,
county, state or public utility companies or their designated agents during
periods of maintenance, inspection, repair or construction activities conducted
by such entities.
(Ord. 1678, passed 5-10-12)
§ 74.48 OLD CAUSEWAY DRIVE, KEEL STREET AND MARINA STREET.
   (A)   Old Causeway Drive.
      (1)   During the period March 1 through October 31 between the hours of
9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., no person shall cause or permit any vehicle registered
in his or her name or which vehicle is under his or her control to be or remain
parked in any marked parking space located on the northern side of Old Causeway
Drive for any period of time for which the required parking fee has not been
paid.
      (2)   No trailers of any kind, whether attached or unattached, may be
parked at any time on Old Causeway Drive.
      (3)   A vehicle properly displaying a current authorized permit issued
pursuant to the provisions of §
74.42 of this code shall be permitted to remain in a marked parking space
without paying the required parking fee.
   (B)   Keel and Marina Streets. No trailer of any kind, whether attached or
unattached, may be parked at any time on Marina Street or on Keel Street from
its intersection with Seacrest Drive to its intersection with Old Causeway
Drive.
(Ord. 1745, passed 5-28-15; Am. Ord. 1773, passed 3-8-18; Am. Ord. 1782, passed
1-15-19)
§ 74.49 PARKING RESTRICTIONS FOR GENE FLOYD DRIVE, THE PUBLIC PARKING LOT
ADJACENT TO TENNIS COURTS LOCATED ON THE TOWN HALL COMPLEX AND THE TOWN’S
HISTORIC SQUARE ADJACENT TO SALISBURY STREET, AND THE SOUTH CHANNEL DRIVE PARK.
   (A)   The first two hours of parking in parking meter spaces located on Gene
Floyd Drive, in the public parking lot adjacent to the tennis courts in the
Town Hall complex, in the town's historic square adjacent to Salisbury Street
and in any location in the town's historic square adjacent to Salisbury Street
not designated as a parking meter space shall be free. Fees for parking in
these areas beyond the first two hours shall be the normal hourly rate then in
effect. A maximum of two hour parking per day shall be allowed with a
residential parking permit or tax decal at the South Channel Drive Park. Free
parking shall be permitted for all visitors that are actively using the park
without the display of a residential parking permit or tax decal.
   (B)   The Town Manager is authorized to erect signs limiting parking on Gene
Floyd Drive, within the public parking lot located adjacent to the tennis
courts in the Town Hall complex and at any other parking location on the Town
Hall complex to Town Hall employees or town business parking only. It shall be
unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in spaces so marked unless such
person is an authorized Town Hall employee or utilizing such parking space for
legitimate business purposes in the Town Hall complex.
   (C)   A vehicle properly displaying a current authorized residential parking
permit issued in accordance with §
74.42 shall be permitted to remain in a parking meter space located on Gene
Floyd Drive or in the public parking lot located adjacent to the tennis courts
in the Town Hall complex without paying the required fee.
(Ord. 1757, passed 2-11-16; Am. Ord. 1782, passed 1-15-19; Am. Ord. 1826,
passed 4-8-21)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 74.50 NOTICE TO VIOLATOR.
   Whenever a member of the Police Department of the town or other person
charged by the Town Manager to enforce the provisions of the parking ordinances
shall find that any of the provisions of the parking ordinances are being, or
have been, violated by the owner or operator of any vehicle, such officer or
person shall notify the owner or operator of the vehicle of the violation by
conspicuously attaching to the vehicle a parking violation notice in such form
as the Town Manager may direct.
(Ord. 1011, passed 4-24-86)
§ 74.51 CONTENTS OF NOTICE.
   Such parking violation notice stated in §
74.50 shall among other things, state upon its face the amount of the penalty
for the specific violation and indicate the graduated penalties which are
imposed for failure to pay within the times established in this subchapter;
notify the offender that a failure to pay the penalty within the last
prescribed time established by this subchapter shall subject the offender to a
civil action in the nature of debt for the applicable penalty together with the
cost of the action to be taxed by the court; state that the offender may answer
the town parking citation by mailing this citation and the stated penalty to
Post Office Box 626, Wrightsville Beach, North Carolina 28480 or may pay the
amount at the Wrightsville Beach Town Hall, Causeway Drive, Wrightsville Beach,
and that upon payment, the case or claim and right of action by the town will
be deemed compromised and settled.
(Ord. 1011, passed 4-24-86; Am. Ord. 1723, passed 3-25-14)
§ 74.52 SETTLEMENT OF CLAIM.
   The Town Manager or his designated agent is authorized to accept payments in
full and final settlement of claim or claims, right or rights of action which
the town may have to enforce such penalty by civil action in the nature of
debt. Acceptance of a penalty shall be deemed a full and final release of any
and all claims or right of action arising out of contended violations. The Town
Manager or his designated agent may also settle any parking violation notice if
he determines that the notice was received as a result of mistake,
inadvertence, or excusable neglect.
(Ord. 1011, passed 4-24-86)
§ 74.53 OTHER REMEDIES.
   Nothing in this subchapter is intended nor shall be construed to provide
that a vehicle parked in violation of any ordinance regulating the parking of
vehicles on public streets or parking areas, may not be towed away in
accordance with applicable statutes and ordinances.
(Ord. 1081, passed 7-14-88)
§ 74.54 FINES TO BE PAID TO GENERAL FUND.
   All penalties paid to the town or as maybe recovered in a civil action in
the nature of debt as provided in this subchapter shall be paid to the General
Fund of the town.
(Ord. 1081, passed 7-14-88)
§ 74.55 IMMOBILIZATION OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   The Town Manager or his or her designee may immobilize by the use of
wheel locks and tow any vehicle for which there are three or more outstanding,
unpaid and overdue parking tickets for a period of more than 72 hours. For the
purpose of determining whether a vehicle has had issued against it three or
more outstanding, unpaid and overdue parking tickets for a period of more than
72 hours, it shall be sufficient if the license plate number of the vehicle and
the license plate number of the vehicle having received the tickets are the
same.
   (B)   If a wheel lock is attached to a vehicle, a notice shall be affixed to
the windshield or other part of the vehicle so as to be readily visible. The
notice shall warn that the vehicle has been immobilized and that any attempt to
move the vehicle may result in damage to the vehicle. The city shall not be
responsible for any damage to an immobilized illegally parked vehicle resulting
from unauthorized attempts to free or move the vehicle. An immobilization fee
of $50 shall be charged for the removal of the wheel lock. The notice shall
also state the total amount of civil penalties due for parking tickets which
are overdue and unpaid and attributable to such vehicle, and the immobilization
fee to be charged. The civil penalties and the immobilization fee shall be paid
to have the wheel lock removed. The address and telephone number to be
contacted to pay such charges to have the wheel lock removed shall also be
listed on the notice.
   (C)   If civil penalties due and the immobilization fee as herein provided
are not paid, or satisfactory arrangements in lieu of payment are not made,
within 24 hours of the attachment of the wheel lock, such vehicle may be towed
to any public or private impoundment lot consistent with existing town
policies. If a private contractor tows and stores the vehicle he may impose
against the vehicle his customary fees and charges for such services. Once a
vehicle has been towed, the Town Manager or his or her designee, shall mail or
cause to have mailed, a notice of towing to the registered owner and
lienholders, if any are known, at the address or addresses reported to the town
by the North Carolina Department of Motor Vehicles.
   (D)   Upon payment of all civil penalties and overdue and unpaid parking
tickets issued for the vehicle and of all other charges authorized by this
section, including immobilization, towing, and storage fees, the vehicle shall
be released to the owner or any other person legally entitled to claim
possession of the vehicle.
   (E)   All towing and storage charges incurred in connection with impounded
vehicles shall constitute a lien upon such vehicles as provided in G.S. § 44A-
2.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to remove
from a vehicle a wheel lock placed thereon pursuant to this section or to
remove from impoundment any vehicle placed therein pursuant to this section
without all civil penalties, immobilization fees and other applicable charges
having first been paid or an approved payment plan having been made.
   (G)   The Town Manager is authorized to establish guidelines to adjust the
amount of civil penalties imposed pursuant to promote the resolution of any
claim against persons with ten or more outstanding delinquent parking tickets.
(Ord. 1414, passed 5-9-02; Am. Ord. 1442, passed 4-24-03; Am. Ord. 1618, passed
2-11-10; Am. Ord. 1835, passed 12-8-21)
§ 74.56 APPEAL OF PARKING VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Any person charged with a violation of the town’s parking ordinances
shall have the right to appeal such violation by filing written notice of
appeal within 120 hours after issuance of the citation giving notice of such
violation. Notice of appeal must be hand delivered or mailed so as to arrive
within the 120-hour time specified herein at the office of the Manager of the
Wrightsville Beach parking program located at 321 Causeway Drive, Wrightsville
Beach, N.C. 28480.
   (B)   The manager of the Wrightsville Beach parking program (the “Parking
Manager”) or the Appeal Coordinator designated under the provisions of the
Wrightsville Beach parking program shall render a decision on such appeal
within five business days of the date of filing of the appeal. Written notice
of the decision of the Parking Manager or Appeal Coordinator shall be mailed to
the appealing party.
   (C)   If the appealing party is dissatisfied with the decision of the
Parking Manager or Appeal Coordinator, the appealing party may request an
administrative hearing to be conducted by an independent hearing officer. A
request for an administrative hearing must be filed in writing with the Parking
Manager within 15 days of receipt of the denial of the appeal as described in
division (B). The written request for an administrative hearing must be hand
delivered or mailed so as to arrive within the 15-day period specified herein
at the office of the Manager of the Wrightsville Beach parking program located
at 321 Causeway Drive, P.0. Box 626, Wrightsville Beach, N.C. 28480. A request
for an administrative hearing shall be accompanied by payment of the amount of
the outstanding citation plus an amount equal to the fee to be paid to the
independent hearing officer. If the decision to impose the parking citation is
reversed, the amount of the citation and the fee for the independent hearing
officer will be refunded to the appealing party. If the decision to impose the
parking citation is upheld, such payments shall be retained by the town. Any
request for an administrative hearing which is not accompanied by payment of
the amount of the outstanding citation plus the fee to be paid to the
independent hearing officer shall be deemed untimely filed and the request for
such hearing shall be denied.
   (D)   The decision of the independent hearing officer as described in
division (B) above shall be final.
   (E)   As a matter of policy, the town will not accept the following as
legitimate grounds for dismissal of parking violations:
      (1)   Lack of knowledge of the town's parking regulations;
      (2)   Conflicts or tardiness going to or returning from appointments;
      (3)   Inability to find a valid parking space; and
      (4)   Failure to have appropriate or sufficient money to deposit in
meters or pay stations.
(Ord. 1591, passed 2-12-09; Am. Ord. 1650, passed 3-10-11; Am. Ord. 1864,
passed 1-9-25)
§ 74.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall subject the
offender to a civil penalty as hereinafter enumerated or as established from
time to time by the Board of Aldermen in the Budget Ordinance. These ordinances
shall be referred to as parking ordinances. Civil penalties may be recovered by
the town in a civil action in the nature of debt if the offender does not pay
the penalty within the prescribed period of time after he has been cited for
violation of the ordinance. In accordance with G.S. § 160A-175(b), a violation
of the parking ordinances shall not be subject to the penalty provision of G.S.
§ 14-4 and shall not be considered a breach of the penal laws of the state.
   (B)   Penalties for overtime parking in a metered space and for all other
violations of the parking ordinances shall be as set forth in Schedule IV of
Chapter 76: Parking Schedules
   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of § 74.44 shall be subject to the
following penalties:
      (1) A violation of the provisions of this chapter is a misdemeanor
punishable in accordance with the provisions of G.S. § 14-4. The fine for such
violation shall not exceed $500;
      (2) A violation of the provisions of this chapter shall subject the
offender to a civil penalty of $500 (recommended);
      (3) The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by an appropriate
equitable remedy issuing from a court of competent jurisdiction;
      (4) Each day's continuing violation of any provisions of this chapter
shall be separate and distinct offense;
      (5)   Any person found guilty of a violation of § 74.44 shall lose their
right to have issued a residential or commercial parking permit for a period of
two years from the date of conviction. Providing, that within 30 days of such
conviction, such person may request a hearing before the Town Manager at which
time they will be given the opportunity to demonstrate to the Town Manager that
their parking permit privileges should not be revoked for such period of time.
The decision of the Town Manager in such matter shall be final.
   (D)   Any person violating the provisions of §
74.15(I) shall be subject to those penalties set forth in §
10.99.
(Ord. 1011, passed 4-24-86; Am. Ord. 1081, passed 7-14-88; Am. Ord. 1131,
passed 1-10-91; Am. Ord. 1154, passed 8-22-91; Am. Ord. 1215, passed 7-8-93;
Am. Ord. 1228, passed 4-28-94; Am. Ord. 1424, passed 8-22-02; Am. Ord. 1633,
passed 7-15-10; Am. Ord. 1806, passed 7-17-20)
Statutory reference:
   State penalty, see G.S. § 20-176
CHAPTER 75: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   Speed limits
   
II.   Trucks prohibited on certain streets
   
III   Establishment of one-way streets
SCHEDULE I. SPEED LIMITS.
   The speed limit set forth in this schedule shall be applicable to the
streets named herein and the Town Manager shall install appropriate traffic-
control devices to indicate the established speed limit:
   (A)   Fifteen miles per hour. On any portion of the following streets on
Harbor Island located south of Causeway Drive (U.S. 76):
LOCATION ORD. NO. DATE
LOCATION                                    ORD. NO. DATE
Albright Street                             1378     4-12-01
Arrindale Street                            1378     4-12-01
Auditorium Circle                           1075     5-26-88
Augusta Street                              1378     4-12-01
Bahama Drive                                1378     4-12-01
Bay Street                                  1378     4-12-01
Bellamy Street                              1378     4-12-01
Bermuda Drive                               1378     4-12-01
Birmingham Street                           1378     4-12-01
Bob Sawyer Drive                            1378     4-12-01
Bridgers Street                             1378     4-12-01
Chadbourn Street                            1378     4-12-01
Channel Avenue                              1378     4-12-01
Charlotte Street                            1378     4-12-01
Circle Drive                                1378     4-12-01
Coburn Street                               1378     4-12-01
Corbett Street                              1378     4-12-01
Cypress Drive                               1075     5-26-88
E & W Asheville Street                      1378     4-12-01
E & W Atlanta Street                        1378     4-12-01
E & W Columbia Street                       1378     4-12-01
E & W Fayetteville Street                   1378     4-12-01
E & W Greensboro Street                     1378     4-12-01
E & W Henderson Street                      1378     4-12-01
E & W Oxford Street                         1378     4-12-01
E Augusta Street                            1378     4-12-01
E Charlotte Street                          1378     4-12-01
E Raleigh Street                            1378     4-12-01
E Salisbury Street                          1378     4-12-01
Fourth Avenue                               1378     4-12-01
Gene Floyd Drive                            1378     4-12-01
Heron Street                                1378     4-12-01
Island Drive                                        10755-26-88
Iula Street                                 1378     4-12-01
Jack Parker Boulevard                       1378     4-12-01
Jasmine Drive                                       10755-26-88
Lagoon Drive                                1378     4-12-01
Latimer Street                              1378     4-12-01
Lindy Lane                                  1075     5-26-88
Live Oak Drive                              1075     5-26-88
Mallard Street                              1378     4-12-01
Meier Street                                1378     4-12-01
Moores Inlet Street                         1378     4-12-01
Nathan Street                               1378     4-12-01
North Channel Drive                         1075     5-26-88
Northridge Road                             1378     4-12-01
Northrop Street                             1378     4-12-01
Oceanic Street                              1378     4-12-01
Palmetto Drive                              1378     4-12-01
Point Place                                 1075     5-26-88
Russ Drive                                  1378     4-12-01
S Lumina from Stone Street to Sunset Avenue 1378     4-12-01
Salisbury Street East                       1378     4-12-01
Sandpiper Street                            1378     4-12-01
Schloss Street                              1378     4-12-01
Seacrest Drive                              1858     2-8-24
Seagull Street                              1378     4-12-01
Seashore Street                             1378     4-12-01
Second Street                               1378     4-12-01
Shearwater Street                           1378     4-12-01
Shore Drive                                 1075     5-26-88
Short Street (Harbor Island)                1378     4-12-01
Short Street (Wrightsville Island)          1378     4-12-01
Snyder Street                               1378     4-12-01
South Channel Drive                         1075     5-26-88
Southridge Road                             1378     4-12-01
Sprunt Street                               1378     4-12-01
Stone Street                                1378     4-12-01
Sweeney Street                              1378     4-12-01
Taylor Street                               1378     4-12-01
Trent Court                                 1378     4-12-01
Water Street                                1378     4-12-01
Wright Street                               1378     4-12-01
 
   (B)   Twenty-five miles per hour:
LOCATION ORD. NO. DATE
LOCATION                                                      ORD. NO. DATE
Coral Drive from its intersection with Causeway Drive (U.S.   1176     4-30-92
74) to its northern terminus
Keel Drive                                                    1378     4-12-01
Marina Street                                                 1378     4-12-01
North Lumina Avenue from its intersection with Causeway Drive 1075     5-26-88
to its northern terminus
Old Causeway Drive                                            1378     4-12-01
Parmele Boulevard                                             1378     4-12-01
Pelican Drive (all)                                           1075     5-26-88
Seawater Lane                                                 1378     4-12-01
South Lumina Avenue (U.S. 76) from Sunset Street South to and 1075     5-26-88
including Jack Parker Boulevard
Sunset Avenue                                                 1378     4-12-01
 
   (C)   Thirty-five miles per hour:
 
LOCATION                            ORD. NO.         DATE
Causeway Drive eatward its
intersection with Seacrest Drive to 1378             4-12-01
its intersection with Waynick
Boulevard
Waynick Boulevard                   1378; 1841; 1844 4-12-01; 4-14-22; 5-9-23
 
   (D)   Forty-five miles per hour:
 
LOCATION                                                      ORD. NO. DATE
Causeway Drive (U.S. 76) from the town limits eastward to its 1075     5-26-88
intersection with Seacrest Drive
West Salisbury Street (U.S. 74) from Look Out Drive westward  1075     5-26-88
to the town limits
 
 
SCHEDULE II. TRUCKS PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS.
   No person may drive any truck over the following street:
 
Location                                               Ord. No. Passage Date
Latimer Street from its intersection with South Lumina 1287     7-10-97
Avenue to its intersection with Waynick Boulevard.
 
SCHEDULE III. ESTABLISHMENT OF ONE-WAY STREETS.
   Whenever a street is designated one-way and traffic control devices are
installed in accordance with this schedule, no person may drive a vehicle on
such street except in the direction indicated by the traffic control devices.
The following streets are hereby designated one-way streets and the Town
Manager shall install appropriate traffic control devices on such streets to
indicate the direction of lawful traffic movement.
STREET                                                Ord. No. Passage Date
Bellamy Street                                        1401     1-24-02
Bridgers Street                                       1401     1-24-02
Channel Avenue from West Columbia to Sweeney Street   1401     1-24-02
Iula Street                                           1401     1-24-02
Lagoon Drive                                          1401     1-24-02
Latimer Street                                        1401     1-24-02
North Channel Drive from Causeway to 4th Avenue       1401     1-24-02
Seashore Street Second Avenue                         1401     1-24-02
Snyder Street                                         1401     1-24-02
South Lumina Avenue from Stone Street south to Taylor 1401     1-24-02
Street
South Lumina Avenue from Bellamy street south to Iula 1401     1-24-02
Street
South Lumina Avenue from Sunset Street north to Iula  1401     1-24-02
Street
Sprunt Street                                         1401     1-24-02
Taylor Street                                         1401     1-24-02
 
CHAPTER 76: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
     
I.   Parking limited to certain times
    
II.   Diagonal parking
   
III.   Prohibited parking
   
IV.   Penalties for overtime parking in a metered space and other violations of
the parking ordinances
SCHEDULE I. PARKING LIMITED TO CERTAIN TIMES.
   (A)   Parking is prohibited on the east side of North Lumina Avenue from its
intersection with the northern line of Salisbury Street to its intersection
with the southern line of Mallard Street; and on the west side of North Lumina
Avenue from its intersection with the northern line of Stone Street to its
intersection with the southern line of Salisbury Street from 6:00 p.m. Friday
until 6:00 p.m. Sunday and at any time on the legal holidays of Memorial Day,
Independence Day and Labor Day as established by G.S. § 103-4.
   (B)   Parking shall be limited to one hour in metered parking spaces on the
east and west sides of North Lumina Avenue from Oceanic Street to Columbia
Street except during the times when parking is prohibited on the west side of
North Lumina Avenue as provided in division (A) above.
   (C)   Parking shall be limited to one hour in metered parking spaces on the
west side of South Lumina Avenue from Stone Street to Latimer Street.
   (D)   Reserved.
   (E)   Reserved.
   (F)   (1)   The area extending 69 feet southwardly from the intersection of
the eastern line of South Lumina Avenue with the southern line of Stone Street
is hereby designated a vehicle loading and unloading zone during the hours of
6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m in accordance with the provisions of §
74.19.
      (2)   The area extending 78 feet northwardly from the intersection of the
eastern line of North Lumina Avenue with the northern line of Birmingham Street
is hereby designated a vehicle loading and unloading zone during the hours of
6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. in accordance with the provisions of §
74.19.
      (3)   The southern end of Keel Street shall be dedicated as a free 10-
minute only loading and unloading zone.
   (G)   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle except a taxicab in the taxi
stand established in accordance with
Chapter 114 of the Town Code on the eastern side of South Lumina Avenue
beginning at the intersection of the eastern line of South Lumina Avenue with
the southern line of Stone Street and extending 124 feet southwardly except as
follows: the northernmost 69 feet of said taxi stand shall be used exclusively
as a vehicle loading and unloading zone during the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m. and shall be used exclusively as a taxi stand during the hours of 6:00
p.m. to 6:00 a.m. The southernmost portion of said taxi stand consisting of
three metered parking spaces shall be used exclusively for metered vehicle
parking during the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., and shall be used
exclusively as a taxi stand during the hours of 6:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
   (H)   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle except a taxicab in the taxi
stand established in accordance with
Chapter 114 of the Town Code on the eastern side of North Lumina beginning at
the intersection of the eastern line of North Lumina Avenue with the northern
line of Birmingham Street and extending northwardly to the intersection of the
eastern line of North Lumina Avenue with the southern line of East Columbia
Street except as follow: The southernmost 78 feet of said taxi stand shall be
used exclusively as a vehicle loading and unloading zone during the hours of 6:
00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. and shall be used exclusively as a tax stand during the
hours of 6:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. The northernmost portion of said taxi stand
consisting of two metered parking spaces shall be used exclusively for metered
parking during the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. and shall be used
exclusively as a taxi stand during the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
   (I)   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle except a taxicab in the taxi
stand established in accordance with
Chapter 114 of the Town Code on the western side of North Lumina Avenue
beginning at the intersection of the western line of North Lumina Avenue with
the southern line of West Columbia Street and extending southwardly for a
distance of 164 feet. This designated taxi stand consists of seven marked and
metered parking spaces. These seven spaces shall be used exclusively as
general/metered parking for the public during the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m. except from 6:00 p.m. Friday until 6:00 p.m. Sunday and at any time on the
legal holidays of Memorial Day, Independence Day and Labor Day when these
spaces shall be used exclusively as a fire safety lane. During the hours of 6:
00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m., these seven spaces may be used as a taxi stand on the
condition that during the time that such spaces are used as a fire safety lane,
drivers of taxi cabs must remain in their cabs at all times and shall
immediately vacate the fire safety lane for emergency vehicles.
   (J)   On-street parking within the Harbor Island Residential Parking
District is restricted as follows: during the period May 1 through September 15
between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. daily, except as provided in §
74.47, no person shall park any vehicle on the streets designated in §
74.45 unless the vehicle displays a current residential parking pass issued in
accordance with the provisions of §
74.42 of this code or a decal issued in accordance with the provisions of §
70.36 of this code.
   (K)   The parking area located at the Town Hall Complex designated for
holders of commercial II parking permits shall be open seven days per week from
7:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight. Parking in this area shall be restricted to
vehicles displaying a current commercial II parking permit.
(Ord. 1443, passed 4-24-03; Am. Ord. 1458, passed 3-25-04; Am. Ord. 1545,
passed 8-9-07; Am. Ord. 1623, passed 3-11-10; Am. Ord. 1638, passed 8-12-10;
Am. Ord. 1647, passed 2-10-11; Am. Ord. 1652, passed 4-14-11; Am. Ord. 1665,
passed 11-16-11; Am. Ord. 1679, passed 5-10-12; Am. Ord. 1693, passed 8-16-12;
Am. Ord. 1723, passed 3-25-14; Am. Ord. 1729, passed 4-10-14; Am. Ord. 1757,
passed 2-11-16; Am. Ord. 1763, passed 2-9-17; Am. Ord. 1831, passed 7-8-21)
SCHEDULE II. DIAGONAL PARKING.
Double diagonal parking, at an angle of approximately 45 degrees, shall be
permitted in the following locations:
 
Street                     Between                      Side '72 Code Section
Center of Salisbury Street North Lumina Street and east East 11-29
                           end of Salisbury Street
 
Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE III. PROHIBITED PARKING.
(A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, except the operator of an authorized
emergency vehicle as described in §
70.06 of this code, to park or permit to be parked any vehicle in the following
locations:
Location Ord. No. Passage Date
Location                                           Ord. No.   Passage Date
In the parking area reserved for the bridgetender
employed by the NCDOT and located at the
intersection of the western end of Old Causeway
Drive and the southern end of the unpaved street
running under the drawbridge crossing the Atlantic 1220       9-9-93
Intracoastal Waterway; or on any portion of the
two streets identified herein or the immediately
adjacent properties in such a way as to block or
prevent access to the parking area reserved for
the bridgetender.
Oceanic Street from its intersection with the
eastern line of North Lumina Avenue to the eastern 1230       4-28-94
end of Oceanic Street.
Crane Street from its intersection with the
eastern line of North Lumina Avenue to the eastern 1230       4-28-94
end of Crane Street.
On the north side of Pelican Drive extending from
the intersection of Pelican Drive with the
entrance to the North Carolina Wildlife            1288       7-10-97
Commission's public boat ramp to the driveway
entrance for the Channel Walk/Shoreline
Condominium Complex.
The median bounded on the north by Pelican Drive,
on the south by U.S. Highway 74, on the west by
the entrance to the North Carolina Wildlife        1288; 1483 7-10-97; 10-13-05
Commission's public boat ramp, and on the east by
a distance of 500 feet easterly from the Channel
Walk driveway.
Raleigh Street from its intersection with the
eastern line of North Lumina Avenue to the eastern 1310       5-28-98
end of Raleigh Street.
On the west side of North Lumina Avenue from its
intersection with the north limits of Circle Drive 1332       4-8-99
to the most northern end of North Lumina Avenue.
 
Location Ord. No. Passage Date
Location                                            Ord. No.   Passage Date
Iula Street from its intersection with the western
line of South Lumina Avenue to the eastern line of  1332       4-8-99
South Waynick Boulevard.
On the east side of South Lumina Avenue from the
intersection of its eastern line with the southern
line of Sunset Avenue south to the intersection of  1332       4-8-99
South Lumina Avenue and the southern line of Jack
Parker Boulevard.
On the north side of Jack Parker Boulevard from its
intersection with the western line of South Lumina  1332       4-8-99
Avenue to the western most end of Jack Parker
Boulevard and throughout the turn circle.
On the southern side of Jack Parker Boulevard from
the most eastern marked parking space to the east   1332       4-8-99
line of South Lumina Avenue.
All of Birmingham Street from its intersection with
the eastern line of North Lumina Avenue to the      1332       4-8-99
eastern line of Birmingham Street.
In the travel lanes adjacent to the recycle bins on 1332       4-8-99
Seawater Lane.
All of Parmele Boulevard from its intersection with
the western limits of North Lumina Avenue to its
western terminus at the entrance to the             1332       4-8-99
Wrightsville Beach Public Works facility, to
include the turnaround area adjacent to the
entrance to the Public Works facility.
On the north or south side of Albright Street to    1337       6-24-99
the westernmost end or in the roadway.
On the north or south side of Arrindale Street or   1337       6-24-99
in the roadway.
On the east or west side of Bahama Drive to the     1337       6-24-99
most northern end or in the roadway.
The westernmost end of Bay Street or in the         1337       6-24-99
roadway.
On the north or south side of Bellamy Street or in  1337       6-24-99
the roadway.
On the north or south side of Bermuda Drive to the  1337       6-24-99
westernmost end or in the roadway.
Birmingham Street from its intersection with the
eastern line of North Lumina Avenue to the eastern  1337       6-24-99
end of Birmingham Street or in the roadway.
On the east or west side of Bob Sawyer or in the    1337       6-24-99
roadway.
On the north or south side of Bridgers Street or in 1337       6-24-99
the roadway.
On the north side of Causeway Drive, in the roadway
or on the south side except as provided by marked   1337       6-24-99
spaces.
On the north side of Chadbourn Street or in the     1337       6-24-99
roadway.
On the east or west side of Channel Avenue or in    1337       6-24-99
the roadway.
On the north side of Circle Drive or in the         1337       6-24-99
roadway.
On the east side of Coburn Street to the most       1337       6-24-99
southern end or in the roadway.
On the north or south side of Corbett Street to the 1337       6-24-99
westernmost end or in the roadway.
On the east side of Crane Street, in the roadway or 1337       6-24-99
at the most eastern end.
At the easternmost end of E. Asheville Street or in 1337       6-24-99
the roadway.
Beyond the paved asphalt at the easternmost end of  1337       6-24-99
E. Atlanta Street or in the roadway.
At the easternmost end of E. Augusta Street or in   1337       6-24-99
the roadway.
At the easternmost end of E. Charlotte Street or in 1337       6-24-99
the roadway.
On the south side of E. Columbia Street to the      1337       6-24-99
easternmost end or in the roadway.
At the easternmost end of E. Fayetteville Street or 1337       6-24-99
in the roadway.
At the easternmost end of E. Greensboro Street or   1337       6-24-99
in the roadway.
At the easternmost end of E. Henderson Street or in 1337       6-24-99
the roadway.
At the easternmost end of E. Oxford Street or in    1337       6-24-99
the roadway.
At the easternmost end of E. Raleigh Street or in   1337       6-24-99
the roadway.
Easternmost end of E. Salisbury Street other than
the designated Handicap parking area or in the      1337       6-24-99
roadway.
On the north or south side of Gene Floyd or in the  1337       6-24-99
roadway except as provided by marked spaces.
At the most eastern end of Heron Street or in the   1337       6-24-99
roadway.
In the roadway or on the north or south side of     1337       6-24-99
Highway 74 east to and including the 74 bridge.
Iula Street from its intersection with the western
line of South Lumina Avenue to the eastern line of  1337       6-24-99
Waynick Boulevard or in the roadway.
On the north side of Jack Parker Boulevard from its
intersection with the west side of South Lumina to  1337       6-24-99
the westernmost end of Jack Parker Boulevard and
throughout the turn circle or in the roadway.
In the roadway or on the east or west side of Keel  1337       6-24-99
Street, except as provided for by marked spaces.
In the lane of travel or on either side of Lagoon   1337       6-24-99
except as provided for by marked spaces.
On the north or south side of Latimer Street or in  1337       6-24-99
the roadway.
Beyond the paved portion of Mallard Street at the   1337       6-24-99
east end.
On the east or west side of Marina Street and
throughout the turn circle or in the roadway except 1337       6-24-99
as provided for by marked spaces on the east side
of the street.
On the north or south side of Meier Street or in    1337       6-24-99
the roadway.
At the easternmost end of Moores Inlet or in the    1337       6-24-99
roadway.
In the roadway or on the west side of North Lumina
Avenue from its intersection with the north side of
Circle Drive to the most northern end and           1337       6-24-99
throughout the turn circle or on the east side
except as provided by marked spaces.
On the north or south side of Nathan Street or in
the roadway except as designated by marked spaces   1337       6-24-99
on the south side.
On either side of North Ridge and throughout the    1337       6-24-99
turn circle or in the roadway.
On the north or south side of Northrop Street to    1337       6-24-99
the westernmost end or in the roadway.
On the north or south side of Oceanic Street to the 1337       6-24-99
easternmost end or in the roadway.
On the north or south side of Old Causeway Drive to
the most eastern end or in the roadway, except as   1337       6-24-99
provided for by marked spaces.
On the east or west side of Palmetto Drive to the   1337       6-24-99
most northern end or in the roadway.
On the north or south side of Pelican Drive from
the intersection of Driftwood Court to the most
western end of Pelican Drive or in the roadway.
Also, at the most eastern end of Pelican Drive or   1337       6-24-99
on the north side of the intersection with
Driftwood Court as indicated by posted signs or in
the roadway.
Raleigh Street from its intersection with the
eastern line of North Lumina Avenue to the eastern  1337       6-24-99
end of Raleigh Street.
In the roadway on Russ Drive.                       1337       6-24-99
In the roadway or on the east and west side of
South Lumina Avenue at Iula south to Sunset Avenue  1337       6-24-99
except as provided for by marked spaces.
On the east side of 0-200 block of South Lumina, in
the roadway or on the west side except as provided  1337       6-24-99
for by marked spaces.
On the east side of the 300 block of South Lumina,
in the roadway or on the west side except as        1337       6-24-99
provided for by marked spaces.
On the east side of the 400 block of South Lumina,
in the roadway or on the west side except as        1337       6-24-99
provided for by marked spaces.
On the east side of the 500-600 block of South
Lumina, in the roadway or on the west side except   1337       6-24-99
as provided for by marked spaces.
At the most eastern end of Sandpiper Street or in   1337       6-24-99
the roadway.
On the east or west side of the 700 block of
Schloss Street to the most northern and southern    1337       6-24-99
ends or in the roadway.
On the east or west side of the 800 block of
Schloss Street to the most northern and southern    1337       6-24-99
ends or in the roadway.
On the east or west side of the 900 block of
Schloss Street to the southernmost ends or in the   1337       6-24-99
roadway.
In the roadway of Sea Oats Lane and throughout      1337       6-24-99
either turn circle.
On either side of Seacrest Drive or in the roadway. 1337       6-24-99
At the most eastern end of Seagull Street or in the 1337       6-24-99
roadway.
On the east or west side of Seapath and throughout
either turn circle at the southernmost ends or in   1337       6-24-99
the roadway.
On the north or south side of Seashore Street or in
the roadway except as designated by marked spaces   1337       6-24-99
on the north side.
On either side of Seawater Lane, in the roadway or  1337       6-24-99
adjacent to the recycle bins.
At the most eastern end of Shearwater Street or in  1337       6-24-99
the roadway.
In the roadway on Short Street from its
intersection with Keel Street west to the           1337; 1829 6-24-99; 6-10-21
intersection of Marina Street, except as provided
by marked spaces.
On the north or south side of Short Street from its
intersection with Schloss Street west to the        1337       6-24-99
intersection of Water Street or in the roadway.
On the east or west side or any portion of Smith    1337       6-24-99
Alley.
On the north or south side of Snyder Street or in   1337       6-24-99
the roadway.
On either side of South Ridge and throughout the    1337       6-24-99
turn circle or in the roadway.
On the north or south side of Sprunt Street or in   1337       6-24-99
the roadway.
On the north side of Stone Street from the junction
at North Lumina to the easternmost end throughout   1337       6-24-99
the turn circle or in the roadway.
On the north or south side of Sunset Avenue or in   1337       6-24-99
the roadway.
On the north or south side of Sweeney Street or in  1337       6-24-99
the roadway.
On the north or south side of Taylor Street or in   1337       6-24-99
the roadway.
At the westernmost end of W. Asheville Street or in 1337       6-24-99
the roadway.
At the westernmost end of W. Columbia Street or in  1337       6-24-99
the roadway.
At the westernmost end of W. Fayetteville Street or 1337       6-24-99
in the roadway.
At the westernmost end of W. Greensboro Street or   1337       6-24-99
in the roadway.
At the westernmost end of W. Henderson Street or in 1337       6-24-99
the roadway.
At the westernmost end of W. Oxford Street or in    1337       6-24-99
the roadway.
In the roadway or on the north or south side of W.
Salisbury Street, east of the Highway 74 Bridge, as 1337       6-24-99
designated by yellow curbing or markings.
On the east or west side of the 0-100 block of
Water Street to the northernmost paved end or in    1337       6-24-99
the roadway.
On the east or west side of the 200 block of Water
Street to the paved section at the northernmost end 1337       6-24-99
or in the roadway.
On the east or west side of the 300 block of Water  1337       6-24-99
Street or in the roadway.
On the east side of Waynick Boulevard in the
roadway or on the west side except as provided by   1337       6-24-99
marked spaces.
On the north or south side of Wright Street to the  1337       6-24-99
westernmost end or in the roadway.
On the south side of Causeway Drive from the
easternmost entrance to The Moorings extending      1410       3-28-02
westwardly for a distance of 153 feet
Along US 74 (West Salisbury Street) between the
east end of the bridge over the Intracoastal        1521       9-14-06
Waterway eastward to the west end of the bridge
over Banks Channel, a distance of 0.971 mile.
On the grass median located between Highway 74-76   1612       9-10-09
and West Salisbury Street.
On the grass median located between West Salisbury  1612       9-10-09
Street and Highway 74.
On the grass median located between Highway 74-76   1612       9-10-09
and Old Causeway Drive.
On the grass median located at the point where      1612       9-10-09
Highways 74 and 76 diverge.
On the grass median located at the point where Old
Causeway Drive intersects Highway 76 which grass    1612       9-10-09
median also serves to divide the east bound and
west bound traffic on Highway 76.
On any town property that is not clearly designated
for parking purposes. Designation for parking
purposes shall be accomplished by the use of signs
indicating that the property is available for
parking purposes. Provided, that the provisions of
this schedule shall not apply to town property on   1633       7-15-10
which parking is authorized by ordinance, to
parking in connection with special events sponsored
or approved by the town, to parking by town owned
vehicles and to parking authorized by a permit
issued by the Town Manager or his or her designee.
At the westernmost end of Augusta Street or in the  1773       3-8-18
roadway.
 
   (B)   Penalty. Violation of the provisions of this Schedule III shall
subject the offender to those penalties set forth in §
74.99 of this code.
(Ord., passed 5-26-83; Am. Ord. 1136, passed 2-14-91; Am. Ord. 1177, passed 4-
30-92; Am. Ord. 1230, passed 4-28-94; Am. Ord. 1288,passed 7-10-97; Am. Ord.
1332, passed 4-8-99; Am. Ord. 1337, passed 6-24-99; Am. Ord. 1409, passed 3-28-
02; Am. Ord. 1410, passed 3-28-02; Am. Ord. 1521, passed 9-14-06; Am. Ord.
1612, passed 9-10-09; Am. Ord. 1627, passed 5-13-10; Am. Ord. 1633, passed 7-
15-10; Am. Ord. 1679, passed 5-10-12; Am. Ord. 1773, passed 3-8-18; Am. Ord.
1795, passed 7-9-20; Am. Ord. 1829, passed 6-10-21)
SCHEDULE IV. PENALTIES FOR OVERTIME PARKING IN A METERED SPACE AND OTHER
VIOLATIONS OF THE PARKING ORDINANCES.
          If paid within 72 hours If paid after 72 hours If paid after 10 days
Violation commencing with         but within 10-day      following issuance of
          issuance of ticket      period commencing with ticket
                                  issuance of ticket
                     If paid within 72 If paid after 72
                     hours commencing  hours but within 10- If paid after 10
Violation            with issuance of  day period           days following
                     ticket            commencing with      issuance of ticket
                                       issuance of ticket
Parking overtime in
a metered space or   $50.00            $60.00               $70.00
time limited area
All other violations
of the parking
ordinances or
parking schedules in
Chapter 76  except   $150.00           $150.00              $150.00
as otherwise
provided in this
Schedule IV or
elsewhere in the
Town Code
Violation of
Chapter 76  -
Parking Schedules,
Schedule I(A) shall  $250.00           $250.00              $250.00
result in the
following fine, the
vehicle being towed
or both
Violation of §      $250.00           $250.00              $250.00
74.22 , FIRE LANES
Violation of §
74.23 ,              $250.00           $250.00              $250.00
HANDICAPPED PARKING
Violation of §
74.37 , OPERATION OF $300.00           $300.00              $300.00
METERS
Violation of §
74.25 , DESIGNATED   $250.00           $250.00              $250.00
LIFEGUARD PARKING
Violation of §§
74.45  -
74.47 , HARBOR       $150.00           $150.00              $150.00
ISLAND RESIDENTIAL
PARKING DISTRICT
Violation of §§
74.46 (B) and (C),
74.48 (A)(2) and
(B), parking         $150.00           $150.00              $150.00
trailers on Pelican
Drive, Old Causeway
Drive, Keel Street
and Marina Street
Parking in violation
of the provisions of
subsection (L) of
Schedule I of        $150.00           $150.00              $150.00
Chapter 76  for the
Commercial II
Parking Lot.
 
(Ord. 1228, passed 4-28-94; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 5-26-94; Am. Ord. 1333,
passed 4-8-99; Am. Ord. 1366, passed 7-13-00; Am. Ord. 1462, passed 6-10-04;
Am. Ord. 1598, passed 5-14-09; Am. Ord. 1621, passed 2-11-10; Am. Ord. 1656,
passed 5-12-11; Am. Ord. 1679, passed 5-10-12; Am. Ord. 1726, passed 3-25-14;
Am. Ord. 1729, passed 4-10-14; Am. Ord. 1745, passed 5-28-15; Am. Ord. 1805,
passed 7-17-20; Am. Ord. 1829, passed 6-10-21)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
Chapter
   
90.   ABANDONED VEHICLES
   
91.   ANIMALS
   
92.   BEACH AND SHORE REGULATIONS; WATER RECREATION
   
93.   CIVIL EMERGENCIES
   
94.   FIRE PREVENTION
   
95.   GARBAGE, TRASH, AND WEEDS
   
96.   HEALTH AND SANITATION
   
97.   NOISE AND PUBLIC NUISANCES
   
98.   SPECIAL EVENTS, PARADES, DEMONSTRATIONS, PICKETING, PUBLIC BEACH
   
99.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
   
100.   ALARM SYSTEMS
CHAPTER 90: ABANDONED VEHILCES
Section
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Removal of abandoned or junked motor vehicles
   
90.03   Abandoned, junked, and health or safety hazard vehicles
   
90.04   Exemptions
   
90.05   Notice and hearing
   
90.06   Geographical area to which this chapter applies
 
   
90.99   Penalty
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   "ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE." A motor vehicle as defined in G.S. § 160A-303(b)
that:
      (1)   Has been left upon a street or highway in violation of a law or
ordinance prohibiting parking;
      (2)   Is left on property owned or operated by the town for longer than
24 hours;
      (3)   Is left on private property without the consent of the owner,
occupant, or lessee thereof for longer than two hours;
      (4)   Is left on any public street or highway for longer than seven days
or is determined by law enforcement to be a hazard to the motoring public;
      (5)   Is moored, anchored, or otherwise located for more than 30
consecutive days in any 180-consecutive day period in any waters or marshes
waterward of the pierhead line as established by the Town of Wrightsville
Beach; or
      (6)   Is designed to float, is in danger of sinking, has sunk, is resting
on the bottom, or is located such that it is a hazard to navigation or in an
immediate danger to other vessels. Shipwrecks, vessels, cargoes, tackle and
other underwater archeological remains that have been in place for more than
ten years shall not be considered abandoned motor vehicles and shall not be
removed under the provisions of this section without the approval of the
Department of Cultural Resources, which is the legal custodian of these
properties pursuant to G.S. § 121-22 and G.S. § 121-23.
   "HEALTH OR SAFETY HAZARD VEHICLE." A motor vehicle as described in G.S. §
160A-303 that has, for a period of more than 48 hours, been in a state of
disrepair and is incapable of being moved under its own power and is found to
be a breeding ground or harbor for mosquitoes or other insects, snails, rats,
or vermin of any kind; a point of heavy growth of weeds or grass over eight
inches in height; a point of accumulation of stagnant water; a point of
concentration of gasoline, oil, or other flammable or explosive materials; is
so located that there is danger of the vehicle falling or turning over; a
source of danger for children through entrapment in areas of confinement that
cannot be opened from the inside or from exposed surfaces of metal, glass or
other rigid material; or in any other condition detrimental to the public
health or safety.
   "JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE." An abandoned motor vehicle as described hereinabove
that also is partially dismantled or wrecked; cannot be self- propelled or
moved in the manner in which it was originally intended to move; is more than
five years old and worth less than $100; or does not display a current license
plate.
(Am. Ord. 1785, passed 5-9-19)
§ 90.02 REMOVAL OF ABANDONED OR JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   Subject to division (B) below, whenever it is made to appear to
appropriate town officials that abandoned or junked motor vehicles as defined
in §90.01 exist within the town limits, the town may have the vehicles removed
to a storage yard or area and thereafter may dispose of them in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   No motor vehicle may be removed from private property without the
written request of the owner, lessee, or occupant of the premises unless the
Board of Aldermen or a duly authorized town official or employee has declared
it to be a health or safety hazard.
   (C)   The town may require any person requesting the removal of a junked or
abandoned motor vehicle from private property to indemnify the town against any
loss, expense, or liability incurred because of the removal, storage, or sale
thereof.
   (D)   No person shall be held to answer in any civil or criminal action to
any owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of any abandoned,
lost, or stolen motor vehicle for disposing of the vehicle as provided in this
chapter.
Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.03 ABANDONED, JUNKED, AND HEALTH OR SAFETY HAZARD VEHICLES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to
possession of a motor vehicle to cause or allow such vehicle to be abandoned or
to become a junked motor vehicle as described in this chapter.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to
possession of a vehicle or for the owner, lessee, or occupant of the real
property upon which the vehicle is located to leave or allow to remain on
property in the town any motor vehicle which is a health or safety hazard
vehicle as defined in this chapter.
Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.04 EXEMPTIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any motor vehicle in an
enclosed building or any vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise being
operated in a lawful place and manner if the vehicle is necessary to the
operation of the enterprise, or to any vehicle in an appropriate storage place
or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the town.
§ 90.05 NOTICE AND HEARING.
   (A)   In those cases where motor vehicles are towed pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter and the person who tows the vehicle is responsible
for collection of all towing fees, all provisions of G.S. Chapter 20, Article
7A (G.S. §§ 20-219.9 et seq.), shall apply.
   (B)   In those situations where motor vehicles are towed pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter and the town is responsible for collecting any
towing fees, the procedures set forth hereinafter shall apply.
   (C)   Pre-towing notice. Except as set forth in division (D) below, a motor
vehicle subject to the provisions of this chapter may only be towed after
notice to the owner or person entitled to possession of the vehicle. Notice
shall be given by affixing notice on the windshield or some other conspicuous
place on the vehicle. The notice shall state that civil penalties will begin in
seven days after the notice is affixed unless the motor vehicle is moved by the
owner or legal possessor at that time. Additionally in the case of a health or
safety hazard vehicle, if the names and mailing address of the owner of the
vehicle and the real property upon which the vehicle is located can be
determined with reasonable diligence, the notice shall also be given to both by
first class mail sent to the last known address of such persons as reflected on
the county tax records. Such note shall be deemed given when delivered into the
possession of the U.S. Postal Service.
   (D)   Pre-towing notice exception. If it is determined by the town that an
abandoned vehicle on public streets impedes the flow of traffic or otherwise
jeopardizes the public welfare so that immediate removal is required, the
vehicle may be removed without any pre-towing notice. Circumstances justifying
the immediate removal of a motor vehicle include but are not limited to,
vehicles obstructing traffic, vehicles parked in violation of parking
ordinances, vehicles blocking or impeding access to and from residences and
places of business, vehicles posing a traffic hazard and vehicles causing
damage on public or private property.
   (E)   Removal of vehicle; post-towing notice. Following removal of a motor
vehicle pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the town shall notify the
last known registered owner of the vehicle of the following:
      (1)   That the vehicle has been towed;
      (2)   A description of the vehicle;
      (3)   The place where the vehicle is stored;
      (4)   The violation with which the owner is charged, if any;
      (5)   The procedure that the owner must follow to have the vehicle
returned to such owner which shall include permitting the release of the
vehicle at any time after towing by the posting of a bond acceptable to the
town in an amount equal to twice the towing fees or by payment of all towing
fees owed;
      (6)   That the owner may file a request in writing with the magistrate in
the county where the vehicle was towed to determine if probable cause existed
for the towing. Such written request must be filed with the magistrate within
15 days of service on the owner of the notice required by this section. If the
owner is served by publication in the manner described in division (F) below,
the time for filing such request shall begin to run the day after the second
required publication.
   (F)   Procedure for giving the required notice. The notice required by
division (E) shall initially be given by telephone if possible. If the vehicle
has a North Carolina registration, notice shall be attempted by telephone
within 24 hours of towing. If the vehicle is not registered in this state,
notice shall be attempted by telephone within 72 hours of towing. Whether or
not the owner is reached by telephone, notice shall be mailed to the owner's
last known address within 48 hours of towing unless the owner or his agent
waives this notice in writing. Such mailing shall be by first class mail and by
certified mail, return receipt requested. If the owner's last known address
cannot be determined after a reasonable search for such address, such notice
shall be given by publishing the required notice once a week for three
successive weeks in a newspaper that is qualified for legal advertising in
accordance with G.S. § 1-597 and G.S. § 1-598 and circulated in the area where
the party to be served is believed by the serving party to be located or if
there is no reliable information concerning the location of the party then in a
newspaper circulated in Hanover County. The costs of such publication shall be
included in the towing fee to be recovered by the town as provided herein.
   (G)   Right to probable cause hearing before sale or final disposition of
vehicle; Right to recover vehicle; unauthorized removal unlawful.
      (1)   After towing of a motor vehicle under the provisions of this
chapter, the owner or other person entitled to possession may request in
writing a hearing to determine if probable cause existed for towing the
vehicle. The request must be filed within 15 days of the owner's receipt of the
notice required by division (E) above with the magistrate in the county in
which the vehicle was towed. The magistrate will set the hearing within 72
hours of receipt of the request and the hearing will be conducted in accordance
with the provisions of G.S. § 20-219.11.
      (2)   At any time after towing of a motor vehicle pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter, the owner may obtain possession of the motor
vehicle by paying the towing fee or by posting bond in accordance with G.S. §
20-219.12.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or attempt to remove
from any storage facility any vehicle which has been impounded pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter unless and until all towing fees are paid or a bond
is posted as prescribed by G.S. § 20-219.12.
   (H)   Sale and disposition of vehicle.
      (1)   With the consent of the owner, the town may dispose of any vehicle
towed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter without holding it for any
prescribed time.
      (2)   Any vehicle towed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall
be held for at least 30 days during which the owner may claim it by exhibiting
proof of ownership satisfactory to the town and paying all towing fees. A motor
vehicle held for more than 30 days may be sold in accordance with the
applicable provisions of G.S. 44A-4 except that no hearing other than the
probable cause hearing provided for in division (G) above shall be required. If
no one purchases the vehicle at the sale and the value of the vehicle is less
than the towing fees, the town may destroy the vehicle.
      (3)   The proceeds of the sale shall be paid in the manner set forth in
G.S. § 44A-5.
   (I)   Definitions. The definitions set forth in G.S. § 20-219.9 shall be
applicable to all provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 1785, passed 5-9-19)
§ 90.06 GEOGRAPHICAL AREA TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.
   The provisions of this Chapter 90 shall apply in those areas where the town
exercises territorial and extraterritorial jurisdiction under G.S. § 160A-360.
(Ord. 1785, passed 5-9-19)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   A violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute an
infraction punishable by a penalty of not more than $50.
   (B)   (1)   Any person who causes or allows a motor vehicle as defined in §
90.01(E) or (F) to be abandoned shall be subject to a civil penalty in the
amount of $250 for the first day of such offense and in the amount of $100 for
each after the first day of such offense that such violation continues within
12 months of the first offense to be recovered by the town in a civil action in
the nature of debt if the offender does not pay the penalty within ten days of
having been cited for a violation of this section. In accordance with G.S. §
160A-175(b), a violation of this section shall not be subject to the penalty
provisions of G.S. § 14-4 and shall not be considered a breach of the penal
laws of the state.
      (2)   A violation of any other provisions of this chapter shall subject
the offender to a civil penalty of $50.00. If any offender fails to pay the
civil penalty within ten days after being cited for a violation, the town may
seek to collect any such civil penalty in a civil action in the nature of debt.
   (C)   The town may seek to enforce the provisions of this chapter through
any appropriate equitable action.
   (D)   Each day that a violation continues after the offender has been
notified of a violation shall constitute a separate offense.
   (E)   The town may seek to enforce the provisions of this chapter by using
any one or any combination of the foregoing remedies.
(Am. Ord. 1785, passed 5-9-19)
CHAPTER 91: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
91.01   Purpose
   
91.02   Definitions
Restrictions
   
91.08   Restrictions
Control of Dogs and other Animals
   
91.10   Bird sanctuary
   
91.11   Dogs running at large prohibited
   
91.12   Dogs and other animals prohibited on beach and other public property at
certain times, places
   
91.13   Confinement of female dogs in heat
Administration and Enforcement
   
91.20   Animal Control Officer
   
91.21   Annual animal license tax
   
91.22   Animal as public nuisance
   
91.22.1   Non-resident owner responsibility
   
91.23   Impoundment
   
91.24   Notice to owner of impounded animal
   
91.25   Permissible periods of impoundment
   
91.26   Claiming impounded animal
   
91.27   Disposition of unclaimed animals
   
91.28   Enforcement of chapter
   
91.29   New Hanover County responsible for designation of a potentially
dangerous dog
 
   
91.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   Some but not all of the purposes of this chapter are to regulate,
restrict, or prohibit the keeping, running, or going at large of any domestic
animals, including dogs and cats; to establish a bird sanctuary within the town
limits; and to levy an annual license tax on the privilege of keeping dogs
within the town.
   (B) It is expressly recognized that the owners of animals are responsible
for the acts of their animals and it is the intent of this chapter to require
animal owners to comply with the law, not merely to have the town operate an
impoundment program. Police officers and animal control officers shall place
primary emphasis upon apprehending and initiating prosecution of violators of
this chapter.
(Ord., passed 9-28-78)
Statutory reference:
   Regulation of domestic animals, see G.S. § 160A-186
   Violation of ordinances, see G.S. § 14-4
§ 91.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   "ANIMAL AT LARGE" or "STRAY." Any animal off the premises of his owner and
not on a leash, or any animal within the town wandering lost which does not
have an owner.
   "ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER." Any person designated to perform the duties
described by this chapter.
   "ANIMAL SHELTER." Any facility designated by the Board of Aldermen for the
purpose of impounding or caring for animals under authority of this chapter.
   "MEANS TO PROPERLY REMOVE AND DISPOSE OF FECES." An owner or custodian of a
dog will have on or near their person a device such as a plastic bag, or other
suitable plastic or paper container, that can be used to fully clean-up and
contain dog waste until it can be disposed of in an appropriate container. Such
a device must be produced and shown, upon request, to anyone authorized to
enforce these ordinances.
   "PUBLIC NUISANCE." Any domesticated animal or group of animals which:
      (1)   Is found at large;
      (2)   Damages the property of anyone other than its owner, including but
not limited to, turning over garbage containers or damaging gardens, flowers,
or vegetables;
      (3)   Is a vicious animal;
      (4)   Causes fouling of the air by odors;
      (5)    Causes unsanitary conditions of enclosures or surroundings;
      (6)   By virtue of number of type, is offensive or dangerous to the
public health, safety, or welfare;
      (7)   Barks, whines, or howls in an excessive, continuous, or untimely
fashion;
      (8)   Is diseased and dangerous to the public health;
      (9)   Habitually or repeatedly chases, snaps at, attacks, or barks at
pedestrians, bicyclists, or vehicles; or
      (10)   Appears on the public beaches of the Atlantic Ocean within the
town at any place east of the established building line on the beach and an
extension northward and southward of the building line to the northern and
southern boundary lines of the town, whether on a leash or not, at any time
between the dates of April l and September 30 of each year.
      (11)   Is a dog and which dog deposits feces on public property or on
private property without the consent of the owner or person in lawful
possession of the private property, and the person owning, possessing,
harboring or having the care, charge, control or custody of the dog fails to
remove the feces so deposited. Provided, however, that a dog accompanying a
blind person and used for the assistance of the blind person shall not be
included within this definition.
   "VICIOUS ANIMAL." Any animal which constitutes a physical threat to human
beings or other animals by virtue of attacks of a number and severity as to
cause property damage or physical injury.
(Ord., passed 9-28-78; Am. Ord., passed 5-28-81; Am. Ord. 1172, passed 4-16-92;
Am. Ord. 1407, passed 3-28-02)
RESTRICTIONS
§ 91.08 RESTRICTIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following restrictions shall apply:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any dog to take it
off its own property limits without the means to properly remove and dispose of
their dog's feces from any public or private property.
   (B)   It is the responsibility of a dog's owner or custodian to clean up
their dog's feces from any public or private property outside of their own
property limits. These properties are to include, but not be limited to,
beaches, rights-of-way, paths and public access areas.
(Ord. 1407, passed 3-28-02)
Penalty, see § 91.99
CONTROL OF DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS
§ 91.10 BIRD SANCTUARY.
   (A)   The area embraced within the town limits and all land owned or leased
by the town outside the corporate limits is designated as a bird sanctuary.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to intentionally trap, hunt, shoot, or otherwise
kill, any bird within the sanctuary established by division (A); provided, that
this section does not prohibit such actions by the town or its authorized
agents in dealing with any bird or animal found to be a public nuisance as
defined herein so long as such activity undertaken by the town or its
authorized agents does not violate applicable state and federal statutes, rules
and regulations.
   (C)   The civic clubs of the town are granted permission to erect artistic
signs, giving notice of the regulations herein provided, at those places and of
a design as may be approved by the Board of Aldermen.
(Ord., passed 9-28-78; Am. Ord. 1448, passed 8-14-03)
Penalty, see § 91.99
Statutory reference:
   Bird sanctuaries, see G.S. § 160A-188
§ 91.11 DOGS RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog to allow the animal to be off
the premises of his owner and not on a leash in the town.
(Ord., passed 9-28-78)
Penalty, see § 91.99
§ 91.12 DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS PROHIBITED ON BEACH AND OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTY AT
CERTAIN TIMES, PLACES.
   (A)   Except as otherwise permitted herein, no animals (to include horses)
shall be permitted at any time on the public beach of the Atlantic Ocean within
the town. For purposes of this chapter, the "public beach of the Atlantic Ocean
within the town" shall mean all of that property zoned Conservation Zone (P-1)
under the Town Code and located within the town limits and lying east of Lumina
Avenue and south of Jack Parker Boulevard.
   (B)   Between the dates of April 1 and September 30 of each year, no person
shall allow a dog on the public beach of the Atlantic Ocean.
   (C)   Between the dates of October 1 and March 31 of each year, dogs shall
be allowed on the public beach of the Atlantic Ocean only if leashed and such
leashed dog is under the control of the person in possession of such dog.
   (D)   No person shall possess or allow a snake on the public beach of the
Atlantic Ocean or on any property owned by the town or on a public street or
sidewalk.
   (E)   Service animals registered under the provisions of G.S. Chapter 168
shall be allowed on the public beach of the Atlantic Ocean at all times.
   (F)   The Board of Aldermen shall have the authority to prohibit dogs and
other animals on any public property within the town in connection with group
activities approved by the Board of Aldermen or at other times where such
prohibition is deemed necessary by the Board of Aldermen for the health and
safety of the general public. The general public shall be given notice of such
prohibition by publication of a notice giving the dates, times and place of
such prohibition at least five calendar days prior to the activity and by
posting signs at the time and place of the activity giving notice of such
prohibition.
   (G)   Dogs are prohibited at all times from the Greensboro Street Mini-Park
located between Greensboro and Salisbury Streets.
(Ord., passed 9-28-78; Am. Ord., passed
5-28-81; Am. Ord. 1201, passed 10-22-92; Am. Ord. 1348, passed 11-18-99; Am.
Ord. 1389, passed 7-12-01; Am. Ord. 1408, passed 3-28-02; Am. Ord. 1676, passed
3-8-12)
Penalty, see § 91.99
Cross-reference:
   Beach regulations, see
Ch. 92
§ 91.13 CONFINEMENT OF FEMALE DOGS IN HEAT.
   Every female dog, while in heat, shall be confined in a building or secure
enclosure in a manner that she will not be in contact with another dog, nor
create a nuisance by attracting other animals. This section shall not be
construed to prohibit the intentional breeding of animals within an enclosed
area on the premises of the owner of an animal being bred.
(Ord., passed 9-28-78)
Penalty, see § 91.99
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 91.20 ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.
   (A) In order to abate the aforementioned problems and enforce the
regulations hereinafter set forth, primary responsibility is delegated to the
Animal Control Officer. The Officer, in the performance of his duties, shall
have all the powers, authorities, and immunities granted under this chapter and
by the general laws of this state to enforce the provisions of this chapter and
the state law which relate to the care, treatment, or impounding of animals,
but shall not have the power of arrest.
   (B) It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder, or molest
any animal control officer, police officer, or other duly appointed agent while
in the performance of any duty authorized by this chapter, or to seek to
release any animal in the custody of these agents except in the manner herein
provided.
(Ord., passed 9-28-78)
Penalty, see § 91.99
Cross-reference:
   Power to appoint, see Charter Sec.
4.6
Statutory reference:
   Animal regulations, see G.S. § 160A-186
§ 91.21 ANNUAL ANIMAL LICENSE TAX.
   (A)   All dog and cat owners residing in the town for over 15 days shall
register their dogs and cats with the Town Office annually, and provide
pertinent information as may be requested including the size, age, breed,
color, sex, legal residence of the animal, and the name and address of the
owner.
   (B)   A license tax, to be established by the Board of Aldermen, shall be
paid to the Town Office who, in return, will provide the owner with a suitable
dog or cat license tax tag. The animal license tax levied by this section shall
be for the privilege of keeping, harboring, and maintaining a dog or cat within
the town, and the animal license shall expire at the end of the ensuing tax
listing period.
   (C)   The license period shall be from January 1 to December 31 of every
calendar year. Grace period for annual registration will extend through January
31.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any dog owner to permit any dog over four
months old to appear or be on any street, park, or public way of the town or in
any public place therein unless the dog is wearing a collar or harness to which
is attached a current rabies vaccination tag and a current town animal license
tax tag (when the license tax tag is required under this chapter) which have
been issued for that dog.
   (E) The annual animal license tax required hereunder shall be $10 for
altered and unaltered dogs and cats.
(Ord., passed 9-28-78; Am. Ord., passed 11-2-78; Am. Ord. 1413, passed 3-28-02;
Am. Ord. 1606, passed 6-25-09)
Penalty, see § 91.99
Statutory reference:
   Animal taxes, see G.S. § 160A-212
§ 91.22 ANIMAL AS PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to maintain a public nuisance as defined
in § 91.02 of this chapter.
   (B)   In addition to other methods of enforcement, upon receipt of a
complaint being made to the Police Department or Animal Control Officer by any
resident or residents that any person is maintaining a public nuisance as
defined in § 91.02 of this chapter, the Animal Control Officer, Chief of
Police, or his designated representative, shall investigate the matter and may
notify the owner of the animal or animals in question that a complaint has been
received.
   (C)   If the findings of the investigating officer indicate that the
complaint is justified, then the Animal Control Officer, Chief of Police, or
his designated representative shall proceed to take action as is deemed
necessary to enforce this chapter.
(Ord., passed 9-28-78) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.22.1 NON-RESIDENT OWNER RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   A non-resident owner of any premises subject to this chapter shall be
responsible and liable for any actions by the tenants or occupants of the
premises that constitute second or subsequent violations of §
91.22 of this chapter.
   (B)   No non-resident owner shall be liable unless notified of first
violations of this chapter by the tenants or occupants. Provided further that
the first violation shall have occurred within the previous 24-month period.
Notice of such first violation shall be effected by mailing a copy of the
citation to the non-resident owner by registered or certified mail, return
receipt requested.
   (C)   No non-resident owner may be subjected to criminal liability by the
application of this section, but shall be subject to civil penalties or
equitable relief as provided hereinafter. This section shall in no way relieve
any tenant or occupant from responsibility for violations of this chapter.
   (D)   The owner or occupant of any premises shall be liable for any actions
of guests or invitees on the premises that violate this chapter. The owner’s
liability shall be determined as set forth in division (A) above. In order to
be liable for such actions, the occupant must have been actually or
constructively present at the premises at the time of the violation by the
guest or invitee.
(Ord. 1710, passed 5-9-13)
§ 91.23 IMPOUNDMENT.
   Domesticated animals, including dogs, may be impounded when found at large
or when constituting a public nuisance.
(Ord., passed 9-28-78)
Cross-reference:
   Public nuisance, see §
91.22
§ 91.24 NOTICE TO OWNER OF IMPOUNDED ANIMAL.
   The Animal Control Officer shall make reasonable efforts to notify the owner
of any impounded animal.
(Ord., passed 9-28-78)
§ 91.25 PERMISSIBLE PERIODS OF IMPOUNDMENT.
   Domesticated animals shall be impounded for no less than three days unless
claimed by its owner in accordance with this chapter. The animals shall be
impounded in a humane manner in any animal shelter designated by the Board of
Aldermen.
(Ord., passed 9-28-78)
§ 91.26 CLAIMING IMPOUNDED ANIMALS.
   (A)   The owner of an impounded animal shall be entitled to claim the
animal, except as provided in this section, upon compliance with the license
provisions of this chapter, the payment of all designated fees and penalties,
and upon furnishing proof of ownership.
   (B)   Reclaiming fees as provided in this section shall be $3 per day for
each animal plus a $10 penalty, except in the case of dogs without a current
license in which case the penalty will be $20. This fee and penalty does not
include applicable charges for any license or rabies inoculation that may be
required by this chapter or other applicable law. If the animal claimed is not
properly licensed or inoculated, the owner shall secure the necessary license
and have the animal inoculated.
   (C)   For each animal that is impounded more than one time within a 12-month
period, the penalty for taking up and impounding the animal shall be $20 in all
cases.
(Ord., passed 9-28-78)
Cross-reference:
   License tax, see §
91.21
§ 91.27 DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED ANIMALS.
   (A)   If an animal is not claimed by the owner within four days after
impoundment, the animal may be disposed of in one of the following ways:
      (1)   Release for adoption by a new owner who shows evidence of ability
and intention to provide the animal with an appropriate home and care.
      (2)   Turning the animal over to the New Hanover County Animal Control
Center.
   (B)   For animals turned over to the New Hanover County Animal Control
Center as provided above, it shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of the
animal to take animal from the center without first complying with all
reclaiming requirements of this chapter.
(Ord., passed 9-28-78)
Penalty, see § 91.99
Statutory reference:
   Animal shelters, see § G.S. 160A-493
§ 91.28 ENFORCEMENT OF CHAPTER.
   The provisions of the chapter shall be enforced by the Animal Control
Officer, police officers, and other officers as may be authorized by the Board
of Aldermen, under the operational supervision of the Police Department
pursuant to policies established by the Board of Aldermen.
(Ord., passed 9-28-78)
§ 91.29 NEW HANOVER COUNTY RESPONSIBLE FOR DESIGNATION OF A POTENTIALLY
DANGEROUS DOG.
   The current provisions of New Hanover County Animal Control Ordinances
regarding the designation of a potentially dangerous dog are hereby adopted and
shall apply within the corporate limits of the town.
(Ord. 1824, passed 3-11-21)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   A violation of §§
91.08,
91.11,
91.12, and
91.13 shall subject the offender to a civil penalty of $250. Civil penalties
may be recovered by the town in a civil action in the nature of debt if the
offender does not pay the penalty within 14 days after being cited for
violation of the section. In accordance with G.S. § 160A-175(b), a violation of
the sections enumerated in this division (A) shall not be subject to the
penalty provisions of G.S. § 14-4 and shall not be considered a breach of the
penal laws of the state.
   (B)   A violation of any remaining provisions of this chapter not specified
in division (A) above is a misdemeanor punishable in accordance with the
provisions of G.S. § 14-4. The fine for such violations shall not exceed $500.
   (C)   A violation of any remaining provisions of this chapter not specified
in division (A) above shall subject the offender to a civil penalty of $250.
Civil penalties may be recovered by the town in a civil action in the nature of
debt if the offender does not pay the penalty within 14 days after being cited
for violation of the provision.
   (D)   Enforcement of this chapter may be by appropriate equitable remedy,
injunction, or an order of abatement issuing from a court of competent
jurisdiction pursuant to G.S. § 160A-175(d)and(e).
   (E)   The violation of any provision of this chapter may be enforced by one,
all of a combination of the remedies authorized and prescribed in G.S. § 160A-
175; provided, that in no event shall a violation of the subsections enumerated
in division (A) above be subject to the penalty provisions of G.S. § 14-4 nor
shall they be considered a breach of the penal laws of the state.
   (F)   Any person issued a civil citation under the provisions of this
section may appeal the issuance of such citation to the Wrightsville Beach
Chief of Police (“Chief of Police”). An appeal shall be perfected in accordance
with the following:
      (1)   An appeal shall be taken by giving written notice of appeal to the
Chief of Police within 14 calendar days of the date of issuance of the civil
citation. In determining the 14 calendar days within which such appeal may be
taken, the date of the civil citation shall not be counted.
      (2)   Such written notice must be received by the Chief of Police no
later than 5:00 p.m. on the fourteenth day of the appeal period. If the
fourteenth day falls on a Saturday, Sunday or holiday recognized by the town,
the time for filing such appeal shall be extended to 5:00 p.m. on the next day
which is not a Saturday, Sunday or holiday.
      (3)   A copy of the citation issued to the appealing party shall be
attached to such written notice of appeal.
      (4)   The written notice of appeal shall set forth the grounds for the
appeal, include other information that the appealing party believes supports
its position and must include the name, email address, mailing address and
telephone number of the appealing party.
      (5)   Within 15 calendar days of receipt of the written notice of appeal,
the Chief of Police shall issue a written decision. The Chief of Police may
uphold the citation, dismiss the citation or reduce the citation to some lesser
offense. Provided, that the Chief of Police may not impose any penalty greater
than that set forth in the citation from which appeal was taken. The written
decision of the Chief of Police will be emailed or mailed by first class mail
to the appealing party within five days of issuance to the email address or
mailing address of the appealing party shown on the written notice of appeal.
      (6)   The decision of the Chief of Police shall be final.
      (7)   If the Chief of Police upholds the citation or takes other action
that requires the appealing party to make payment to the town, such payment
must be made within 30 days of the date of the written decision of the Chief of
Police. If the appealing party fails to make payment within that time, the town
shall undertake enforcement action as appropriate.
(Ord., passed 9-28-78; Am. Ord. 1069, passed 1-28-88; Am. Ord. 1413, passed 3-
28-02; Am. Ord. 1534, passed 3-28-07; Am. Ord. 1596, passed 4-9-09; Am. Ord.
1684, passed 7-12-12; Am. Ord. 1688, passed 8-16-12)
CHAPTER 92: BEACH AND SHORE REGULATIONS; WATER RECREATION
Section
   
92.01   Definitions
   
92.02   Littering and smoking on beach prohibited
   
92.03   Containers for food and drink
   
92.04   Devices for cooking food prohibited
   
92.05   Use of motor vehicle by handicapped persons to enter ocean
   
92.06   Authority to declare ocean unsafe
   
92.07   Swimming in ocean prohibited when unsafe
   
92.08   Transportation, storage and launching of vessels on the beach adjoining
the Atlantic Ocean
   
92.09   Tents, umbrellas and canopies on beach strand
   
92.10   Operating boat near beach
   
92.11   Diving from fishing pier
   
92.12   Use of surfboard or ski-board restricted
   
92.13   Motorboat mufflers
   
92.14   Baiting or attracting sharks prohibited
   
92.15   Vegetation, sea oats; not to be removed
   
92.16   Fishing from bridges
   
92.17   Filling holes and trenches created on beach strand
   
92.18   Use of vehicles on beach prohibited
   
92.19   [Reserved]
   
92.20   Mooring buoys prohibited within the zoning jurisdiction of the town
   
92.21   Prohibition on docking vessels at Wynn Plaza
   
92.21.1   Diving from Wynn Plaza
   
92.22   Abandoned vessel unlawful; removal authorized
   
92.23   (Reserved)
   
92.24   Notice when vessel removed; hearing
   
92.25   Authorized towing services
   
92.26   Operation of personal watercraft
   
92.27   Mooring of boats and construction of piers
   
92.28   Sale or rental of merchandise, equipment or personal services
prohibited on beach front
   
92.29   Business activities permitted on beach front
   
92.30   Prohibition on passenger pick up or delivery
   
92.31   Unlawful to release balloon on town property, beach front and waters
surrounding the town
   
92.32   Diving from bridges
   
92.33   Protection of dunes
 
   
92.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Dogs on beaches, see §
91.21
§ 92.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   “ABANDONED VESSEL.” A vessel that:
      (1)   Is moored, anchored, or otherwise located for more than 30
consecutive days in any 180-consecutive-day period in any waters or marshes (a)
waterward of the pierhead line as established by the town and (b) within the
zoning jurisdiction of the town as established pursuant to the provisions G.S.
§ 160A-360.
      (2)   If designed to float, is in danger of sinking, has sunk, is resting
on the bottom, or is located such that it is a hazard to navigation or is an
immediate danger to other vessels. Shipwrecks, vessels, cargoes, tackle, and
other underwater archeological remains that have been in place for more than
ten years shall not be considered abandoned vessels and shall not be removed
under the provisions of this section without the approval of the Department of
Cultural Resources, which is the legal custodian of these properties pursuant
to G.S. § 121-22 and G.S. § 121-23.
   “ANY ONE LOCATION.” All the waters within the limits of the town.
   “AUTHORIZED TOWN OFFICIAL.” A police officer, code enforcement officer or
other own employee designated by the Town Manager to carry out the duties
described in this chapter.
   “BEACH FRONT.” All of that property zoned conservation zone (P-1) under the
Town Code and located within the town limits and lying east of Lumina Avenue
and south of Jack Parker Boulevard.
   “BOAT OR VESSEL.” A vessel or watercraft of any type or size specifically
designed to be self-propelled, whether by engine, sail, oar, paddle, or other
means, which is used to travel from place to place by water. A “BOAT OR VESSEL”
shall also include any machine designed or intended to travel over water by
self-propulsion or while attached to any self-propelled vessel.
   “FLOATING STRUCTURE.” Any structure not a boat, supported by means of
floatation, designed to be used without a permanent foundation, which is used
or intended for human habitation or commerce. A structure will be considered a
“FLOATING STRUCTURE” when it is inhabited or used for commercial purposes for
more than 30 days in any one location. A boat may be deemed a “FLOATING
STRUCTURE” when its means of propulsion have been removed or rendered
inoperative and it contains at least 200 square feet of living space area.
(Ord., passed 7-28-78)
   “KITE BUGGY.” Any wheeled vehicle propelled by wind through the use of a
kite, sail or similar device.
   “OCEAN-RELATED BUSINESS ACTIVITIES.” A business activity limited solely to
teaching participants to surf or kite board and the rental of chairs and
umbrellas by hotels and private clubs located immediately adjacent to the beach
front.
   “SURFBOARD” or “SKI-BOARD.” Any planing hull (planing hulls designed
primarily for sailing or other boating are neither contemplated nor included in
this section), constructed of any material, which is or may be used to ride on
by any person in any manner in, on, above, or through the water, with the
exception of:
      (l)   Any closed-cell foam object less than five feet in length, without
a hard fiber-glass, plastic, or like cover, enclosure, or surface.
      (2)   Any inflatable object less than l5 lbs. p.s.i. pressure and less
than five feet in length.
('72 Code, § 14-3) (Ord., passed l0-26-78; Am. Ord. 1428, passed 10-10-02; Am.
Ord. 1593, passed 3-12-09; Am. Ord. 1626, passed 4-22-10; Am. Ord. 1663, passed
8-11-11; Am. Ord. 1772, passed 1-11-18)
§ 92.02 LITTERING AND SMOKING ON BEACH PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall throw, deposit, cause, or permit to be thrown or
deposited, any glass, bottles, glassware, cans, garbage, waste, cigarettes,
cigars or other tobacco products, or refuse of any kind on the beach front as
defined in this chapter and any other beaches along the Atlantic Ocean,
Masonboro Inlet, Banks Channel and waters and waterways in the town or any
water adjacent to the beaches and shores of the town.
   (B)   Smoking is prohibited on the beach along the Atlantic Ocean from the
southern line of Jack Parker Boulevard extended eastwardly to the high water
line of the Atlantic Ocean to the northern line of the public parking lot
immediately south of the Shell Island Resort Hotel extended eastwardly to the
high water line of the Atlantic Ocean. For purposes of this section, smoking
shall mean the use or possession of a lighted cigarette, lighted cigar, lighted
pipe, or other lighted tobacco product.
   (C)   The Town shall post signs notifying the public that smoking is
prohibited that meet the following requirements:
      (1)   State in English that smoking is prohibited.
      (2)   Be of sufficient size to be clearly legible to a person of normal
vision and be conspicuously posted.
      (3)   Be posted in locations and at intervals reasonably calculated to
inform the public of the prohibition of smoking on the beach.
('72 Code, § 13-l) (Am. Ord. 1674, passed 11-2-12)
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.03 CONTAINERS FOR FOOD AND DRINK.
   No person shall take, carry, or cause to be carried upon the public beaches,
quasi-public beaches, or water adjacent thereto within the town any glass
containers that could be used for the purpose of transporting food or beverage.
This section shall not be deemed to include thermos bottles or thermos jugs.
('72 Code, § 13-2) (Ord. 1123, passed
9-13-90)
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.04 DEVICES FOR COOKING FOOD.
   No person shall carry or cause to be carried upon the public beaches or
quasi-public beaches of the town any device that could be used for the purpose
of cooking any food.
('72 Code, § 13-3)
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.05 USE OF MOTOR VEHICLE BY HANDICAPPED PERSONS TO ENTER OCEAN.
   The Board of Aldermen or Town Manager may grant authorization to a
handicapped person to use a motor vehicle for the purpose of ingress and egress
to the Atlantic Ocean. The vehicle must be approved by the Board of Aldermen or
the Town Manager. A permit, issued by the Wrightsville Beach Police Department,
must accompany vehicles accessing the beach stand. The permit will specify the
date and location where the vehicle will be operated.
('72 Code, § 13-4) (Am. Ord. 1531, passed 3-15-07)
§ 92.06 AUTHORITY TO DECLARE OCEAN UNSAFE.
   The Chief of Police may declare the ocean to be unsafe, dangerous, and
injurious when in his or her opinion and discretion, after considering and
weighing all factors, he or she deems it for the best interest and safety of
all concerned. The public shall be notified of the action by the most practical
and expedient means.
('72 Code, § 13-5)
§ 92.07 SWIMMING IN OCEAN PROHIBITED WHEN UNSAFE.
   (A)   When conditions exist which make it unsafe for persons to swim in the
waters of the Atlantic Ocean adjoining the town boundaries or other waters
within or adjoining the boundaries of the town, the Town Manager is authorized
to declare designated portions of the Atlantic Ocean or other waters within or
adjoining the boundaries of the town to be unsafe for swimming. Such
declaration shall be in writing, shall be signed by the Town Manager and shall
specifically describe the geographic area so determined to be unsafe.
   (B)   Upon execution of such a declaration by the Town Manager, it shall be
unlawful for any person to swim in the areas declared to be unsafe by the Town
Manager.
   (C)   Any declaration issued by the Town Manager under the provisions of
this section shall be valid for a period of 14 days excluding the day on which
the declaration is signed. Upon the expiration of such 14-day period, the Town
Manager's declaration shall expire; upon such expiration it shall no longer be
unlawful to swim in the areas described in the declaration; provided, that
nothing shall prevent the Board of Aldermen from continuing such prohibition of
swimming for such additional period and within such areas as it deems
appropriate by ordinance adopted either before or after expiration of the Town
Manager's declaration.
   (D)   Nothing contained herein shall be construed to permit the Town
Manager, acting pursuant to this authority, or the Board of Aldermen to
prohibit swimming altogether within the waters of the Atlantic Ocean adjacent
to the boundaries of the town or within other waters within or adjacent to the
boundaries of the town.
('72 Code, § 13-6) (Am. Ord. 1239, passed 8-25-94)
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.08 TRANSPORTATION, STORAGE AND LAUNCHING OF VESSELS ON THE BEACH ADJOINING
THE ATLANTIC OCEAN.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to moor, store or place any
vessel, to include sailboats of any type, on any portion of the beach adjoining
the Atlantic Ocean and described in division (E) below except as follows:
      (1)   Vessels owned and/or operated by employees and agents of the town,
county, state or the U.S. government while engaged in official duties.
      (2)   In an emergency situation.
      (3)   Vessels registered with a race or regatta pursuant to a group
activity request approved by the town in accordance with applicable town
ordinances. Provided, that in no event shall such boats be placed more than 50
feet west of the high water mark or on any portion of the beach on which
vegetation exists.
      (4)   Vessels not in excess of 25 feet in length and powered by sail, oar
or paddle provided that in no event shall such boats be placed more than 50
feet west of the high water mark or on any portion of the beach on which
vegetation exists and provided further that no such vessel shall be permitted
on the beach between sunset and sunrise.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to launch, land or transport other than by
portage any vessel, to include sailboats of any type, on any portion of the
beach adjoining the Atlantic Ocean and described in division (E) below except
as follows:
      (1)   Vessels owned and/or operated by employees and agents of the town,
county, state or the U.S. government while engaged in official duties.
      (2)   In an emergency situation.
      (3)   Vessels registered with a race or regatta pursuant to a group
activity request approved by the town in accordance with applicable town
ordinances. Provided, that in no event shall such boats be placed more than 50
feet west of the high water mark or on any portion of the beach on which
vegetation exists.
      (4)   Vessels not exceeding 25 feet in length and powered solely by sail,
paddle or oar may be transported by portage across the beach area described
hereinabove.
   (C)   From April 1 through September 30, it shall be unlawful to launch or
land any vessel within 200 feet of either side of an established lifeguard
stand located on any portion of the beach adjoining the Atlantic Ocean and
described in division (E) below except as follows:
      (1)   Vessels owned and/or operated by employees and agents of the town,
county, state or the U.S. government while engaged in official duties.
      (2)   In an emergency situation.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful at any time to launch or land any vessel within
750 feet of a fishing pier located on any portion of the beach adjoining the
Atlantic Ocean and described in division (E) below except as follows:
      (1)   Vessels owned and/or operated by employees and agents of the town,
county, state or the U.S. government while engaged in official duties.
      (2)   In an emergency situation.
   (E)   The provisions of this section shall apply to that portion of the
beach lying within the boundaries of the town adjacent to the waters of the
Atlantic Ocean and described as follows:
   Seaward of the property line of the town of Wrightsville Beach as
established by Chapter 246 of the Public Laws of 1939, as amended, and as shown
on the map(s) of said property line maintained by the Department of Public
Works of the Town of Wrightsville Beach extending to the northern terminus of
said property line and then seaward of the western boundary of property of the
Town of Wrightsville Beach adjoining the Atlantic Ocean as extended northwardly
from said terminus; to the northern boundary of tract 7 as shown on that map
entitled "North Shell Island Subdivision" and recorded in Map Book 25 at Page
20, New Hanover County Registry.
(Ord. 1356, passed 3-9-00)
§ 92.09 TENTS, UMBRELLAS AND CANOPIES ON BEACH STRAND.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave tents, canopies or umbrellas on
the beach strand adjacent to the waters of the Atlantic Ocean overnight without
prior approval of the Town Manager or his or her authorized designee.
(Ord. 1548, passed 9-13-07)
§ 92.10 OPERATING BOAT NEAR BEACH.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a boat powered by a gasoline
or diesel fueled engine or by internal combustion engine inside the area 100
yards eastward from the mean high water mark of the Atlantic Ocean in a manner
as to create a hazard to others.
(Ord., passed 6-25-81; Am. Ord. 1258, passed 9-14-95)
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.11 DIVING FROM FISHING PIER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to jump, dive, leap, or any way propel
his or her body from any commercial fishing pier within the town at any time.
('72 Code, § 15-22) (Ord., passed 5-26-83)
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.12 USE OF SURFBOARD OR SKI-BOARD RESTRICTED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or have in their
possession, in the Atlantic Ocean within the town's regulatory jurisdiction as
set forth in Chapter 539 of the 1973 Session Laws, any surfboard or ski- board,
as follows:
      (1)   At any time within 100 feet north of the Masonboro Inlet jetty,
within 350 feet north and south of the commercial fishing pier known as “Johnny
Mercer’s,” and within 350 feet north and south of the Crystal Pier adjacent to
the current Oceanic Restaurant.
      (2)   In a designated area as follows:
         (a)   In front of each lifeguard stand during the period of the
Saturday before Memorial Day through Labor Day whenever a lifeguard is on duty
in the lifeguard stand. The designated area shall be no longer than 750 feet
and no shorter than 600 feet, and shall extend 300 feet (100 yards) seaward
from the mean high water mark of the Atlantic Ocean.
         (b)   In other areas designated by the Ocean Rescue Director or his
designee due to weather, crowd conditions, special events or other factors.
         (c)   At any time when surfing is prohibited in such a designated
area, a flag shall be raised at each end of the subject area so as to be
readily visible to all persons within said area.
         (d)   Surfing shall be permitted in all areas during times when the
Ocean Rescue Director or his or her designee has posted red warning flags
indicating dangerous swimming conditions.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to hold any surfing contests at any time within
the corporate limits or within areas subject to the regulatory jurisdiction of
the town without first obtaining written approval from the Board of Aldermen
pursuant to the group activity permit process. The group activity permit may
allow such contests in areas and at times otherwise prohibited by ordinance.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to use a surfboard in the waters of the Atlantic
Ocean within the town's regulatory jurisdiction without having an ankle strap
or shock cord securely attached to the user at one end and the surfboard at the
other. In addition, it shall be unlawful for any person to possess or have
under his or her control on the beach strand adjacent to the waters of the
Atlantic Ocean within the town’s regulatory jurisdiction a surfboard without an
ankle strap affixed to the board.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to swim in the Atlantic Ocean
within 100 feet of the Masonboro Inlet jetty. This prohibition will not apply
to persons engaged in snorkeling or scuba diving within 100 feet of the
Masonboro Inlet jetty.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person to swim in the Atlantic Ocean
within 200 feet of the commercial fishing pier known as “Johnny Mercer’s;” and
within 200 feet of the Crystal Pier adjacent to the current Oceanic Restaurant.
This prohibition will apply to persons engaged in snorkeling or scuba diving.
('72 Code, § 14-14) (Ord. passed 10-26-78; Am. Ord. passed 7-24-80; Am. Ord.
passed 5-28-81; Am. Ord. passed 7-22-82; Am. Ord. 1048, passed 4-9-87; Am. Ord.
1474, passed 4-14-05; Am. Ord. 1490, passed 1-26-06; Am. Ord. 1533, passed 4-
12-07; Am. Ord. 1575, passed 5-8-08; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 10-11-12; Am. Ord.
1707, passed 5-9-13) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.13 MOTORBOAT MUFFLERS.
   No boat equipped or driven by a gasoline motor or by other internal
combustion engine, including those driven by outboard motors, shall be driven
or plied in the waters of the Banks Channel between the northern edge of
Masonboro Inlet and the southern edge of Wrightsville or Moore's Inlet, unless
the motor or engine is equipped with suitable mufflers of some standard or
approved type.
('72 Code, § 14-7)
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.14 BAITING OR ATTRACTING SHARKS PROHIBITED.
   No person fishing from a pier or the shore within the town limits shall bait
or cause to be used any bait which attracts sharks of any type to the shores or
piers. This section shall not prevent regular and normal fishing now done on
piers and shores of the town, except to the extent it affects the baiting and
luring of sharks to the waters of the town.
('72 Code, § 14-12)
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.15 VEGETATION, SEA OATS; NOT TO BE REMOVED.
   No persons shall remove from any property owned by the town any sea oats or
other native vegetation which is useful and helpful in the preservation of such
land against wind, water, or tidal erosion.
('72 Code, § 14-17)
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.16 FISHING FROM BRIDGES.
   (A) There shall be no fishing, crabbing, or taking of marine life of any
kind or by any means, from any public bridge within the corporate limits of the
town except as provided herein.
   (B)   Fishing shall be permitted on the north side of the Highway 74 bridge
crossing Banks Channel from October 1 through March 31 provide that during such
time, no fishing, crabbing, or taking of marine life of any kind or by any
means shall be permitted on such bridge above those areas designated as travel
ways for vessels passing underneath such bridge.
('72 Code, § 15-8) (Ord., passed 5-28-8l; Am. Ord. 1068, passed 12-17-87; Am.
Ord. 1149, passed 7-11-91; Am. Ord. 1353, passed 2-10-00; Am. Ord. 1456, passed
2-12-04)
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.17 FILLING HOLES AND TRENCHES CREATED ON BEACH STRAND.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to dig holes, trenches or other
depressions on the beach strand adjacent to the waters of the Atlantic Ocean
and depart the beach strand without having first completely filled such hole,
trench, or other depression.
(Ord. 1549, passed 9-13-07)
§ 92.18 USE OF VEHICLES ON BEACH PROHIBITED.
   No vehicle as defined in
Chapter 70 of the town code shall be permitted on the foreshore, beach strand
or barrier dune system within the town limits of the town except as follows:
   (A)   Vehicles owned and/or operated by employees and agents of the town,
county, the state, and the U.S. Government while engaged in official duties
shall not be subject to the provisions of this section.
   (B)   The Board of Aldermen or Town Manager may approve the operation of
vehicles on the areas described hereinabove pursuant to the provisions of an
activity or event approved by the Board of Aldermen or Town Manager. A permit,
issued by the Wrightsville Beach Police Department, must accompany vehicles
accessing the beach strand. The permit will specify the date and location where
the vehicle will be operated.
   (C)   Handicapped persons shall be permitted to use vehicles on the areas
described above in accordance with the provisions of §
92.05 hereinabove.
   (D)   Bicycles (excluding those equipped with a throttle) are permitted on
the beach strand at any time between October 1 and April 1. Between April 1 and
October 1, bicycles are prohibited on the beach strand between the hours of 10:
00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
(Ord. 1105, passed 10-21-89; Am. Ord. 1531, passed 3-15-07; Am. Ord. 1626,
passed 4-22-10; Am. Ord. 1823, passed 3-11-21; Am. Ord. 1859, passed 5-9-24)
§ 92.19 [RESERVED].
§ 92.20 MOORING BUOYS PROHIBITED WITHIN THE ZONING JURISDICTION OF THE TOWN.
   (A)   No person shall anchor or otherwise install a mooring buoy in any
waters located within the zoning jurisdiction of the town as established
pursuant to the provisions of G.S. Ch. 160A. Provided, that this section shall
not apply to any mooring buoy located between a pierhead line established in
accordance with the town code and the mainland.
   (B)   (1)   Any mooring buoy located within the town limits on the date of
original adoption of this section shall be removed within 180 days of the date
of the original adoption. The town is authorized to remove any of the buoys
remaining upon expiration of the 180-day period described above on the
condition that the town notify the person owning or controlling the buoy at the
person's last known address 30 days prior to the date of removal of the mooring
buoy. If the town is unable to determine what person owns or controls the buoy
or an address, it may give the notice by placing the notice on the buoy.
      (2)   Any mooring buoy located within the extraterritorial jurisdiction
of the town established in accordance with the provisions of G.S. §160A-360 at
the time of initial adoption of this section shall be permitted to remain in
the location. It shall be the responsibility of the person or organization
controlling the buoy to provide the town sufficient evidence to establish that
the buoy was so located on the date of adoption and the geographic coordinates
of the buoy. If the information is not provided within 60 days of a request
from the town, the town shall remove the buoy in question. The buoy may be
maintained but under no circumstances shall any such buoys be enlarged,
expanded or relocated in any manner. Provided, that if at any time such buoy
presents a hazard to the health, safety and welfare of town residents, the town
may direct the permanent removal of the buoy only after notifying the person
owning or controlling the buoy and providing the person an opportunity for a
hearing on the issue of removal before the Board of Aldermen. Notice of the
hearing before the Board of Aldermen shall be given at least ten days’ prior to
the hearing by mailing a notice to the person’s last known address, or if the
town is unable to determine what person owns or controls the buoy or an
address, it may give the notice by placing the notice on the buoy in question.
Provided, however, that in the event the buoy presents an immediate hazard to
the health, safety and welfare of town residents, the buoy may be removed
immediately without the requirement for notice and a hearing. In such event,
the town, if requested by the owner, shall schedule a hearing as described
hereinabove within 30 days of the date of the removal of the buoy to consider
any evidence that might justify replacement of the buoy.
(Ord. 1144, passed 5-23-91; Am. Ord. 1161, passed 11-21-91)
§ 92.21 PROHIBITION ON DOCKING VESSELS AT WYNN PLAZA.
   No person shall moor, dock or otherwise affix a vessel of any kind to any
pier, piling or other portion of the docking system located at Wynn Plaza
during the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. Provided, that this section shall
not apply to any person mooring a vessel at Wynn Plaza pursuant to a written
agreement with the town.
(Ord. 1219, passed 9-9-93; Am. Ord. 1552, passed 9-27-07; Am. Ord. 1578, passed
7-17-08)
§ 92.21.1 DIVING FROM WYNN PLAZA.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to jump, dive, leap or in any way propel
his or her body from any dock or piling comprising a portion of the dock and
associated pilings owned by the town and located at Wynn Plaza.
(Ord. 1543, passed 8-9-07)
§ 92.22 ABANDONED VESSEL UNLAWFUL; REMOVAL AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to
possession of a vessel to cause or allow such vessel to be abandoned as the
term is defined herein.
   (B)   Upon investigation, the authorized town official may determine that a
vessel is an abandoned vessel and order the vessel removed.
(Ord. 1428, passed 10-10-02; Am. Ord. 1663, passed 8-11-11)
§ 92.23 (RESERVED).
§ 92.24 NOTICE WHEN VESSEL REMOVED; HEARING.
   Because businesses qualified in accordance with § 92.25 to tow vessels at
the request of the authorized town official are responsible for collecting
towing fees, the provisions of G.S. Article 7A of Chapter 20 (§§ 20-219.9 et
seq.) concerning notice, hearing and other procedures shall be applicable when
vessels are towed pursuant to this chapter. All notices required by provisions
of G.S. Article 7A of Chapter 20 shall be given by the Police Department.
(Ord. 1428, passed 10-10-02; Am. Ord. 1663, passed 8-11-11)
§ 92.25 AUTHORIZED TOWING SERVICES.
   (A)   The Chief of Police shall prepare and maintain an eligible list of the
persons, firms or corporations who apply and qualify to tow and store vessels
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   The Board of Aldermen may, if in its opinion the public interest would
be served thereby, enter into an exclusive contract with one or more persons
engaged in the towing and storage of vessels, to remove the vessels in the
manner described in this article and on such terms and conditions as may be
mutually agreed upon.
   (C)   No person, firm or corporation providing vessel towing services shall
charge the owner of any vessel towed without the consent of the owner an amount
for towing and storage fees in excess of those fees approved by resolution of
the City Council.
(Ord. 1428, passed 10-10-02)
§ 92.26 OPERATION OF PERSONAL WATERCRAFT.
   (A)   No person shall operate a personal watercraft within the waters of
Kenan’s Creek at greater than no-wake speed. For purposes of this chapter, the
“WATERS OF KENAN’S CREEK” shall include the waters and marshes located within
that area bounded on the north by U.S. Highway 74, on the west by the Town Hall
complex, on the south by Causeway Drive and on the east by Harbor island and
the extension of the westernmost line of Harbor Island northwardly to its
intersection with U.S. Highway 74.
   (B)   No person shall operate a personal watercraft within 25 feet of any
marsh or shore within the following areas:
      (1)   Within those areas located within the town’s boundaries and the
town’s extraterritorial jurisdiction lying within the following area: Bounded
by the Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway to the west, the northern line of Motts
Channel to the north, the eastern line of Banks Channel to the east and the
northern line of Shinn Creek to the south.
      (2)   Within those areas located within the town’s boundaries and the
town’s extraterritorial jurisdiction lying within the following area: Bounded
by the Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway to the west, the southern line of the
channel leading from the Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway to Mason’s Inlet
extended eastwardly to the point of intersection with Highway 74 to the north,
the western line of Highway 74 to the east and the southern line of Lee’s Cut
and the Highway 74 bridge extending across the waters of Banks Channel to the
south.
   (C)   No person shall operate a personal watercraft at greater than no-wake
speed or at a speed that causes the personal watercraft to generate a plume of
spray known as a rooster tail under either of the two bridges crossing the
waters of Banks Channel (the Causeway Drive bridge and the Salisbury Street
bridge) and within an area extending 100 feet to the north and 100 feet to the
south of each bridge.
   (D)   For purposes of this chapter, a “PERSONAL WATERCRAFT” shall mean a
personal watercraft as that term is defined in G.S. § 75A-13.3 or any successor
statute.
(Ord. 1544, passed 8-9-07; Am. Ord. 1691, passed 8-16-12; Am. Ord. 1746, passed
6-11-15)
§ 92.27 MOORING OF BOATS AND CONSTRUCTION OF PIERS.
   (A)   No person shall moor, anchor, secure, or leave abandoned any boat,
raft, float, barge, or other similar device within the boundaries as herein
described:
      (1)   Within that area bounded on the north by the southern line of Lot
107 of Shore Acres as shown on that map entitled “Map of Shore Acres Opposite
Wrightsville Beach, N.C.” recorded in Book 3 at Page 66, Office of the Register
of Deeds, New Hanover County, extended westwardly to the pierhead line, on the
west by the pierhead line as established by the Town of Wrightsville Beach, on
the south by the northern line of Lot 45 of Shore Acres as shown on that map
entitled “Map of Shore Acres Opposite Wrightsville Beach, N.C.” recorded in
Book 3 at Page 66, Office of the Register of Deeds, New Hanover County,
extended westwardly to the pierhead line and on the east by the western line of
Island Drive. The area described herein is adjacent to and includes the park
located on the west side of South Harbor Island adjacent to Island Drive.
      (2)   Within that area bounded on the north by the northern line of
Jasmine Place where Jasmine Place intersects Channel Drive (South) as shown on
that map entitled “Map of Shore Acres Opposite Wrightsville Beach, N.C.”
recorded in Book 3 at Page 66, Office of the Register of Deeds, New Hanover
County, extended eastwardly to the pierhead line, on the east by the pierhead
line as established by the Town of Wrightsville Beach, on the south by the
southern line of Lot 5 of Shore Acres as shown on that map entitled “Map of
Shore Acres Opposite Wrightsville Beach, N.C.” recorded in Book 3 at Page 66,
Office of the Register of Deeds, New Hanover County, extended eastwardly to the
pierhead line and on the west by the eastern line of Channel Drive (South) as
shown on said map. The area described herein is adjacent to and includes the
park located on the east side of South Harbor Island adjacent to Channel Drive
(South).
   (B)   No person shall build, place, erect, or cause to be built, placed, or
erected any piling, post, pier, stake, pipe, mooring buoy or similar implement
or device whatsoever within the boundaries set out in this section.
(Ord. 1565, passed 1-10-08; Am. Ord. 1629, passed 5-13-10)
§ 92.28 SALE OR RENTAL OF MERCHANDISE, EQUIPMENT OR PERSONAL SERVICES
PROHIBITED ON BEACH FRONT.
   No merchandise, equipment or personal services shall be sold, marketed or
rented on the beach front except as permitted in this section or elsewhere in
the Town Code.
(Ord. 1593, passed 3-12-09)
§ 92.29 BUSINESS ACTIVITIES PERMITTED ON BEACH FRONT.
   A business engaged in ocean-related business activities may operate on the
beach front subject to the following terms and conditions:
   (A)   Such business shall only operate pursuant to an annual permit issued
by the town. Such permit shall expire on December 31 of each year. A fee
established by the Board of Aldermen shall be charged for such permit.
   (B)   Each business to which an annual permit is issued shall be required to
maintain a general liability insurance policy with the town named as an
additional insured and worker’s compensation insurance as required by the State
of North Carolina. Prior to the issuance of a permit, the business must provide
the town with evidence that such insurance is in force.
   (C)   Hours of operation of such business shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m. Businesses engaged in teaching surfing and kite boarding shall not
operate between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on Memorial Day, 4th of
July and Labor Day.
   (D)   The geographical area of operation of such businesses shall be the
“designated surfing areas” as established under the provisions of §
92.12 of the Town Code. Provided that this limitation shall not apply to the
rental of chairs and umbrellas by hotels and private clubs located immediately
adjacent to the beach front.
   (E)   Any representative of such business when operating on the beach front
shall have a copy of the permit required under division (A) above immediately
available at all times that such business operations are taking place.
   (F)   No sale or rental of merchandise or equipment shall be conducted in
connection with the operation of such business on the beach front. No payment
of any fees shall be accepted by such business on the beach front. Any rental
or sales of merchandise or equipment or payment for such items and for personal
services must be carried out at the primary business location of such business.
(Ord. 1593, passed 3-12-09; Am. Ord. 1733, passed 7-10-14; Am. Ord. 1772,
passed 1-11-18)
§ 92.30 PROHIBITION ON PASSENGER PICK UP OR DELIVERY.
   No vessel carrying passengers for a fee may pick up or discharge passengers
on the beach front.
(Ord. 1593, passed 3-12-09)
§ 92.31 UNLAWFUL TO RELEASE BALLOONS ON TOWN PROPERTY, BEACH FRONT AND WATERS
SURROUNDING THE TOWN.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to litter by releasing inflated balloons
in or on or by discarding balloons in or on any property owned by the town, any
waters within the zoning jurisdiction of the town as established pursuant to
the provisions of G.S. § 160A-360 or the beach front as defined in this chapter
of the Town Code. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
subject to a civil penalty in the amount of $250 to be recovered by the town in
a civil action in the nature of debt if the offender does not pay the penalty
within ten days after having been cited for violation of the ordinance. In
accordance with G.S. § 160A-175(b), any person violating the provisions of this
section shall not be subject to the penalty provisions of G.S. § 14-4 and such
action shall not be considered a breach of the penal laws of the state.
(Ord. 1642, passed 11-18-10)
§ 92.32 DIVING FROM BRIDGES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to jump, dive, leap or in any way propel
his or her body from any bridge located within the town.
(Ord. 1687, passed 7-12-12)
§ 92.33 PROTECTION OF DUNES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or animals (except dogs as permitted
herein) to cross any portion of a dune, the dune ridge or a frontal dune as
such terms are defined in
Chapter 155 of this Code (herein collectively the “dunes”) except for official
town business or for emergency access purposes unless such crossing is (a) for
the purpose of going to the ocean from private property immediately west of the
dunes or to the private property immediately west of the dunes from the ocean
or (b) over an existing pathway or a permitted wooden walkway, ramp, or stairs.
Examples of prohibited activities include, but are not limited to, crossing the
dunes for a purpose other than going to or from the ocean, playing on the
dunes, climbing on the dunes, removing dune vegetation, allowing animals to
cross the dunes (except dogs on a leash when permitted and only in the manner
permitted herein), and other activities that reduce the stability of the dunes
and potentially decrease the dunes’ storm protection value, wildlife habitat
value, and aesthetic value.
(Ord. 1704, passed 4-11-13)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Any person violating the provisions of §
92.02(A) and/or
92.12 shall be subject to a civil penalty in the amount of $250 to be recovered
by the town in a civil action in the nature of debt if the offender does not
pay the penalty within ten days after having been cited for violation of the
ordinance. In accordance with G.S. § 160A-175(b), a violation of the sections
enumerated herein shall not be subject to the penalty provisions of G.S. § 14-
4 and shall not be considered a breach of the penal laws of the state.
      (2)   A violation of the provisions of §
92.02(B) constitutes an infraction and the person committing the infraction may
be punished by a fine of not more than $50.00. Conviction of an infraction
under this subsection has no consequence other than payment of a penalty and a
person found to be in violation of this subsection may not be assessed court
costs.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of §
92.03 shall be subject to a civil penalty in the amount of $100 to be recovered
by the town in the nature of debt if the offender does not pay the penalty
within ten days after having been cited for violation of that section. In
accordance with G.S. § 160A-175(b), a violation of the section enumerated
herein shall not be subject to the penalty provisions of G.S. § 14-4 and shall
not be considered a breach of the penal laws of the state.
   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of § 92.19 shall be subject to a
civil penalty in the amount of $250 for the first offense and $100 for each
subsequent offense that occurs within 12 months of the first offense to be
recovered by the town in a civil action in the nature of debt if the offender
does not pay the penalty within ten days after having been cited for violation
of this section. In accordance with G.S. § 160A-175(b), a violation of the
section enumerated herein shall not be subject to the penalty provisions of
G.S. § 14-4 and shall not be considered a breach of the penal laws of the
state.
   (D)   any person violating the provisions of §
92.21 shall be subject to a civil penalty in the amount of $250 to be recovered
by the town in the nature of debt if the offender does not pay the penalty
within ten days after having been cited for violation of that section. In
accordance with G.S. § 160A-175(b), a violation of the section enumerated
herein shall not be subject to the penalty provisions of G.S. § 14-4 and shall
not be considered a breach of the penal laws of the state.
   (E)   Any person to whom a permit is issued in accordance with the
provisions of §
92.29 and who violates the provisions of §
92.28 or
92.29 shall be subject to a civil penalty in the amount of $100 to be recovered
by the town in a civil action in the nature of debt if the offender does not
pay the penalty within ten days after having been cited for violation of the
ordinance. A second violation of §
92.28 or
92.29 within 30 days of a prior violation shall result in the revocation of
that person’s permit issued under the provisions of §
92.29.
   (F)   Any person violating the provisions of §
92.33 shall be subject to a civil penalty in the amount of $250 to be recovered
by the town in the nature of a debt if the offender does not pay the penalty
within ten days after having been cited for the violation of that section. In
accordance with G.S. § 160A-175(b), a violation of the section enumerated
herein shall not be subject to the penalty provisions of G.S. § 14-4 and shall
not be considered a breach of the penal laws of the state.
   (G)   A violation of any remaining section of this chapter shall be a
misdemeanor or infraction as provided by G.S. § 14-4 and shall be punishable by
a fine not to exceed $500. In addition, a violation of any remaining section of
this chapter shall subject the offender to a civil penalty in the amount of
$100 to be recovered by the town in a civil action in the nature of debt if the
offender does not pay the penalty within ten days after having been cited for
violation of the ordinance.
   (H)   The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by an appropriate
equitable remedy issuing from a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (I)   Each day’s continuing violation of any provisions of this chapter
shall be a separate and distinct offense.
   (J)   Any person issued a civil citation under the provisions of this
section may appeal the issuance of such citation to the Wrightsville Beach
Chief of Police (“Chief of Police”). An appeal shall be perfected in accordance
with the following:
      (1)   An appeal shall be taken by giving written notice of appeal to the
Chief of Police within 14 calendar days of the date of issuance of the civil
citation. In determining the 14 calendar days within which such appeal may be
taken, the date of the civil citation shall not be counted.
      (2)   Such written notice must be received by the Chief of Police no
later than 5:00 p.m. on the fourteenth day of the appeal period. If the
fourteenth day falls on a Saturday, Sunday or holiday recognized by the town,
the time for filing such appeal shall be extended to 5:00 p.m. on the next day
which is not a Saturday, Sunday or holiday.
      (3)   A copy of the citation issued to the appealing party shall be
attached to such written notice of appeal.
      (4)   The written notice of appeal shall set forth the grounds for the
appeal, include other information that the appealing
party believes supports its position and must include the name, email address,
mailing address and telephone number of the appealing party.
      (5)   Within 15 calendar days of receipt of the written notice of appeal,
the Chief of Police shall issue a written decision. The Chief of Police may
uphold the citation, dismiss the citation or reduce the citation to some lesser
offense. Provided, that the Chief of Police may not impose any penalty greater
than that set forth in the citation from which appeal was taken. The written
decision of the Chief of Police will be emailed or mailed by first class mail
to the appealing party within five days of issuance to the email address or
mailing address of the appealing party shown on the written notice of appeal.
      (6)   The decision of the Chief of Police shall be final.
      (7)   If the Chief of Police upholds the citation or takes other action
that requires the appealing party to make payment to the town, such payment
must be made within 30 days of the date of the written decision of the Chief of
Police. If the appealing party fails to make payment within that time, the town
shall undertake enforcement action as appropriate.
(Ord. 1048, passed 4-9-87; Am. Ord. 1356, passed 3-9-00; Ord. 1364, passed 4-
13-00; Am. Ord. 1474, passed 4-14-05; Am. Ord. 1578, passed 7-17-08; Am. Ord.
1593, passed 3-12-09; Am. Ord. 1628, passed 5-13-10; Am. Ord. 1641, passed 10-
14-10; Am. Ord. 1674, passed 11-2-12; Am. Ord. 1685, passed 7-12-12; Am. Ord.
1692, passed 8-16-12; Am. Ord. 1704, passed 4-11-13; Am. Ord. 1707, passed 5-9-
13)
CHAPTER 93: CIVIL EMERGENCIES
Section
   
93.01   Establishment of Emergency Management Agency
   
93.02   Emergency Management Coordinator
   
93.03   Deputy coordinators
   
93.04   Emergency management personnel
   
93.05   Emergency functions
   
93.06   Existence of state of emergency
   
93.07   Declaration of state of emergency
   
93.08   Permitted prohibitions and restrictions
   
93.09   [Reserved]
   
93.10   Permitted exemptions
   
93.11   Separate and superseding declarations
   
93.12   End of state of emergency
   
93.13   Absence or disability of Mayor
   
93.14   Emergency plans and control centers
   
93.15   Mutual aid agreements
   
93.16   Assistance
   
93.17   Appropriations
   
93.18   Application of a state of emergency declared by New Hanover County to
the town
 
   
93.99   Penalty
§ 93.01 ESTABLISHMENT OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY.
   A town Emergency Management Agency is hereby established pursuant to G.S. §
166A-19.15(c).
(Ord. 1217, passed 8-26-93; Am. Ord. 1734, passed 9-11-14)
§ 93.02 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT COORDINATOR.
   There is hereby created the office of Emergency Management Coordinator for
the town (herein "Coordinator"). The Coordinator shall be the Town Manager or
his designee as dictated by the adopted order of succession. The Coordinator
shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration, and
operation of the Emergency Management Agency.
(Ord. 1217, passed 8-26-93)
§ 93.03 DEPUTY COORDINATORS.
   The Coordinator may appoint deputy coordinators for each of the various
emergency functions as may be established pursuant to § 93.05 of this chapter.
In appointing deputy coordinators and in organizing the Emergency Management
Agency, the Coordinator shall employ town officials and employees in such a
manner that their knowledge and experience would be of the most benefit in an
emergency situation.
(Ord. 1217, passed 8-26-93)
§ 93.04 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PERSONNEL.
   (A)   Each person who is appointed to serve in the Emergency Management
Agency hereby established shall, before entering service, take a written oath
before a person authorized to administer an oath in the state, as required for
emergency management workers by G.S. § 166A-13, which oath shall be
substantially as follows: "I, , do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will
support and defend the Constitution of the of the United States and the
Constitution of the State of North Carolina, against all enemies, foreign and
domestic; and that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the same; that I
take this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of
evasion; and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties upon which I
am about to enter. And I do further swear (or affirm) that I do not advocate,
nor am I, nor have I ever knowingly been a member of any political party or
organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United
States or of this State by force or violence; and that during such time as I am
a member of the town Emergency Management Agency, I will not advocate nor
become a member of any political party or organization that advocates the
overthrow of the government of the United States or of this state by force or
violence, so help me God."
   (B)   Volunteers may be called for and accepted as deemed necessary by the
Coordinator. Provided, that volunteers shall be called for only in case of
emergency or for necessary training and preparation for emergencies. All
volunteers shall serve without compensation, and shall be subject to all rules
and regulations established for other emergency management personnel, and may
be dismissed or removed by the Coordinator with or without cause.
(Ord. 1217, passed 8-26-93)
§ 93.05 EMERGENCY FUNCTIONS.
   The Emergency Management Agency, under the supervision and control of the
Coordinator, shall prepare for and carry out all the emergency functions,
including, but not limited to, firefighting services, police services, medical
and health services, evacuation of persons and property from stricken areas,
emergency transportation, rescue, restoration and operation of municipal public
utility services, and other functions related to civilian protection, together
with all other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for and
carrying out of the foregoing function.
(Ord. 1217, passed 8-26-93)
§ 93.06 EXISTENCE OF STATE OF EMERGENCY.
   A state of emergency may be declared upon a determination that an emergency
exists. An emergency is defined as an occurrence or imminent threat of
widespread or severe damage, injury, or loss of life or property resulting from
any natural or man-made accidental, military, paramilitary, weather-related, or
riot-related cause.
(Ord. 1217, passed 8-26-93; Am. Ord. 1734, passed 9-11-14)
§ 93.07 DECLARATION OF STATE OF EMERGENCY.
   (A)   Upon a determination that an emergency as defined in G.S. § 166A-19.3
exists and in accordance with the provisions of G.S. § 166A-19.22, the Mayor is
authorized and empowered to determine and declare the existence of a state of
emergency, and upon such determination and declaration to impose those
authorized prohibitions and restrictions as are set forth in this chapter.
   (B)   In the absence or disability of the Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tempore as
designated by the Board of Aldermen shall be authorized to proclaim a state of
emergency.
   (C)   In the absence or disability of both the Mayor and the Mayor Pro
Tempore, a quorum of the Board of Aldermen shall be authorized to determine and
proclaim the existence of a state of emergency.
(Ord. 1217, passed 8-26-93; Am. Ord. 1734, passed 9-11-14)
§ 93.08 PERMITTED PROHIBITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Upon determination and declaration of the existence of a state of
emergency in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the Mayor by
declaration may impose the following prohibitions and restrictions:
      (1)   Of movements of people in public places, including imposing a
curfew; directing and compelling the voluntary or mandatory evacuation of all
or part of the population from any stricken or threatened area within the
town’s jurisdiction; prescribing routes, modes of transportation, and
destinations in connection with evacuation; and controlling ingress and egress
of an emergency area, and the movement of persons within the area.
      (2)   Of the operation of offices, business establishments, and other
places to or from which people may travel or at which they may congregate.
      (3)   Upon the possession, transportation, sale, purchase, and
consumption of alcoholic beverages.
      (4)   Upon the possession, transportation, sale, purchase, storage, and
use of gasoline, and dangerous weapons and substances, except that this
division (A)(4) does not authorize prohibitions or restrictions on lawfully
possessed firearms or ammunition. As used in this division (A)(4), the term
“dangerous weapons and substances” has the same meaning as it does under G.S. §
14-288.1. As used in this division (A)(4), the term “firearm” has the same
meaning as it does under G.S. § 14-409.39(2).
      (5)   Upon other activities or conditions the control of which may be
reasonably necessary to maintain order and protect lives or property during the
state of emergency.
   (B)   The Mayor may impose as many of those specified prohibitions and
restrictions as found necessary, because of an emergency, to maintain an
acceptable level of public order and services, and to protect lives, safety and
property. The declaration shall be in writing. The Mayor shall take reasonable
steps to give notice of the terms of the declaration to those affected by it
and shall post a copy of it in Town Hall.
   (C)   The prohibitions and restrictions provided for herein shall apply
throughout the town limits or such part thereof as designated in the
declaration.
(Ord. 1217, passed 8-26-93; Am. Ord. 1734, passed 9-11-14) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.09 [RESERVED.]
§ 93.10 PERMITTED EXEMPTIONS.
   The Mayor may exempt from some or all of the prohibitions and restrictions
imposed in accordance with the provisions of §
93.08 above classes of people whose exemption the Mayor finds necessary for the
preservation of the public health, safety and welfare. The declaration shall
state the exempt classes and the restrictions from which each is exempted.
(Ord. 1217, passed 8-26-93; Am. Ord. 1734, passed 9-11-14)
§ 93.11 SEPARATE AND SUPERSEDING DECLARATIONS.
   The Mayor may invoke the prohibitions and restrictions authorized by this
chapter in separate declarations and may amend any declaration by means of a
superseding declaration.
(Ord. 1217, passed 8-26-93; Am. Ord. 1734, passed 9-11-14)
§ 93.12 END OF STATE OF EMERGENCY.
   The Mayor shall declare the end of such state of emergency as soon as
circumstances warrant or when directed to do so by the Board of Aldermen.
(Ord. 1217, passed 8-26-93; Am. Ord. 1734, passed 9-11-14)
§ 93.13 ABSENCE OR DISABILITY OF MAYOR.
   In case of the absence or disability of the Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tempore
shall have and exercise all of the powers given the Mayor in this chapter. In
the absence of both the Mayor and the Mayor Pro Tempore, a quorum of the Board
of Aldermen shall have and exercise all of the powers given to the Mayor in
this chapter.
(Ord. 1217, passed 8-26-93)
§ 93.14 EMERGENCY PLANS AND CONTROL CENTERS.
   The Coordinator may establish a primary emergency control center and one or
more such secondary centers, and other disaster or emergency plans.
(Ord. 1217, passed 8-26-93)
§ 93.15 MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS.
   The Coordinator may, in collaboration with other public and private agencies
in the state, develop mutual aid agreements, subject to approval of such
agreements by the Board of Aldermen, for reciprocal aid and assistance in case
of disaster too great to be dealt with unassisted.
(Ord. 1217, passed 8-26-93)
§ 93.16 ASSISTANCE.
   The Board of Aldermen may accept gifts, grants or loans from the federal
government or any agency or officer thereof or any person, firm or corporation
upon acceptance by the state as provided in G.S. § 166A-19.71; and may make
contracts, obtain and distribute equipment, materials and supplies as provided
in § 166A-19.71. In addition, the Coordinator may make available for emergency
management purposes the equipment, supplies and facilities of the town, and the
services of any town employee or official.
(Ord. 1217, passed 8-26-93; Am. Ord. 1734, passed 9-11-14)
§ 93.17 APPROPRIATIONS.
   Pursuant to G.S. § 166A-19.15 and G.S. § 160A-209, the Board of Aldermen may
make appropriations in its annual budget, and expend funds for emergency
management purposes.
(Ord. 1217, passed 8-26-93; Am. Ord. 1734, passed 9-11-14)
§ 93.18 APPLICATION OF A STATE OF EMERGENCY DECLARED BY NEW HANOVER COUNTY TO
THE TOWN.
   In accordance with the provisions of G.S. § 166A-19.22(b)(2), the Mayor may
consent to or request that a state of emergency declared by New Hanover County
include the area within the corporate limits of the town. The application of
the county state of emergency to the town may be with respect to one or more of
the prohibitions and restrictions imposed by the county pursuant to the
authority granted in G.S. § 166A-19.31 and need not be with respect to all
prohibitions and restrictions authorized by that section or imposed by the
county.
(Ord. 1734, passed 9-11-14)
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or a declaration
enacted or declared under the authority of this chapter is guilty of a Class 2
misdemeanor in accordance G.S. § 14-288.20A.
   (B)   Any person or entity who violates any provision of this chapter or a
declaration enacted or declared under the authority of this chapter shall be
subject to a civil penalty in the amount of $500.00, which sum may be recovered
by the town in a civil action in the nature of debt if the offender does not
pay the charge within 30 days after having been cited for a violation. Multiple
violations shall subject the violator to an additional $500.00 civil penalty
for each violation.
   (C)   The town may seek to enforce the provisions of this chapter through
any appropriate equitable action.
   (D)   The town may seek to enforce this chapter by using any one or any
combination of the foregoing remedies.
(Ord. 1217, passed 8-26-93; Am. Ord. 1734, passed 9-11-14; Am. Ord. 1794,
passed 4-7-20)
CHAPTER 94: FIRE PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
   
94.01   Adoption of Fire Prevention Code
   
94.02   Fire limits
   
94.03   Obstructing fire exits
   
94.04   Passageways, exits, to be kept open in public places
   
94.05   Disconnected and unused wires to be removed
   
94.06   Lots to be free from fire hazard
   
94.07   Open burning prohibited
   
94.08   Permissible open burning
   
94.09   Storage and dispensing of gasoline
   
94.10   Liquids for fuel, lighting, or heating
   
94.11   Motor fuel dispensing and transporting
   
94.12   Motor fuel dispensing devices; attendant required
   
94.13   Motor fuel dispensing devices; fire extinguishers
   
94.14   Enforcement of maximum occupancy
Activity at fires
   
94.20   General regulations
   
94.21   Following fire equipment
   
94.22   Interfering with firefighters or fire apparatus
   
94.23   Riding on fire apparatus
   
94.24   Interfering with fire alarm apparatus
   
94.25   Protection of fire hose
Fire Inspection
   
94.30   Authority and responsibility of Fire Inspector
   
94.31   Investigations
   
94.32   Records of fires
   
94.33   Enforcement
Handling of Liquified Petroleum Gas
   
94.34   Name of LP-gas supplier
   
94.35   Anchoring of LP-gas container
Sprinkler Requirements for New Construction, Renovations and Additions
   
94.45   Sprinkler requirements for new multi-family residential structures
   
94.46   Sprinkler requirements for new non-residential structures
   
94.47   Automatic sprinkler system not to be disabled
 
   
94.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 94.01 ADOPTION OF FIRE PREVENTION CODE.
   The most current edition of the North Carolina State Building Code, Fire
Prevention, is hereby adopted as the Fire Prevention Code for the town by
reference as fully as though set forth herein. Official copies of the Fire
Prevention Code shall be kept on file in the office of the Fire Department.
('72 Code, § 8A-9) (Ord., passed 8-23-79; Am. Ord. 1163, passed 12-19-91; Am.
Ord. 1406, passed 3-28-02)
§ 94.02 FIRE LIMITS.
   (A)   The fire limits of the town shall be described in the zoning
regulations and on the official map in the office of the Town Clerk.
('72 Code, § 8A-1)
   (B)   No frame, sheet iron, or wooden building shall be erected or moved
into the fire zone. No exceptions shall be made except as provided in the
building code. Alterations and repairs to frame or wooden buildings shall be in
accordance with the fire zone regulations set out in the building code. ('72
Code, § 8A-2)
(Ord. passed 8-23-79)
Cross-reference:
   Zoning Code, see
Ch. 155
Statutory reference:
   Establishments of fire limits, see G.S. § 160A-435
   Restrictions within fire limits, see G.S. § 160A-436
§ 94.03 OBSTRUCTING FIRE EXITS.
   No person shall at any time, place any encumbrance of any kind before or
upon any fire escape, balcony, or ladder intended as a means of escape from
fire. Every member of the Police or Fire Department who discovers any fire
escape encumbered in any manner shall report the same through his Department
channels to the Fire Inspector, who shall immediately notify the owner, his
agents, or tenant to remove the encumbrance, and the encumbrance shall
thereupon be immediately removed.
('72 Code, § 8A-3) (Ord., passed 8-23-79)
Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.04 PASSAGEWAYS, EXITS, TO BE KEPT OPEN IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   (A)   All doors, aisles, and passageways within and leading into or out of
the theaters, churches, and all other places of public assemblage, during the
entire time when any show, performance, service, exhibition, lecture, concern,
ball, or other assemblage is held therein, shall be kept adequately lighted and
free from any article that might obstruct or delay the exit of the audience,
congregation, or assemblage. The doors of such buildings, while occupied, shall
not be fastened so that they cannot easily be opened by anyone from within.
   (B)   No person shall sit, stand, or remain seated or standing, nor shall
the owner or operator of such a place allow any person to remain in any place
of public assemblage in any aisle under any circumstances or in any exit or
passage required for the safe exit of the assemblage.
   (C)   Clear passage from all exits and on sidewalks outside of all theaters
and other places of public assemblage shall be maintained at all times.
   (D)   No aisle, passageway, or stairway in any store shall be obstructed
with tables, show cases, or other obstructions during the hours the store is
open to the public.
('72 Code, § 8A-4) (Ord., passed 8-23-79)
Penalty, see § 94.99
Statutory reference:
   Ways of escape provided, see   G.S. § 69-12
§ 94.05 DISCONNECTED AND UNUSED WIRES TO BE REMOVED.
   No electric light, telegraph, or telephone company shall permit any of its
disconnected, dead, or unused wires to hang or remain on any pole, tree, or
house where the same has been formerly connected and in use. All wires shall be
taken down and removed immediately, upon notice by the Fire Inspector.
('72 Code, § 8A-5) (Ord., passed 8-23-79)
Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.06 LOTS TO BE FREE FROM FIRE HAZARD.
   No person shall permit rubbish, refuse, or other articles of combustible or
inflammable nature to accumulate or remain on any lot or premises.
('72 Code, § 8A-6)
Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.07 OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit open burning of refuse or
other combustible material within the limits of the town or on property owned
by the town, except as may be allowed and permitted by § 94.08 or the laws,
rules, regulations, and orders of the State Environmental Management
Commission.
('72 Code, § 8A-7)
Penalty, see § 94.99
Statutory reference:
   Environmental Commission, see G.S. § 143B-282
§ 94.08 PERMISSIBLE OPEN BURNING.
   (A) No bonfires or outdoor rubbish fires shall be allowed within the town
except as permitted by this section.
   (B) No fires of any kind, to include, but not be limited to, outdoor cooking
fires, shall be allowed upon the beach strand of the Atlantic Ocean.
   (C) Fires purposely set for the instruction and training of public and
industrial firefighting personnel shall be permitted if authorized in writing
by the Fire Chief.
   (D) Fires used solely for human warmth shall be permitted at construction
sites during the months November through March if authorized in writing by the
Fire Chief. The Fire Chief may specify the location of the fire and the nature
of any container in which the fire is built. Other reasonable conditions
necessary to ensure safety of the fires may be imposed by the Fire Chief.
   (E) The Chief of the Fire Department shall order the extinguishing of any
fire and the Fire Department may extinguish any fire not in conformity with the
provisions of this section or any fire which shall endanger the surrounding or
nearby property.
('72 Code, § 8A-8; Am. Ord. 1163, passed 12-19-91)
Penalty, see § 94.99
Statutory reference:
   Environmental Commission, see G.S. § 143B-282
§ 94.09 STORAGE AND DISPENSING OF GASOLINE.
   No person shall establish, maintain, operate, or conduct any facility for
the storage or dispensing of any quantity of kerosene, oil, gasoline, or other
inflammable material for distribution to retailers or consumers, except as
provided in § 94.11(B).
('72 Code, § 8A-10)
Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.10 LIQUIDS FOR FUEL, LIGHTING, OR HEATING.
   All gases and other types of inflammable liquids used or intended for use
for fuel, lighting, or heating purposes shall comply with all provisions of the
building code.
('72 Code, § 8A-11)
Cross-reference:
   Building code, see
Ch. 151
§ 94.11 MOTOR FUEL DISPENSING AND TRANSPORTING.
   Vehicles transporting any type of flammable and combustible liquid shall not
park within the town limits for any purpose except to load or unload.
(Ord. 1163, passed 12-19-91)
Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.12 MOTOR FUEL DISPENSING DEVICES; ATTENDANT REQUIRED.
   (A) All motor fuel dispensing devices for use by or on behalf of the public,
including but not limited to those which are preset, remote preset, coin-
operated, card-operated, or money-operated, shall have at least one attendant
on duty on the premises whereon the devices are located at all times the
devices are open to or available for use by or on behalf of the public.
   (B) It shall be the duty of the attendant to supervise, observe, and control
the dispensing of motor fuel by the device or devices. However, nothing herein
shall be construed as prohibiting a customer or user from operating the device
and serving himself so long as the attendant is on duty on the premises to
insure that the motor fuel is dispensed to eliminate to the extent possible the
risk of bodily injury and property damage which could result from the improper
handling or use of the dispensing service.
('72 Code, § 8A-15)
Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.13 MOTOR FUEL DISPENSING DEVICES; FIRE EXTINGUISHERS.
   There shall be present and available for use on the premises whereon is
located any motor fuel dispensing device, as referred to in § 94.12, at least
one fire extinguisher, in good working condition, suitable for and effective
against fires of flammable liquids, gases, and greases, which extinguisher
shall be capable of extinguishing a 25-square-foot of area of flammable liquid
fire, and shall be located within 100 feet of the motor fuel dispensing device
or devices.
('72 Code, § 8A-16) (Ord., passed
4-13-72)
Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.14 ENFORCEMENT OF MAXIMUM OCCUPANCY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation within the town to
operate a place of business in violation of the maximum occupancy rates
established by the State Building Code. All members of the town Police
Department shall have the authority to enforce those maximum occupancy rates.
(Ord. passed 7-12-79)
ACTIVITY AT FIRES
§ 94.20 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   (A) The officer in command shall have the authority to summon aid and no
citizen so summoned may refuse to help in extinguishing the fire or in
protecting exposed property.
   (B) During the continuance of a fire, the Fire Chief, his assistant, or the
Mayor shall have authority to call upon any citizen to render assistance in
pulling down or demolishing any building or in removing goods or furniture from
a building on fire or in danger of fire, but not without the consent of the
officer of the Fire Department or the Police Department who may be in charge.
   (C) It shall be unlawful to congregate on the streets or alleys near a fire
in a manner which would interfere with the activities of the Fire Department.
   (D) In the event of an alarm of fire, the apparatus of the Fire Department
responding to it, shall have the right-of-way in and upon all streets, lanes,
alleys, and other public ways.
   (E) The drivers of vehicles, upon the approach of fire apparatus, shall
immediately bring their vehicle to a stop on the right-hand side of the street
in the direction in which they are facing and shall not move their vehicle
until the apparatus has passed.
Penalty, see § 94.99
Cross-reference:
   Traffic regulations, see
Ch. 71
§ 94.21 FOLLOWING FIRE EQUIPMENT.
   It shall be unlawful to follow any fire apparatus which is responding to a
call, by automobile or any other vehicle, (unless the vehicle is used for
transporting firefighters to the scene of a fire), at a distance closer than
one city block, or to pass the apparatus or to park within the same block in
which a fire is in progress.
Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.22 INTERFERING WITH FIREFIGHTERS OR FIRE APPARATUS.
   No person shall interfere with a firefighter in the discharge of his duty,
or hinder him in the performance of his duty. No person other than members of
the Fire Department shall loiter about any fire station, or change, handle, or
meddle in any manner with any fire engine or any other fire apparatus.
Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.23 RIDING ON FIRE APPARATUS.
   No person other than a member of the Fire Department shall mount any fire
engine, wagon, or apparatus before it leaves the station or while on its way to
or from a fire, or at any other time, unless by permission of the driver or
officer in command of the engine, wagon, or other apparatus.
Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.24 INTERFERING WITH FIRE ALARM APPARATUS.
   No person shall interfere carelessly or willfully with the fire alarm system
or injure the poles, wires, boxes, or any other apparatus connected therewith.
Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.25 PROTECTION OF FIRE HOSE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to drive over, or
in any way damage or mutilate any fire hose while in use at a fire or
otherwise.
Penalty, see § 94.99
FIRE INSPECTION
§ 94.30 AUTHORITY AND RESPONSIBILITY OF FIRE INSPECTOR.
   (A)   The Fire Chief of the town shall serve as the Fire Official as that
term is defined in the North Carolina State Building Code, Volume V, Fire
Prevention. Provided, however, to the extent that the duties of the Fire
Official are delegated to representatives of New Hanover County by virtue of an
interlocal agreement between the town and New Hanover County, the
representatives of New Hanover County shall assume the responsibilities of Fire
Official. The Fire Official, with the approval of the Town Manager, may detail
the members of the Fire Department as additional Fire Officials as shall from
time to time be necessary.
   (B)   Fire inspections shall be made in the manner prescribed by that person
acting as the Fire Official of the town.
('72 Code, § 8A-3) (Ord., passed 8-23-79; Am. Ord. 1163, passed 12-19-91)
§ 94.31 INVESTIGATIONS.
   The Fire Official shall promptly investigate all complaints of fire hazards
existing within the town and report the results of the investigations to the
Fire Chief.
('72 Code, § 8-3) (Ord., passed 8-23-79; Am. Ord. 1163, passed 12-19-91)
§ 94.32 RECORDS OF FIRES.
   The Fire Official or his designated representative shall keep a record of
the origin, location, name of the owner of the structure involved, extent of
damage done by the fire, and amount of insurance carried on the structure
involved, as furnished by the Fire Chief.
('72 Code, § 8-3) (Ord., passed 8-23-79; Am. Ord. 1163, passed 12-19-91)
Statutory reference:
   Investigation of fires, see G.S. § 69-1
§ 94.33 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Fire Official shall cause the removal of fire hazards by serving an
order on the owner or his agent of the premises in question, the order to state
a reasonable time limit for correction of the hazardous condition.
('72 Code, § 8-3) (Ord., passed 8-23-79; Am. Ord. 1163, passed 12-19-91)
HANDLING OF LIQUIFIED PETROLEUM GAS
§ 94.34 NAME OF LP-GAS SUPPLIER.
   The name and emergency service telephone number of the LP-Gas suppliers
shall be affixed and legibly maintained in a visible location on or near all
stationary LP-Gas containers with an aggregate capacity of less than 4,000
gallons water capacity installed at consumer premises. Lettering shall be not
less than two inches in height unless a smaller size is permitted by other
applicable federal, state or county regulations.
(Ord. 1286, passed 7-10-97)
§ 94.35 ANCHORING OF LP-GAS CONTAINER.
   At any location within the town where necessary to prevent flotation due to
possible high flood waters, LP-Gas containers shall be securely anchored as
follows:
   (A)   Containers shall be anchored as follows:
      (1)   Horizontal containers: each container shall be secured with four
mobile home type earth anchors as described in division (B) (2) below. Two
anchors will be sunk at each end of the container. Each anchor will be
connected so as to resist motion from buoyancy and to prevent floatation and
rotation. Anchor connections will be over the top of the container from anchor
to anchor. Anchors will be set such that their tops will be flush with the
ground at a point under the turn of the container not greater than 12 inches
from and in line at each end with the legs on either end of the container.
Connecters to anchors will be torqued to not less than 50 foot pounds.
      (2)   Underground containers: each container shall be secured by using
four mobile home type earth anchors. Two anchors will be sunk at each end of
the container. Each anchor will be connected so as to resist motion from
buoyancy and to prevent floatation and rotation. Anchor connections will be
over the top of the container from anchor to anchor. Anchors will be set such
that their tops will be flush with the ground at a point in line and
perpendicular with the turn of the tank and in line at each end with the legs
on either end of the container. Connecters to anchors will be torqued to not
less than 50 pounds.
      (3)   Vertical containers: each container shall be secured with two
mobile home type earth anchors. Anchors will be connected to the legs of the
container through the bottom assembly. Each container in any group shall be
anchored individually. Vertical containers may be affixed to solid surfaces
instead of using anchors as described hereinabove provided such fastening will
prevent floatation and not affect the vertical stability of the container.
Connecting straps shall be fastened together with not less than 50 foot pounds
of torque. Anchors shall be augured into the earth such that the tops are flush
to the ground surface. Anchors shall be located opposite to each other.
   (B)   Materials for strapping and anchoring shall be as follows:
      (1)   Strapping: materials shall consist of galvanized steel strapping
not less than 1.25 inches wide and not less than .031 inch thickness, or
stainless steel strapping not less than .75 inches wide and not less than .031
inch thickness; or stainless steel cable not less than three-eighths inches in
diameter. When galvanized strapping is used, vinyl, rubber or plastic sheathing
over the strap will be required in order to separate the container surface from
the strap surface and prevent galvanic action between these materials. All
strapping material shall have a tensile breaking strength of not less than
4,000 pounds.
      (2)   Anchors: anchors shall consist of steel mobile home earth type
anchors. The anchor shank shall not be less than 36 inches in length and five-
eighths inches in diameter. Each anchor shall contain at least two auger discs
not less than four inches in diameter. The anchor assembly shall be capable of
maintaining not less than 3,000 pounds holding strength. Anchors shall be
capable of withstanding not less than 50 foot pounds of torque for connecting
of straps or cable.
   (C)   The following requirements must be met for containers anchored prior
to adoption of this section;
      (1)   Galvanized strapping affixed prior to adoption of the section must
be protected from galvanic action by the use of plastic, rubber or vinyl
sheathing material.
      (2)   Preexisting strapping must connect anchors through the legs of the
container at its base to prevent floatation or movement with cable or strapping
material under a load of not less than 50 foot pounds of applied torque.
   (D)   Containers may be secured to permanent vertical surfaces if this can
be accomplished in a fashion that will prevent the container from being
dislodged or floating. Fastening shall be at the top portion of the containers
and at the bottom portion of the container with a connection to the adjacent
vertical surface with straps or cable under load of not less than 50 foot
pounds of torque. Top and bottom fastenings will be fitted 90 degrees to the
vertical plain of the container. Such fastenings must achieve 3,000 pound
holding potential. Other alternative fastening methods may be utilized subject
to the prior approval of the Fire Official as defined in § 94.30.
(Ord. 1286, passed 7-10-97)
SPRINKLER REQUIREMENTS FOR NEW CONSTRUCTION, RENOVATIONS AND ADDITIONS
§ 94.45 SPRINKLER REQUIREMENTS FOR NEW MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES.
   (A)   An automatic fire sprinkler system is required to be installed in new
multi-family construction, renovations and additions as follows:
      (1)   In all new multifamily residential structures of three or more
attached housing units.
      (2)   In any structural addition to a multi-family residential structure
of three or more attached housing units where the cost of the addition is
greater than 50% of the building's value, sprinklers are required in the added
area but not in the original part of the building.
      (3)   In the entirety of any multi-family residential structure of three
or more attached housing units which is renovated at a cost greater than 50% of
its value, or which has been damaged and is rebuilt at a cost greater than 50%
of its value.
   (B)   The required sprinkler system for three unit structures shall meet the
requirements of NFPA Standard #13R and NFPA Standard #13 for all structures
with more than three units.
   (C)   All connections shall be located on the street side of each building,
and activation of the sprinkler system shall activate both a local building
alarm and a supervisory alarm and a 24-hour certified and licensed alarm
monitoring service.
(Ord. 1328, passed 2-11-99)
§ 94.46 SPRINKLER REQUIREMENTS FOR NEW NON-RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES.
   (A)   An automatic fire sprinkler system, meeting the requirements of NFPA
Standards #13, is required to be installed in non-residential construction as
follows:
      (1)   In new non-residential structures, if:
         (a)   The building has more than 2,000 square feet of floor action; or
         (b)   20% or more of the total floor area is more than 200 feet of
travel distance from the nearest access point for a fire truck; or
         (c)   The building exceeds two stories or 24 feet in height from the
average grade of the lot to the windows on the topmost occupied floor.
      (2)   In any structural addition to a non-residential building of more
than 2,000 square feet, where the cost of the addition is greater than 50% of
the building's value, sprinklers are required in the added area but not in the
original part of the building.
      (3)   In a non-residential building of more than 2,000 square feet which
is either renovated at a cost greater than 50% of value or which is damaged and
rebuilt at a cost greater than 50% of value.
   (B)   All connections shall be located on the street side of each building,
and activation of the sprinkler system shall activate both a local building
alarm and supervisory alarm and a 24-hour certified and licensed alarm
monitoring service.
(Ord. 1328, passed 2-11-99)
§ 94.47 AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEM NOT TO BE DISABLED.
   Upon the occupancy of any new, renovated or expanded structure subject to
the provisions of §§ 94.36 and 94.37, no person shall shut off or disable such
automatic fire sprinkler system and no owner or resident or such building shall
fail to prevent the shutting off or disabling of such a system. Provided,
however, that a sprinkler system may be shut off in order to perform
maintenance work on the system during the time that qualified maintenance
personnel are on the premises performing necessary maintenance work. Such
maintenance work shall only be conducted after notice to and approval by the
Town Fire Department.
(Ord. 1328, passed 2-11-99)
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Failure to comply with this chapter shall be a misdemeanor and any
person convicted of a violation shall be punished as provided in G.S. § 14-4,
to include a fine not to exceed $500. Each day's violation of any provision of
this chapter is a separate offense.
   (B)   Each day's continuing violation shall be a separate and distinct
offense.
   (C)   The town may seek to enforce the provision of this chapter through any
appropriate equitable remedy issued from a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (D)   The town may seek to enforce the provisions of this chapter through
any appropriate equitable remedy issuing from a court of competent
jurisdiction.
   (E)   The town may seek to enforce this chapter by using any one or more
combination of the foregoing remedies. The issuance of a civil citation shall
not preclude the issuance of a criminal summons or arrest warrant where deemed
appropriate.
(Am. Ord. 1247, passed 3-30-95; Am. Ord. 1277, passed 7-25-96)
CHAPTER 95: GARBAGE, TRASH, AND WEEDS
Section
General Provisions
   
95.01   Definitions
   
95.02   Director of Public Works to administer regulations
Collection and Disposal
   
95.10   Private garbage and trash collection, disposal prohibited
   
95.11   Garbage to be promptly removed
   
95.12   Residential roll-out carts
   
95.13   Storage and collection practices
   
95.14   Commercial sold waste
   
95.15   Yard trash, mixed and miscellaneous collection
   
95.16   Collection of household furniture and appliances
   
95.17   Wet garbage
   
95.18   Collection and disposal fees
   
95.19   Waste pickup schedule
   
95.20   Screening of solid waste containers (dumpsters)
   
95.21   Collection of disaster related debris from private streets and private
property
Weeds
   
95.25   Planting of Beach Vitex prohibited
 
   
95.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 95.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   "BUILDING MATERIALS." Any materials such as lumber, brick, plaster,
sheetrock, concrete, asphalt, shingles, wire mesh, gutters, or other items
accumulated as a result of repairs or additions to existing buildings,
construction of new buildings, demolition of existing structures or
landscaping.
   "COMMERCIAL REFUSE." All refuse (other than ashes, dead animals, leaves,
tree trimmings, hazardous refuse, or animal litter), incidental to the ordinary
conduct of retail, wholesale, commercial or multi-family uses.
   "EXTRA PICKUP." The unscheduled pickup of a customer's solid waste container
due to the customer's specific request or a return to the customer's location
due to the collection truck not being afforded access to the solid waste
container or the customer's failure to comply with the provisions of this
chapter.
   "GARBAGE." All solid waste capable of being rapidly decomposed by
microorganisms, including, but not limited to, animal and vegetable waste
resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food, but
excluding sewage, human waste, building materials and clean yard trash.
   "HAZARDOUS WASTE." Materials such as cleaning fluids, crankcase oil, cutting
oils, paints, solvents, explosives, acids, caustic poisons, drugs, chemical
pesticides, radioactive products, infectious or infected materials, offal fecal
matter or any other material deemed to be “hazardous waste” under state or
federal law.
   "MIXED AND MISCELLANEOUS WASTE." All refuse resulting from the use and
maintenance of property, regardless of the nature of the activity thereon,
except garbage, furniture, appliances and hazardous waste.
   "REFUSE." Solid waste material consisting of garbage and mixed and
miscellaneous waste.
   "ROLL-OUT CART." A 90-gallon container, having wheels with a hinged lid,
issued by the town for the disposal of refuse as defined herein.
   "SOLID WASTE CONTAINER." A metal container of two cubic yards or greater
capacity capable of being emptied in the ordinary course of business by town
equipment. Solid waste container shall include those containers typically known
as "dumpsters".
   "WET GARBAGE." Refuse from which liquids have not been properly separated,
or drained, or refuse which has not been containerized to prevent leakage.
   "YARD TRASH." Leaves, grass trimmings, shrubs or shrub trimmings, tree
trimmings and other plant waste other than garbage.
(Ord. 1346, passed 8-26-99)
§ 95.02 DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS TO ADMINISTER REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The Director of the Department of Public Works, with the approval of
the Board of Aldermen, shall be responsible for the general supervision of the
collection, removal, and disposition of all solid waste.
   (B)   The Director of the Department of Public Works, subject to the
approval of the Board of Aldermen, may prepare and publish rules for the
effective administration and enforcement of this chapter. No person, firm,
corporation, or association shall fail, neglect, or refuse to comply with the
rules and regulations. Failure of the owner to pay refuse collection charges
within the time set forth on billing may result in discontinuation of the
service without prejudice to the town to recover for the service rendered
before discontinuance, and service shall not be restored until the account is
paid.
(Ord. 1346, passed 8-26-99)
COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
§ 95.10 PRIVATE GARBAGE AND TRASH COLLECTION, DISPOSAL PROHIBITED.
   The town shall have the exclusive right and privilege of operating garbage
and trash collection and disposal service within the town. No individual,
corporation, partnership, or any other entity shall be allowed to engage in the
business of collecting, hauling, transporting, and disposing of garbage and
trash in and from the town except as otherwise permitted by the town. Provided
that holders of permits from the North Carolina Alcoholic Beverage Control
Commission who are required to participate in recycling programs mandated by
G.S § 18B-1006.1 may contract directly with private companies, entities or
individuals to provide recycling services in accordance with regulations
promulgated by the North Carolina Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission.
(Ord. 1346, passed 8-26-99; Am. Ord. 1561, passed 10-25-07)
§ 95.11 GARBAGE TO BE PROMPTLY REMOVED.
   No person, firm, corporation, or association maintaining a building, lot, or
other structure of whatever type shall allow refuse that is unsightly, decayed
or otherwise is a menace to health or cleanliness to remain on any premises
longer than is reasonably necessary to remove and deposit the same in a
standard receptacle. Neither shall a person, firm, corporation, or association
allow the accumulation of trash, weeds, vines, cans, rags, bottles, boxes,
barrels, debris, garbage, or any other type of waste material. No material
shall be left loose to blow onto public or private property and neither shall
any material be buried on any land.
(Ord. 1346, passed 8-26-99)
§ 95.12 RESIDENTIAL ROLL-OUT CARTS.
   (A)   All occupants of single-family and multi-family residences not
exceeding five units shall be issued roll-out carts and are required to deposit
all garbage and refuse in said roll-out carts. In cases of single-family and
multi-family dwellings, the owner will be held responsible for any damage to
such roll-out cart; however, the occupant may be held liable for failure to
store the roll-out cart as provided in this chapter. No refuse shall be
collected except that which is in the roll-out cart. Yard trash, mixed and
miscellaneous waste, household furniture, and appliances shall be picked up in
accordance with §§ 95.15 and 95.16.
   (B)   Roll-out carts shall remain the property of the town. Roll-out carts
that are damaged, destroyed, or stolen through abuse, neglect, or improper use
of the owner-users shall be replaced by the town at the expense of the owner of
the property. Roll-out carts which are destroyed, damaged, or stolen in the
course of normal or reasonable usage or through no abuse, neglect, or improper
usage of the owner-users shall be repaired or replaced by the town at no
charge. The roll-out carts shall not be damaged, destroyed, defaced, or removed
from the premises by any person. Markings and identification devices on the
roll-out carts, except as placed or specifically permitted by the town, are
expressly prohibited and shall be regarded as damage to the roll-out carts.
   (C)   Whenever there are six or more dwelling units in one building, the
building shall be required to have a solid waste container (dumpster) and shall
comply with normal commercial regulations.
(Ord. 1346, passed 8-26-99)
§ 95.13 STORAGE AND COLLECTION PRACTICES.
   (A)   Refuse may be stored pending collection by the town only in roll-out
carts provided by the town. Refuse may be stored (between scheduled collections
only) in any appropriate and convenient fashion. Refuse may not be stored
between scheduled pickups on the street side of the building setback line of
any lot adjacent to a street or alleyway. Roll-out carts shall be placed within
three feet of the curbing, or the edge of those streets having no curbing, by
6:00 a.m. on the day of collection and shall be removed promptly after
collection is made no later than the evening of the day of collection.
   (B)   Hazardous waste, rocks, dirt, sod, vegetative yard waste, paint,
gasoline, oil, flammable liquids, solvents, propane tanks, hot coals or ashes,
building materials, fluorescent light bulbs, pallets, antifreeze (ethylene
glycol), aluminum cans, whole scrap tires, lead acid batteries, motor oil
filters, recyclable rigid plastic beverage containers, oyster shells, discarded
computer equipment and discarded televisions shall not be placed in roll-out
carts or dumpsters.
   (C)   Those persons not able to move the roll-out cart to the curb as a
result of physical disability may apply to the Public Works Director for
physical hardship status. The Public Works Director is authorized to
investigate and authorize exceptions for disabled or handicapped persons.
(Ord. 1346, passed 8-26-99; Am. Ord. 1632, passed 7-15-10; Am. Ord. 1645,
passed 12-9-10)
§ 95.14 COMMERCIAL SOLID WASTE CONTAINERS.
   The Director of the Department of Public Works shall determine the location,
position, and means of access to all solid waste containers. All commercial
establishments shall have a means of containing their solid waste. The
containers shall be a solid waste container (dumpster) of acceptable size and
shall be serviced with the frequency necessary so as not to exceed the capacity
of the container, create an unsightly appearance, or become a health hazard. In
unusual cases when the Director of the Department of Public Works determines
that roll-out carts may better serve the needs of the commercial establishment
and will not hamper the efficiency of solid waste collection, a maximum of five
regulation-size roll-out carts may be allowed. However, no roll-out cart shall
be serviced more than two times weekly. Access to solid waste containers shall
be free and clear. If access by town vehicles to such sold waste container is
not afforded, then no pickup will be made on that collection date, or the owner
shall be charged for an extra pickup.
(Ord. 1346, passed 8-26-99)
§ 95.15 YARD TRASH, MIXED AND MISCELLANEOUS COLLECTION.
   (A)   Any person desiring collection of yard trash shall arrange it for easy
handling as provided for in this section, and shall place it within three feet
of the curbing or the edge of those streets having no curbing. Grass, leaves
and other loose items shall be placed in heavy refuse bags. Brush, shrubbery
trimmings and limbs of less than four-foot lengths shall be bundled or shall be
placed in containers or heavy refuse bags. Tree limbs and other similar
materials for collection shall be cut in four- to five-foot lengths, with
protruding branches trimmed and placed in an orderly, neat manner near the
curb. In no instance shall an object be in excess of six inches in diameter nor
heavier than 75 pounds. Objects in excess of six inches in diameter or heavier
than 75 pounds shall be treated as mixed and miscellaneous waste. Yard trash
removal for large scale trimming of shrubbery may be arranged by calling the
Department of Public Works, and paying the established fee.
   (B)   Corrugated board, kraft board, wooden crates, or other similar rubbish
shall be flattened and tied in bundles of a size that can be handled by one man
or placed in either plastic bags or refuse receptacles after being flattened.
   (C)   Building materials which have accumulated from the construction,
improvement, repair, or demolition of any structure shall not be collected by
the town. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy on new
construction, or in any case all such material shall be removed by the owner of
the property or by the building contractor regularly and no more than one cubic
yard (three feet by three feet by three feet) shall be allowed to accumulate on
site at any one time.
   (D)   No collection will be made under this section except in strict
compliance with the terms of this section.
(Ord. 1346, passed 8-26-99)
§ 95.16 COLLECTION OF HOUSEHOLD FURNITURE AND APPLIANCES.
   (A)   Any person desiring the collection of normal household discarded
furniture and appliances which cannot otherwise be prepared for collection
pursuant to the other sections of this chapter shall request collection by
calling the Department of Public Works.
   (B)   Items for collection shall be placed at the curbside no earlier than
the day preceding the scheduled collection date as established by the
Department. Furniture includes couches, chairs, tables, beds, springs,
mattresses, chests, and similar items. Such items may be broken down and
bundled or neatly stacked. Appliances include refrigerators, stoves, washers,
dryers, dishwashers, and similar items.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or have outside any
building or dwelling, any icebox, refrigerator, or any other container of any
kind which has an airtight snap lock or other device thereon, without first
removing the snap lock or other device or removing doors from the icebox,
refrigerator, or other container.
   (D)   A fee shall be charged for disposing of any and all of the above items
as prescribed by the Board of Aldermen.
(Ord. 1346, passed 8-26-99)
§ 95.17 WET GARBAGE.
   All garbage shall have the liquid drained off and shall be containerized in
waterproof plastic bags or other waterproof combustible material before it is
placed in the garbage receptacle. The owners of operations violating this
section shall receive a surcharge in accordance with the adopted fee schedule.
(Ord. 1346, passed 8-26-99)
§ 95.18 COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL FEES.
   For the service of collecting and disposing of solid waste, the owner of
each premises from which solid waste is collected by the town shall be charged
rates as established from time to time by the Board of Aldermen. Adjustments to
collection and disposal fees shall be applicable to the first billing following
the effective date of the modified fees. Collection and disposal services are
provided throughout the year. Therefore, a minimum charge shall be made for all
users of the system. Residential user's minimum shall be the normal rate per
roll-out container per dwelling unit. Commercial user's minimum shall be as
previously stated; but in no case less than the one day charge for the size
solid waste container used in the highest period. The charges shall be
considered to be a debt owing to the town from the owner or occupant of the
premises which uses the service. No owner or occupant of premises within the
town shall be exempt from the collection and disposal service provided by the
town. All owners or occupants of premises within the town shall be subject to
the service charges prescribed by the Board. Any adjustment for the charges
shall be made at the discretion of the Board on the recommendation of the Town
Manager.
(Ord. 1346, passed 8-26-99; Am. Ord. 1418, passed 7-11-02)
§ 95.19 WASTE PICKUP SCHEDULE.
   (A)   The town shall provide solid waste collection and disposal service to
each residential property within the town, subject to the availability of
funds, personnel, equipment, and materials.
   (B)   The Director of Public Works shall make all determinations regarding
the size and number of solid waste containers needed and the frequency of
collection necessary at each commercial property to provide sanitary collection
and disposal service in the most efficient and effective manner. Commercial
properties may request service according to the approved refuse rate schedule.
Owners of commercial properties, or their authorized agents, may request
changes in frequency of collection and disposal service or changes in the
number or size of solid waste containers at their location bi-monthly on the
even numbered months; and, if approved by the Director of Public Works, such
changes shall become effective within five days of the date of the request.
(Ord. 1346, passed 8-26-99)
§ 95.20 SCREENING OF SOLID WASTE CONTAINERS (DUMPSTERS).
   (A)   All solid waste containers will be screened from public view by a
fence constructed in accordance with standards as specified herein on at least
three sides of the solid waste container and with a height of at least five
feet.
   (B)   All solid waste containers shall be located on the property owner’s
land and shall be placed on a minimum six-inch thick concrete pad a minimum of
14 feet wide by 14 feet deep for each solid waste container. Screening shall
not be placed so as to encroach upon the 14-foot x 14-foot dumpster pad.
   (C)   No other containers, materials, tools, and the like shall be placed on
the 14-foot by 14-foot dumpster pad. Articles found on the dumpster pad will be
considered trash or garbage and may be disposed of in accordance with this code
or required to be promptly removed.
   (D)   Required screens are not storage racks and shall be kept clean, neat
and orderly at all times. No trash is allowed outside the screened enclosure.
   (E)   If gates are provided, there shall be two a minimum of six feet wide
on each side creating a minimum clear opening 12 feet wide. Gates shall be
engineered without a central post and to carry all the gate load/weight without
the assistance of wheels or other supporting devices. Gates shall be diagonally
braced and easily opened and closed. If gates are provided with locks, said
locks shall remain unlocked between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
   (F)   Property owners presently using solid waste containers shall have one
year from the date of the adoption of this section to come into compliance with
the screening requirements set forth herein.
(Ord. 1346, passed 8-26-99)
§ 95.21 COLLECTION OF DISASTER RELATED DEBRIS FROM PRIVATE STREETS AND PRIVATE
PROPERTY.
   The town shall not be responsible for the collection or removal of debris
from private streets or private property resulting from a disaster that causes
the town to declare a state of emergency under the provisions of
Chapter 93 of the Town Code. Private property owners or homeowner associations
shall be responsible for such debris removal. Such debris shall be removed
either to the disposal location designated by the town or to the nearest public
right- of-way as designated by the town. The Town Manager or his or her
designee shall maintain a list of private streets affected by this section.
(Ord. 1550, passed 9-27-07)
WEEDS
§ 95.25 PLANTING OF BEACH VITEX PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to plant or cause to be planted Beach
Vitex (Vitex rotundifolia) on any property located within the town limits.
(Ord. 1584, passed 9-25-08; Am. Ord. 1710, passed 5-9-13)
§ 95.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   A violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a
misdemeanor as provided by G.S. § 14-4 and shall be punishable by a fine not to
exceed $100.
   (B)   A violation of the provisions of this chapter shall subject the
offender to a civil penalty in the amount of $50 to be recovered by the town in
a civil action in the nature of debt if the offender does not pay the penalty
within 10 days after being cited for a violation of this chapter.
   (C)   A violation of this chapter may be enforced by an appropriate
equitable remedy issuing from a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (D)   Each day's continuing violation of the provisions of this chapter
shall be a separate and distinct offense.
(Ord. 1346, passed 8-26-99)
CHAPTER 96: HEALTH AND SANITATION
Section
   
96.01   General provisions
   
96.02   Food establishments
   
96.03   Human wastes
   
96.04   Stagnant water
   
96.05   Temporary toilet facilities
 
   
96.99   Penalty
§ 96.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   No person shall throw, place, or deposit any garbage or trash in any street,
public place or private property within the town limits, except in garbage
containers or garbage vehicles as provided in this chapter or Chapter 95.
('72 Code, § 9-11) (Ord., passed 12-13-79)
Penalty, see § 96.99
§ 96.02 FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS.
   All persons selling food of any kind or serving prepared meals shall comply
with all requirements of the state Board of Health pertaining thereto.
('72 Code, § 9-11.1) (Ord., passed 12-13-79)
Penalty, see § 96.99
§ 96.03 HUMAN WASTES.
   No person shall urinate or deposit any human waste of any kind on any
street, lot, or premises except in approved sanitary facilities.
('72 Code, § 9-11.2) (Ord., passed 12-13-79)
Penalty, see § 96.99
§ 96.04 STAGNANT WATER.
   No person or occupant of any property shall allow stagnant water to
accumulate or remain in cellars or anywhere on his property.
('72 Code, § 9-11.3) (Ord., passed 12-13-79)
Penalty, see § 96.99
§ 96.05 TEMPORARY TOILET FACILITIES.
   No temporary toilet facilities shall be permitted in the town except in the
case of public necessity as declared by the town, town approved special events
or permitted construction sites.
(Ord. 1346, passed 8-26-99; Am. Ord. 1459, passed 5-27-04)
§ 96.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating the provisions of § 96.03 shall be subject to a
civil penalty in the amount of $100 to be recovered by the town in a civil
action in the nature of debt if the offender does not pay the penalty within 15
days after having been cited for violation of the ordinance. In accordance with
G.S. § 160A-175(b), a violation of the section enumerated herein shall not be
subject to the penalty provisions of G.S. § 14-4 and shall not be considered a
breach of the penal laws of the state.
   (B)   A violation of any remaining section of this chapter is a misdemeanor
punishable in accordance with the provisions of G.S. § 14-4. The fine for such
violation shall not exceed $500.
   (C)   A violation of any remaining section of this chapter shall subject the
offender to a civil penalty of $100. If any person fails to pay a civil penalty
within 15 days after being cited for a violation, the town may seek to recover
the penalty in a civil action in the nature of debt.
   (D)   The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by an appropriate
equitable remedy issuing from a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (E)   Each day’s continuing violation of any provisions of this chapter
shall be a separate and distinct offense.
('72 Code, § 9-11.4) (Ord., passed 12-13-79; Am. Ord. 1341, passed 7-29-99; Am.
Ord. 1346, passed 8-26-99; Am. Ord. 1357, passed 4-13-00; Am. Ord. 1423,passed
8-22-02; Am. Ord. 1711, passed 6-13-13)
CHAPTER 97: NOISE AND PUBLIC NUISANCES
Section
   
97.01   Statement of policy; interpretations
   
97.02   General prohibition
   
97.03   Noises prohibited at all times
   
97.04   Noises prohibited at certain times
   
97.05   Noises that generally do not violate this chapter
   
97.06   Responsible parties; notice
   
97.07   Non-resident owner and occupant responsibility
   
97.08   Public nuisances enumerated
   
97.09   Notice and order to abate nuisance
   
97.10   Appeal
   
97.11   Abatement of nuisance by town
   
97.12   Charges for abatement by town; lien
   
97.13   Definitions
   
97.14   Placement of graffiti prohibited
 
   
97.99   Penalty
§ 97.01 STATEMENT OF POLICY; INTERPRETATIONS.
   (A)   Statement of policy. It is the policy of the Town of Wrightsville
Beach to maintain a peaceful community while recognizing that certain noises
are generated by the acceptable economic and recreational activity of a vibrant
community. The goal of the town is to encourage such activity while ensuring
that time periods during which many residents are customarily at rest or have
an expectation of peaceful enjoyment of their residences are not disturbed by
unacceptable levels or types of noise.
   (B)   Interpretations and definitions. For purposes of this chapter, the
following interpretations and definitions shall apply.
      (l)   When the word "REASONABLE" is used herein, it shall be evaluated
with reference to the normal expectations for sound during normal waking hours
versus the normal expectations for sound during normal sleeping hours, with a
higher level of sound acceptable during the day and a lower level of sound
acceptable during the night. It shall also be evaluated with reference to the
location involved, with a higher level of noise expected and tolerated if
generated within a commercial district within the town and a lower level of
noise expected and tolerated if generated within a residential district within
the town.
      (2)   A "REASONABLE PERSON" is one who is moderate, fair and sensible.
Although enforcement of this chapter shall often be the result of a complaint
received by the town, in each instance where a complaint is received and the
standard of "reasonableness" invoked, a Wrightsville Beach police officer
answering the complaint shall separately determine, based upon his or her
investigation and in light of the circumstances of the situation, whether the
noise in question is at an "unreasonable" level pursuant to the provisions of
this
Chapter 97 .
      (3)   Whether a sound is "AUDIBLE WITHIN A PERSON'S TEMPORARY OR USUAL
PLACE OF ABODE" shall be determined with one or more windows of the complaining
party open, assuming weather conditions during which it is reasonable and
customary for one or more windows to be open.
      (4)   Noise is "DISTURBING" if it is perceived by a person of ordinary
sensibilities as interrupting the normal peace and calm of an area.
      (5)   "UNREASONABLY LOUD NOISE" shall mean noise which is loud, raucous
and disturbing which unreasonably obstructs, disturbs, injures, or endangers
the comfort, health, peace, or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary
sensibilities.
(Ord. 1810, passed 9-10-20)
§ 97.02 GENERAL PROHIBITION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to make, allow, continue, or
assist to be made, allowed or continued:
      (l)   Any unreasonably loud noise;
      (2)   Any noise which unreasonably disturbs, injures, or endangers the
comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary
sensibilities, within the jurisdictional limits of the town; or
      (3)   Any noise which is so harsh, prolonged, unnatural, or unusual in
time or place as to occasion unreasonable discomfort to any person of
reasonable and ordinary sensibilities residing, visiting or working in the area
from which said noises emanate, or as to unreasonably interfere with the peace
and comfort of such residents or their guests, or operators or customers in
places of business, or as to detrimentally or adversely affect such residences
or places of business.
   (B)   Factors for determining whether noise is unreasonably loud or
disturbing include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   The proximity of the sound to sleeping facilities, whether
residential or commercial;
      (2)   The land use, nature, and zoning of the area(s) from which the
sound emanates and the area where it is received or perceived;
      (3)   The time of day or night the sound occurs;
      (4)   The duration of the sound; and
      (5)   Whether the sound is recurrent, intermittent, or constant.
(Ord. 1810, passed 9-10-20)
§ 97.03 NOISES PROHIBITED.
   The following noises are declared to be unreasonably loud or disturbing
noises in violation of §
97.02 and are prohibited. This enumeration shall not be construed to be an
exhaustive or exclusive list of noises which violate §
97.02, nor shall satisfying any requirements of this section render a sound in
itself reasonable:
   (A)   Noises intended to disturb. The creation of noise for the primary
purpose of disturbing another person, such purpose gleaned from the
circumstances surrounding the generation of the noise.
   (B)   Horns, signaling devices, sirens, and the like. The sounding of any
horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, watercraft, bus, or other
vehicle, except as a warning or danger signal; or the sounding of such device
repeatedly or for an unreasonable period of time; or the use of any siren upon
any vehicle, other than a bona fide police, fire or other emergency vehicle or
equipment.
   (C)   Television sets, radios, musical instruments, or amplification and
playing devices, and the like. The outdoor use, operation, or playing of any
television set, radio, musical instrument or sound amplifying device, or other
machine or device for the production or reproduction of sound, including but
not limited to devices designed for playing music and other material from
records, compact discs, MP3s, mobile phones, speakers and the like, in a manner
or at a volume which would or does annoy or disturb a person of reasonable
sensibilities within his or her temporary or usual place of abode or place of
employment.
   (D)   Yelling, shouting, and the like. The frequent, constant, or continual
yelling or shouting, in a manner or at a volume which would or does annoy or
disturb a person of reasonable sensibilities within his or her temporary or
usual place of abode or place of employment.
   (E)   Animals. The frequent, constant, or continual noise from any animal
that habitually, frequently, intermittently, or repeatedly makes excessive
noises that tend to annoy, disturb, or frighten a person of reasonable
sensibilities at a volume level or for a period of time which would or does
annoy or disturb a person of reasonable sensibilities within his or her
temporary or usual place of abode or place of employment.
   (F)   Vehicles and watercraft. The use of any motorized vehicle or
watercraft of any nature that is so out of repair, or so loaded, altered or
operated as to create grating, grinding, rattling, amplified exhaust sound(s),
or other noise which would or does annoy or disturb a person of reasonable
sensibilities within his or her temporary or usual place of abode or place of
employment, or the operation of a motorized vehicle with a defective, altered,
or missing muffler such that the vehicle emits an unreasonably load noise.
   (G)   Loading, unloading, waste disposal. The creation of an unusual and
unreasonable level of prolonged noise in connection with loading or unloading
any vehicle, the opening and destruction of bales, crates, and other
containers, or the prolonged deposit of solid waste materials or recyclables
into containers or receptacles, at a noise level which would or does annoy or
disturb a person of reasonable sensibilities within his or her temporary or
usual place of abode or place of employment.
   (H)   Alarms. Car, watercraft, home and similar types of alarms which are
activated and not discontinued promptly after the person in control of the
alarm is advised or discovers that the alarm has been activated, unless the
alarm is allowed to continue because said person believes that a crime is being
committed.
   (I)   Compression release engine brakes or air brakes (aka "Jake Brakes ").
The noise caused by the unnecessary release or use of compression release
engine brakes, sometimes referred to as air brakes or "Jake Brakes."
   (J)   Loud, raucous and disturbing noise. Loud, raucous and disturbing
noise, which term shall mean any sound which, because of its volume level,
duration and character, annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort,
health, peace or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary sensibilities within
the limits of the town of Wrightsville Beach. The term loud, raucous and
disturbing noise shall be limited to loud, raucous and disturbing noises heard
upon the public streets, in any public park, in any school or public building
or upon the grounds thereof while in use, in any church or upon the grounds
thereof while in use, upon any parking lot open to members of the public as
invitees or licensees, or in any occupied residential unit which is not the
source of the noise or upon the grounds thereof.
(Ord. 1810, passed 9-10-20)
§ 97.04 NOISES PROHIBITED AT CERTAIN TIMES.
   The following noises are declared to be in violation of §
97.02 if generated between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. and are
prohibited between those hours. This enumeration shall not be construed to be
an exclusive list of actions or noises that violate §
97.02 nor shall satisfying any requirements of this section render a sound in
and of itself reasonable.
   (A)   Outdoor use of television sets, radios, music amplification and
playing devices, and the like. The outdoor use, operation, or playing of any
television set, radio, musical instrument, phonograph, sound amplifying device
or other machine or device for the production or reproduction of sound to the
extent that it is audible at a distance in excess of 150 feet from the origin
of the sound.
   (B)   Indoor use of musical instruments, sound amplification, and the like.
The indoor use, operation or playing of a musical instrument or sound
amplifying device at such volume or in such manner as to be clearly audible
disturbing (as defined in this
Chapter 97 ) within another person's temporary or usual place of abode and.
   (C)   Yelling, shouting, and the like. Yelling, shouting, whistling, or
singing outdoors at a volume which is audible within another person's temporary
or usual place of abode.
   (D)   Parties. Noise from parties or gatherings of people, including but not
limited to the noise from many voices speaking at once, drunken conversation,
yelling, shouting, singing, music, breaking glass, or fireworks, which is
audible within another person's temporary or usual place of abode. For purposes
of this division, a "party" is considered any gathering of people, whether at a
fixed location or otherwise, for social interaction.
   (E)   Fireworks. The use of fireworks or other noisemakers which produce
sound audible within another person's temporary or usual place of abode, except
as allowed pursuant to a valid pyrotechnics permit issued under applicable law.
   (F)   Vehicles. The prolonged idling or running of a motor vehicle for a
period of time exceeding what is reasonably needed to "warm" a vehicle's engine
before use, which is audible within another person's temporary or usual place
of abode.
   (G)   Loading or unloading commercial vehicles; the deposit or disturbance
of solid waste materials and recyclables. Noise made in connection with the
prolonged loading or unloading of any commercial vehicle or the prolonged
deposit, collection or disturbance of solid waste materials or recyclables, at
a sound level audible within another person's temporary or usual place of
abode.
   (H)   Construction activity. The erection (including excavation),
demolition, alteration, or repair of any building or structure of any kind in a
residential area or business district other than between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday, except in the case of emergency repairs
to existing structures not then under construction and in the case of urgent
necessity in the interest of public safety and upon notice to the Town Manager
or his or her designee. Provided that such activities shall be deemed
unreasonably loud and disturbing noises for all of Memorial Day, Fourth of
July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day, and New Year's Day when such
days fall on a day other than Sunday.
(Ord. 1810, passed 9-10-20)
§ 97.05 NOISES THAT GENERALLY DO NOT VIOLATE THIS CHAPTER.
   The following noises and activities are exempt from the provisions of this
chapter unless they produce a risk of serious or unnecessary bodily harm:
   (A)   Town work. The sounds produced by town vehicles, employees and
contractors engaged in:
      (1)   Critical and/or emergency town duties such as removing snow,
repairing damaged water or sewer lines, responding to fires, responding to
vehicle accidents, and the like; or
      (2)   The normal day-to-day operations of the town; provided, that such
activities are exempt only if conducted between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:
00 p.m., unless explicitly authorized by the Town Council following general
notice to the public and a public hearing.
   (B)   Community events.
      (1)   The normal and customary sounds emanating from a non-recurring
community event conducted by a governmental entity, school, church, or similar
non-commercial entity, so long as the event with which the noise is associated
begins no earlier than 7:00 a.m. and ends no later than 10:00 p.m. For purposes
of this division, "non-recurring" shall refer to an event which occurs no more
than four times during any calendar year. However, an event can lose its status
as a community event under this division if multiple complaints from different
sources are received about the noise level emanating from the event, and upon
investigation, the police determine that the noise levels ten feet or more from
the property boundaries of the property upon which the event is conducted, or
with respect to events such as parades which utilize the public streets, ten
feet or more from the curb or edge of the street pavement when no curb exists,
violate the standards set out in §
97.06. If an event loses its status as a "community event" it shall no longer
enjoy the presumption under this section that it does not violate the chapter.
      (2)   Any community event or series of events specifically authorized by
the town as a community event, including one for which it is predicted will
generate noise otherwise prohibited by this Chapter 97, upon a finding that
such event provides a benefit to the citizens of Wrightsville Beach and the
public at large that exceeds the potential detrimental effects of the noise it
may generate. Before approving such event or series of events, the Board of
Aldermen shall confirm that notice of the public hearing was posted at least
seven days prior to the hearing on the town's website and in every other place
at which the town has posted notice of the meeting during which the public
hearing is to take place. The applicant for designation as a community event
shall provide a schedule of the starting and ending time of the event, a
description of the noise-generating activities which are expected from the
event, a summary of all steps which will be taken to mitigate any negative
noise impacts of the event, and the applicant shall describe the expected
benefits to the citizens of Wrightsville Beach and the public at large which
will be derived from the event.
   (C)   Sporting events. The normal and customary sounds emanating from a
sporting event held on the campus of a school or on town owned property will
not be considered noises or activities which violate this chapter, so long as
the event with which the noise is associated does not begin prior to 6:00 a.m.
and has been scheduled to end by 11:00 p.m., and any crowd associated with the
event is expected to disperse by 11:30 p.m., even if due to unexpected delays,
overtime periods and the like, the event extends past 11:00 p.m. and the crowd
does not disperse until after 11:30 p.m. This exemption, however, does not
relieve people leaving such an event from minimizing any loud talking,
shouting, and the like, which may be heard in places of abode in the vicinity
of the event, and should any person fail to heed a request by a Wrightsville
Beach police officer to lower the volume of such noise, that person may be
cited and fined pursuant to this
Chapter 97 .
   (D)   Remote vehicle entry or key. The use of a remote vehicle entry or key
causing an audible "beep" when used simply to lock or unlock a vehicle prior to
or following the reasonable use of the vehicle.
   (E)   Ordinary use of power tools. The ordinary use of a noise-causing tool,
such as a lawnmower, weed trimmer, circular saw, chain saw, and the like, if
used on weekdays between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., so long as the
tool is being used for a legitimate maintenance or construction purpose
associated with the property upon which it is utilized and the person using
such tool takes all practical steps to minimize its disturbing noise impacts on
others.
   (F)   Emergency work. Emergency work performed for the purpose of preventing
or alleviating physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an
existing or imminent peril. This emergency exception includes maintenance,
backup, or upkeep strictly necessary to keep emergency equipment, such as
generators, in operating order. In addition, this exception only applies for
the shortest duration of time reasonably required to address the emergency.
   (G)   Public demonstrations. Noise resulting from parades, lawful picketing
or other public demonstrations protected by the U.S. Constitution or federal
law or for which a permit has been granted by the town, provided that such
demonstrations are held between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on
weekdays, or between 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on weekends.
   (H)   Safety signals. Noise of safety signals, warning devices, and
emergency pressure relief valves, provided such signals are used in a manner
consistent with promoting public health and safety.
   (I)   Emergency vehicles. Noise resulting from the lawful operation of any
authorized emergency vehicle.
(Ord. 1810, passed 9-10-20)
§ 97.06 RESPONSIBLE PARTIES; NOTICE.
   (A)   Any person who creates or assists in creating an unreasonably loud or
disturbing noise or other violation of this chapter is responsible for
remedying the violation and may be held liable for civil or criminal penalties
under this chapter.
      (1)   A person shall be deemed to create or assist in creating the
unreasonably loud or disturbing noise or other violation if that person owns,
manages, leases, occupies, or operates any residence, business, or location at
which the noise is generated.
      (2)   In those instances where the violating noise is the result of the
actions of a group of persons, such as a late-night party, all persons present
shall be liable for the appropriate civil penalties, whether or not they
individually created the offending noise.
   (B)   Notice. Written warning or a citation or notice of violation may be
served in person, by first class mail, or by email. A property owner who does
not occupy the property from which the violating noise is generated may be
served by first class mail to the address currently on file with the county tax
assessor. A person who occupies or otherwise is in possession of the property
may be served by posting.
(Ord. 1810, passed 9-10-20)
§ 97.07 NON-RESIDENT OWNER AND OCCUPANT RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   A non-resident owner of any premises subject to this chapter shall be
responsible and liable for any actions by the tenants or occupants of the
premises that constitute second or subsequent violations of this chapter;
provided that no non-resident owner shall be liable unless notified of first or
previous violations of the chapter; and further provided that the first or
previous violations shall have occurred within the previous 24-month period.
Notice of first or previous violations shall be effected by mailing a copy of
the citation to the non- resident owner by registered or certified mail, return
receipt requested. No non- resident owner may be subjected to criminal
liability by the application of this section, but shall be subject to civil
penalties and equitable relief as provided hereinafter. This section shall in
no way relieve any tenant or occupant from responsibility for violations of
this chapter.
   (B)   The owner or occupant of any premises shall be responsible and liable
for any actions of guests or invitees on the premises that violate this
chapter; provided that the occupant shall have been actually or constructively
present at the time of the violation.
('72 Code, § 12-5) (Ord. 1094, passed 5-11-89; Am. Ord. 1810, passed 9-10-20)
§ 97.08 PUBLIC NUISANCES ENUMERATED.
   (A)   The existence of any of the following conditions on any vacant lot or
other parcel of land within the corporate limits whether on public or private
property is hereby declared to be dangerous and prejudicial to the public
health or safety and to constitute a public nuisance:
      (1)   The uncontrolled growth of weeds or grass to a height of 12 inches
or more;
      (2)   Any accumulation of organic or inorganic matter that is offensive
by virtue of odors or vapors or which is inhabited by rats, mice, snakes, or
vermin of any kind which is or may be dangerous or prejudicial to the public
health;
      (3)   Any accumulation of trash, garbage or other waste not in compliance
with the provisions of
Chapter 95;
      (4)   Any accumulation of hazardous refuse or concentration of
combustible items such as mattresses, boxes, paper, automobile tires, old
clothes, or any other combustible materials or objects of a like nature;
      (5)   Open wells;
      (6)   Any accumulation of stagnant water causing or threatening to cause
the inhabitation thereof by mosquitoes;
      (7)   The open storage of any item detrimental to the public health or
safety including, but not limited to, any furniture, appliance, ice box, stove,
glass, building material or building rubbish;
      (8)   Any condition detrimental to the public health which violates the
rules and regulations of the New Hanover County Health Department;
      (9)   The presence of any debris from the demolition of any structure on
the property, including but not limited to, partially demolished walls,
foundations, basements, building materials and rubbish, after the cessation of
all active demolition activity on the property;
      (10)   Placing or allowing to be placed anything on property owned or
legally occupied by another without the express permission of the owner or
occupant of such property;
      (11)   Going upon property owned or legally occupied by another after
having been told not to do so by the owner or occupant of such property; and
      (12)   The presence of Beach Vitex (Vitex rotundifolia) on any vacant lot
or other parcel of land within the town limits.
      (13)   The placement of graffiti upon the surface of any public or
private property.
      (14)   The intentional introduction of any substance into any body of
water which in any way renders other persons insecure in life or insecure in
the use of said body of water or produces unreasonable annoyance, discomfort or
hurt to other persons. For purposes of this subsection (14), the phrase
"INTENTIONAL INTRODUCTION" shall include the introduction of substances on to
land adjacent to any body of water wherein said substance migrates into the
adjacent body of water.
   (B)   When any of the following conditions exist on a public right-of-way
between the property line and the curb or edge of the roadway and threatens,
limits, impairs or creates a hazard to the use of the right-of-way by vehicles
or pedestrians, such a condition is declared to be dangerous and prejudicial to
the public health or safety and to constitute a severe nuisance:
      (1)   Any accumulation of animal or organic matter that is offensive by
virtue of odors or which is inhabited by rats, mice, snakes or vermin which may
be dangerous to the public health.
      (2)   Any accumulation of trash, garbage or other waste not in compliance
with the provisions of
Chapter 95.
      (3)   Any accumulation of hazardous refuse or concentration of
combustible items such as mattresses, boxes, paper, housewares, tires, clothes
or furniture.
      (4)   Any accumulation of appliances, glass, building materials,
demolition materials or rubbish.
   (C)   Requirement for minimum maintenance of exterior features. Upon written
notification, by certified mail, the owner of the building or structure shall
be required to correct the following conditions within forty-five (45) days:
      (1)   All uncovered roof areas lacking shingles, metal, rubber, masonry,
or other typical finished roof material that expose the roof and portions of
the structure below the same to rot, moisture, mildew, animals, or other
conditions leading to dilapidation, decay, and potential safety hazards.
      (2)   All uncovered exterior wall areas lacking wood, masonry, vinyl,
aluminum, brick, stucco, or other typical siding material that expose the wall
areas and portions of the structure inside the same to rot, moisture, mildew,
animals, or other conditions leading to dilapidation, decay, and potential
safety hazards.
      (3)   Any broken window, or any window opening covered with plywood,
plastic, metal, or other material other than typical window materials that
expose the wall areas and portions of the structure inside the windows to rot,
moisture, mildew, animals, or other conditions leading to dilapidation, decay,
and potential safety hazards.
      (4)   Any door that is missing, hanging, and/or visibly damaged to be
non-functional such that it exposes the interior of the structure to rot,
moisture, mildew, animals, or other conditions leading to dilapidation, decay,
and potential safety hazards.
      (5)   Any missing and/or broken deck, porch, or stairway railing segment
that presents the potential for falling and serious injury to a person relying
on the same.
(Ord. 1710, passed 5-9-13; Am. Ord. 1766, passed 5-11-17; Am. Ord. 1810, passed
9-10-20; Am. Ord. 1846, passed 6-22-23; Am. Ord. 1852, passed 8-10-23) Penalty,
see §
97.99
§ 97.09 NOTICE AND ORDER TO ABATE NUISANCE.
   (A)   For purposes of this subchapter, the respondent is the person in
possession of the property where a public nuisance (as described in §
97.06) is located, as well as the owner of such property, if different from the
former.
   (B)   Upon determination by the Town Manager or his or her designee (herein
“Manager”) that there exists on any property conditions constituting a public
nuisance (as described in §
97.06), the Manager shall notify the respondent in writing sent by certified
mail return receipt requested or by commercial delivery service such as FedEx
of such conditions and shall order the abatement thereof within 15 days of the
date of such notice or within 45 days as identified in §
97.08(C). If after due diligence the respondent’s correct address cannot be
determined, then the required notice shall published once in a newspaper
qualified for legal advertising and circulated in New Hanover County and shall
be posted conspicuously on the offending property. The notice shall order the
abatement of the nuisance within 15 days of the publication of the notice.
   (C)   Upon determination by the Manager that there exists on the public
right-of-way conditions constituting a severe nuisance, the Manager shall
notify the owner of the abutting property of such conditions and shall order
the abatement thereof within 24 hours of such notice. This notice shall, if
feasible, be given by telephone. Whether or not the owner is reached by
telephone, notice shall be mailed by first class mail to his or her last known
address unless he or she or his or her agent receives this notice in person.
(Ord. 1710, passed 5-9-13; Am. Ord. 1810, passed 9-10-20; Am. Ord. 1846, passed
6-22-23) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.10 APPEAL.
   (A)   At any time before the expiration of the 15 days’ abatement period
specified in §
97.07(B), the respondent may request a hearing before the Town Manager to
appeal the finding of the Manager’s designee that a public nuisance as defined
in §
97.06 exists on the premises. Upon completion of the hearing, the Town Manager
shall consider the evidence before him or her and shall either revoke the
initial order, issue a final order which differs from the initial order, or
reinstate the initial order as a final abatement order.
   (B)   If the city has caused the abatement of a severe nuisance as defined
in §
97.07(C), at any time within 30 days of the property owner’s receipt of a
statement of charges from the city for the removal of the conditions, the
property owner may request a hearing before the Town Manager to appeal the
charges and the finding of the Manager’s designee that a severe nuisance
existed on the right-of-way. Upon completion of the hearing, the Town Manager
shall consider the evidence before him or her and shall either uphold, modify
or revoke the charges resulting from the abatement by the town.
   (C)   Any request for a hearing pursuant to this section must be in writing
and must be filed in the office of the Town Manager. The Town Manager shall fix
a time for the hearing, and the initial abatement order or the accrual of
interest on the statement of charges shall be temporarily suspended pending
such hearing. The hearing must be held by the Town Manager within 31 calendar
days following receipt of the request for hearing by the office of the Town
Manager. At the hearing, the individual affected by the order shall be given
the opportunity to present evidence to refute the findings which supported the
abatement order or the removal of the nuisance condition.
(Ord. 1710, passed 5-9-13; Am. Ord. 1810, passed 9-10-20)
§ 97.11 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE BY TOWN.
   Upon the occurrence of any of the following conditions:
   (A)   A hearing is requested and held under §
97.08 above resulting in either a final order with modifications or the
reinstatement of the initial order as final order, and such order is not
complied with within 15 days from adjournment of the hearing;
   (B)   No hearing is requested or held, and the respondent having been
ordered to abate such public nuisance fails, neglects or refuses to abate or
remove the condition constituting the nuisance within 15 days from the date of
said order; or
   (C)   The property owner fails to abate conditions constituting a severe
nuisance within ten days of notification of the owner of such conditions; the
Manager shall cause the condition to be removed or otherwise remedied by having
employees of the city go upon the premises and remove or otherwise abate such
nuisance.
(Ord. 1710, passed 5-9-13; Am. Ord. 1810, passed 9-10-20)
§ 97.12 CHARGES FOR ABATEMENT BY TOWN; LIEN.
   (A)   The actual cost incurred by the city in removing or otherwise
remedying a public nuisance pursuant to §
97.07 shall be charged to the owner of the offending property and shall be a
lien upon the land or premises where the public nuisance existed and shall be
collected as unpaid taxes, as provided in G.S. § 160A-193.
   (B)   In the event charges for the removal or abatement of a public nuisance
are not paid within 30 days after the receipt of a statement of charges from
the town, such charges shall bear interest at the rate of 8% per annum until
paid.
(Ord. 1710, passed 5-9-13; Am. Ord. 1810, passed 9-10-20)
§ 97.13 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
   "GRAFFITI." Graffiti means any inscription, word, writing, drawing, figure,
mark of paint, ink, chalk, dye or other similar substance, etching, engraving
or other defacement (collectively "defacement") by a graffiti implement or
chalk or by the application of any material, adhesive label, paper, fabric or
other matter (collectively "matter") with adhesive or other substance which is
intended to make the application of the matter permanent or difficult to
remove, on public or private property. Graffiti does not include temporary,
easily removable chalks or other water soluble markings which are used in
connection with traditional children's activities such as drawings of bases for
ball games, hopscotch and similar activities, nor does it include temporary,
easily removable markings used in connection with any lawful business or public
purpose or activity and markings used to denote the location of underground
utility infrastructure and those used in conjunction with establishing survey
control data and location points by survey crews.
   "OWNER." Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every
mortgagee of record.
(Ord. 1766, passed 5-11-17; Am. Ord. 1810, passed 9-10-20)
§ 97.14 PLACEMENT OF GRAFFITI PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place graffiti upon the surface of
any public or private property.
(Ord. 1766, passed 5-11-17; Am. Ord. 1810, passed 9-10-20)
§ 97.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   The Town Manager, Chief of Police or their designee(s) shall have
responsibility for the enforcement of the noise regulations contained herein.
Nothing in this section shall prevent the Town Manager or Chief of Police or
their designee(s) from obtaining voluntary compliance by way of warning, notice
or education.
   (B)   Initiation of enforcement. The provisions of §
97.03 (A) (noises intended to disturb) and shall be enforced only as the result
of the receipt of a complaint. All other provisions of this chapter may be
enforced either as the result of the receipt of a complaint or as the result of
the observations of any law enforcement officer or other employee or official
of the town.
   (C)   Civil penalties. A violation of §
97.08  (A)(14) shall subject the offender(s) to a civil penalty in the amount
of $500.00 for the first offense; and $1,000.00 for the second and each
subsequent offense. Any other violation of this chapter [excepting §§
97.02 ,
97.03 ,
97.04  and
97.14  which is addressed in §
97.99 (D) below] shall subject the violator to a civil penalty in the amount of
$100.00 provided, that subsequent violations within any 12-month rolling period
shall subject the violator to the following civil penalties: a second violation
in any rolling 12-month period shall subject the violator to a civil penalty in
the amount of $250.00, and a third and any subsequent violation in any rolling
12-month period shall result in the assessment of a $500.00 civil penalty.
   (D)   A violation of §§
97.02,
97.03,
97.04 and
97.14 shall subject the offender(s) to a civil penalty in the amount of $250.00
for the first offense; $500.00 for the second offense; $750.00 for the third
offense; and $1,000.00 for the fourth and each subsequent offense.
   (E)   If any person fails to pay a civil penalty within 15 days after being
cited for a violation, the town may seek to recover the penalty in a civil
action in the nature of debt.
   (F)   The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by an appropriate
equitable remedy issuing from a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (G)   Each day's continuing violation of any provisions of this chapter
shall be a separate and distinct offense.
   (H)   Appeal of civil penalty. Appeal of a civil penalty amount may be made
to the Town Manager or designee by filing an appeal stating with specificity
the grounds for the appeal and the reasons the penalty should be reduced or
abated. In considering the appeal, the Town Manager or designee may consider
the following:
      (1)   The gravity of the violation;
      (2)   Any action taken or not taken by the violator to avoid and/or
correct the violation;
      (3)   The cost of the action to correct the violation;
      (4)   Any previous violations committed by the violator, on the same or
different site; and
      (5)   Any competent mitigating or exonerating evidence presented by the
party appealing the penalty.
   (I)   Criminal penalties.
      (1)   A person committing more than two violations of this chapter during
any rolling 12-month period shall also be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and
shall be fined not more than $500.00, exclusive of and in addition to the civil
penalties imposed.
      (2)   A person committing a violation of §
97.14 shall also be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and shall be fined not more
than $500.00, exclusive of and in addition to the civil penalties imposed. In
addition to any other remedy, the court shall order any person convicted of a
violation of §
97.14 to make restitution to the victim and/or to the Town of Wrightsville
Beach for the damage or loss suffered by the victim and/or to the Town of
Wrightsville Beach as a result of the offense. The court may determine the
amount, terms, and conditions of the restitution.
(Ord. 1710, passed 5- -13; Am. Ord. 1766, passed 5-11-17; Am. Ord. 1810, passed
9-10-20; Am. Ord. 1853, passed 9-13-23; Am. Ord. 1860, passed 6-13-24)
CHAPTER 98: SPECIAL EVENTS, PARADES, DEMONSTRATIONS, PICKETING, PUBLIC BEACH
Section
   
98.01   Purpose; scope and intent
   
98.02   Definitions
   
98.03   Permit required
   
98.04   Standards for all special events
   
98.05   Alternate standards for expressive activities
   
98.06   Notice to other officials
   
98.07   Picketing regulations
   
98.08   Parade regulations
   
98.09   Public beach regulations
   
98.10   Interference with demonstrations and the like prohibited
   
98.11   Police protection
   
98.12   Weapons
   
98.13   Revocation of permit
   
98.14   Exemptions
   
98.15   Appeals
 
   
98.99   Penalty
§ 98.01 PURPOSE; SCOPE AND INTENT.
   (A)   Recognizing that special events can enhance the quality of life for
residents and visitors alike, it is the purpose of the Board of Aldermen to
establish a structured process for permitting the use of public facilities and
the staging of outdoor special events conducted by the private sector using
public property, facilities or services, or to conduct events that occupy,
impact or consume public resources as a result of the congregation of people.
This chapter is intended to insure that the town and its residents and visitors
will have adequate advance notice of a proposed special event and the
cooperation of the organizers in order to properly plan the municipal services,
such as security, sanitation and traffic control that are required for such an
event.
   (B)   It is the intent of the Board of Aldermen to protect the rights of its
citizens to engage in protected free speech expressive activities and yet allow
for reasonable, time, place and manner regulation of those activities within
the overall context of rationally regulating special events that have an impact
upon public facilities and services.
(Ord. 1616, passed 1-14-10)
§ 98.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   “BLOCK.” That portion of any street or public beach lying between its
intersections with other streets. On Causeway Drive and the Salisbury Street
causeway a block shall be 300' segments identified by the Special Events
Coordinator.
   “EXPRESSIVE ACTIVITIES.” Conduct, the sole or principal object of which is
the expression, dissemination or communication by verbal, visual, literary or
auditory means of opinion, views or ideas and for which no fee or donation is
charged or required as a condition of participation in or attendance at such
activity. It includes public oratory, distribution of literature, and
picketing. “EXPRESSIVE ACTIVITIES” do not include commercial activities set out
in §
98.09(D).
   “GROUP DEMONSTRATION.” Any assembly together or concert of action between or
among two or more persons for the purpose of protesting any matter or of making
known any position or promotion of the persons, or of or on behalf of any
organization or class of persons, or for the purpose of attracting attention of
the assembly.
   “PARADE.” Any assemblage of two or more persons participating in or
operating any vehicle in any march, ceremony, show, exhibition, or procession
of any kind in or upon the public streets, sidewalks, alleys, parks, or other
public grounds or places.
   “PERSON.” Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, or
other organization, whether formal or informal.
   “PICKET LINE.” Any two or more persons formed together for the purpose of
making known any position or promotion of the persons, or on behalf of any
organization or class of persons.
   “PICKETING.” The act of participating in or conducting a picket line.
   “PUBLIC BEACH.” The ocean beach as defined in G.S. § 77-20(e) and any
additional area lying between the 1939 line, as defined in
Ch. 155, Appendix A , and the Atlantic Ocean.
   “SMALL GROUPS.” Any formation, procession or assembly of three or fewer
persons for a common purpose.
   “SPECIAL EVENT.”
      (1)   A planned outdoor event which involves:
         (a)   The gathering of a group of persons for a common purpose, design
or goal upon public property or the public beach; or
         (b)   An expressive activity by an individual or a group upon public
property or the public beach.
      (2)   “SPECIAL EVENTS” shall include, but not be limited to, parades,
group demonstrations, and picketing.
   “SPECIAL EVENTS COORDINATOR.” The person designated by the Town Manager to
make decisions regarding special events that do not require approval of the
Board of Aldermen.
   “TEMPORARY STRUCTURE.” Any moveable shelter or enclosure, including a tent,
which is intended to provide protection from the elements for persons, stored
materials, vehicles, or other items and for which no building permit is
required.
   “WATER-BASED ACTIVITY.” Those activities that take place, in whole or in
significant part, in the water and that would be materially altered or impaired
without the ability to perform the activity in the water, for example, boating,
surfing, kite boarding, wake boarding, water-skiing, wind surfing, kayaking,
sailing, and triathlons.
(Am. Ord. 1430, passed 10-24-02; Am. Ord. 1454, passed 1-8-04; Am. Ord. 1465,
passed 8-12-04; Am. Ord. 1547, passed 8-23-07; Am. Ord. 1616, passed 1-14-10;
Am. Ord. 1640, passed 8-12-10; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
§ 98.03 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall have, hold, sponsor, or cause to be had, held, or
sponsored any special event of any nature or for any reason without having
first applied to the town and received a permit to hold the event except as
provided in §
98.14.
   (B)   Special event permits shall not be issued for “for-profit” events
except in connection with town sponsored events or the North Carolina Holiday
Flotilla. A non-profit sponsor may include up to five for-profit vendors as
part of a special event provided the vendor’s activities are clearly incidental
and subordinate to the special event being held by the sponsor. The North
Carolina Holiday Flotilla may include more than five for-profit vendors to be
determined at such time as a special event permit is issued.
   (C)   No special event shall be conducted so as to:
      (1)   Substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of pedestrian
or vehicular traffic at or contiguous to its location or route;
      (2)   Constitute a substantial hazard to the public safety or materially
interfere with or endanger the public peace or rights of residents to the quiet
and peaceful enjoyment of their property or otherwise create a nuisance; or
      (3)   Violate the noise ordinance found in
Chapter 97 of this code or the health and sanitation ordinance found in
Chapter 96 of this code.
   (D)   All applications for a special event permit must be made through the
Special Events Coordinator on forms provided by the town. The Special Events
Coordinator may issue or deny permits as required by this chapter when less
than 200 persons shall be in attendance. All other permits required by this
chapter shall be issued or denied by the Board of Aldermen. The required
application must be completed in its entirety and submitted at least 120 days
prior to the event to allow for town staff and Parks and Recreation Advisory
Committee review. The Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee shall review all
special event permit applications requiring Board of Aldermen approval and
shall make a recommendation to the Board of Aldermen regarding approval or
denial of an application. No application shall be considered submitted until
all information required by the application form has been provided. Such
application forms shall include at a minimum the following information:
      (1)   The name, address, and telephone number of the sponsor for the
event. If the sponsor is not an individual, the applicant shall provide the
name and address of the individual within the sponsoring organization or
corporation who will be responsible for the special event. For special events
governed by §
98.05, only the information required by §
98.05 is required.
      (2)   A narrative describing the special event in detail;
      (3)   The date, hours, and location requested. Special events occurring
on multiple successive days shall require a separate and complete application
for each day of the event;
      (4)   The number of persons estimated to be in attendance at the special
event including organizers, participants, and spectators;
      (5)   Information on requested street closings;
      (6)   Information on availability of parking to accommodate the estimated
number of participants at the proposed location: no vehicles including
transportation services may block any public streets or highways; and, no buses
may be used to transport participants on any of the following streets:
Arrindale, Chadbourn, Oceanic, Birmingham, East and West Columbia, East and
West Atlanta, Charlotte, Raleigh, Augusta, East and West Asheville, East and
West Fayetteville, East and West Oxford, East and West Henderson, East and West
Greensboro, Seagull, Shearwater, Heron, Sandpiper, Crane, Mallard, South Ridge,
and North Ridge;
      (7)   Information on proposed temporary signs and banners, provided such
signs and banners comply with
Ch. 155. The content of signs and banners for expressive activities shall not
be required;
      (8)   Information on utility services including electrical power, water,
restroom facilities, and garbage collection and disposal;
      (9)   An agreement to save and keep the town free and harmless from any
and all loss or damages or claims for damages, including attorney's fees and
litigation costs, arising from or out of the special event;
      (10)   A sketch plan detailing the location of any temporary structures
and the location of the proposed activity. Such plan must identify existing
structures on the property;
      (11)   Information on the location and direction of noise emanating
devices along with proposed level, frequency, and duration;
      (12)   An agreement to comply with all municipal ordinances, rules,
regulations, and other applicable laws; and
      (13)   Information concerning donation solicitations or the sales of any
types of souvenirs, t-shirts, food, drinks or other products on public
property.
   (E)   The application for a special event permit shall include the
applicable permit fee as prescribed in the schedule of fees.
   (F)   (1)   Applications for special event permits requiring approval by the
Special Events Coordinator shall be submitted at least five business days prior
to the date of the planned event. The Town Manager shall have the authority to
reduce the five business day approval period provided good cause is shown.
Applications for special event permits requiring approval by the Board of
Aldermen shall be submitted at least 120 days in advance of the scheduled event
and shall be reviewed by town staff and the Parks and Recreation Advisory
Committee. The application may be placed on the next Board of Aldermen meeting
agenda.
      (2)   For application deadlines applicable to special events conducted
solely for the purpose of engaging in expressive activities, see §
98.05.
   (G)   For those applications requiring approval by the Board of Aldermen,
the Board of Aldermen shall approve, approve with modifications or conditions,
or deny such application in accordance with the applicable standards set forth
in this chapter.
   (H)   For those applications requiring approval by the Special Events
Coordinator, the Coordinator shall approve, approve with modifications or
conditions, or deny such application in accordance with the applicable
standards set forth in this chapter.
   (I)   Multiple events. Application can be made for repeated, multiple or
periodic special events not held on successive days under the following
procedure:
      (1)   Each day an event occurs shall be considered a separate event.
      (2)   A special event permit can cover up to four substantially identical
special events held on different non-successive days by the same permittee.
      (3)   A person holding a permit for a repeated, multiple or periodic
event or any person affiliated with such person may not apply for a new permit
for the same or similar special event more than 30 days prior to the last day
for which that permit has been issued; and
      (4)   The schedule of fees may establish a fee for multiple events that
is other than a separate fee for each event. In the absence of a specific fee
schedule for multiple events, the applicable fee shall be charged for each
event.
('72 Code, § l4-6) (Am. Ord. 1430, passed 10-24-02; Am. Ord. 1465, passed 8-12-
04; Am. Ord. 1524, passed 10-12-06; Am. Ord. 1547, passed 8-23-07; Am. Ord.
1583, passed 8-28-08; Am. Ord. 1616, passed 1-14-10; Am. Ord. 1682, passed 6-
14-12; Am. Ord. 1744, passed 5-7-15; Am. Ord. 1830, passed 7-8-21; Am. Ord.
1838, passed 3-10-22; Am. Ord. 1856, passed 1-11-24) Penalty, see §
98.99
§ 98.04 STANDARDS FOR ALL SPECIAL EVENTS.
   These standards apply to all special events requiring a permit, unless
expressly provided otherwise. The Special Events Coordinator or Board of
Aldermen shall issue a permit if it finds that:
   (A)   The special event occurs between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
except Easter sunrise services which shall be permitted before 8:00 a.m. If the
Special Events Coordinator or Board of Aldermen finds that the proposed event
has the potential to create a situation that a reasonably prudent person would
recognize as likely to unreasonably disturb persons in the vicinity, then the
Board of Aldermen or Special Events Coordinator may modify the permitted hours
of operation for such special event. A decision of the Board of Aldermen in
such matter is final. A decision of the Special Events Coordinator in such
matter may be appealed in writing to the Board of Aldermen in accordance with §
98.15.
   (B)   The special event will not be held at the same time and place as
another event for which a special event permit has previously been issued;
   (C)   The conduct of the special event will not substantially interrupt the
safe and orderly movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic at or contiguous
to its location;
   (D)   The conduct of the special event will not require the diversion of so
great a number of police officers of the town that adequate police protection
cannot be provided to the remainder of the town;
   (E)   The concentration of persons, animals, and vehicles at assembly points
for or at the location of the special event will not substantially interfere
with the town's ability to provide adequate fire, police and emergency
services;
   (F)   Special event permits shall not be issued for “for-profit” events
except in connection with town sponsored events or activities associated with
the North Carolina Holiday Flotilla;
   (G)   Merchandise sales or donation solicitations by a person or group for
the purpose of raising money for a charity or non-profit group may only be
conducted on public property with an approved special event permit. Information
concerning non-profit vending activities must be included in the special event
permit application;
   (H)   The special event will comply with the noise ordinance found in
Chapter 97 of this code;
   (I)   Adequate sanitation and other required health facilities are or will
be made available in or adjacent to any public assembly areas;
   (J)   There are sufficient parking places to accommodate the number of
vehicles reasonably expected; no vehicles including transportation services may
block any public streets or highways; and no buses may be used to transport
participants on any of the following streets: Arrindale, Chadbourn, Oceanic,
Birmingham, East and West Columbia, East and West Atlanta, Charlotte, Raleigh,
Augusta, East and West Asheville, East and West Fayetteville, East and West
Oxford, East and West Henderson, East and West Greensboro, Seagull, Shearwater,
Heron, Sandpiper, Crane, Mallard, South Ridge, and North Ridge; and
   (K)   The location and duration of the display of signs may be limited by
permit condition to avoid sign congestion.
(Am. Ord. 1430, passed 10-24-02; Am. Ord. 1465, passed 8-12-04; Am. Ord. 1547,
passed 8-23-07; Am. Ord. 1583, passed 8-28-08; Am. Ord. 1600, passed 5-28-09;
Am. Ord. 1616, passed 1-14-10; Am. Ord. 1830, passed 7-8-21) Penalty, see §
98.99
§ 98.05 ALTERNATE STANDARDS FOR EXPRESSIVE ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   Expressive activities for groups larger than 15 persons. For all
special events conducted for the sole purpose of engaging in expressive
activities by groups larger than 15 persons, to include church services, the
person in charge of the activity must apply for and receive a special events
permit unless expressly exempt under §
98.09. The following alternate requirements and standards are applicable to the
permit application:
      (1)   A written application for a permit shall be filed not less than 24
hours and not greater than 21 days in advance of the parade, picket line, group
demonstration, or other expressive activity;
      (2)   The application shall specify the time and place for the
commencement of any picket line and the time, place, route, and duration of any
parade, group demonstration, or other expressive activity;
      (3)   The application shall specify whether or not minors below the age
of 18 years will be permitted to participate;
      (4)   The application shall specify the number of persons estimated to be
in attendance including organizers, participants and spectators;
      (5)   The application shall specify a person or persons (not to exceed
three) in charge of the activity. At least one of those persons identified
shall be required to accompany the parade, picket line, group demonstration or
other expressive activity at all times and shall carry the permit with him or
her at that time. The permit shall not be valid in the possession of any other
person. No other identifications are required; and
      (6)   No application or fee or permit fee shall be charged for special
events covered by this section.
   (B)   Special events covered by this division(A) shall comply with the
standards and regulations set forth in §§
98.04 (A), (B), (C), (D), (E), (H), (I), (J), and (K),
98.07,
98.08 and
98.09, and such standards and regulations shall be specified on the permit or
otherwise provided to the person to whom the permit is issued. The Special
Events Coordinator shall issue a special events permit under this division (A)
upon receipt of a complete application and upon finding that the proposed
special event meets all applicable standards.
   (C)   Expressive activities for groups larger than three, but fewer than 16,
wishing to engage in a special event consisting of expressive activities shall
notify the Special Events Coordinator prior to engaging in such activity. The
person providing the notice shall designate the area and time frame for
engaging in a special event consisting of expressive activities and the number
of persons expected to engage in the activity. If the Special Events
Coordinator is not available, such individual or small group shall notify the
fire department. Any expressive activity on the public beach shall be limited
to an area meeting the requirements of §
98.09(B). A group larger than three, but fewer than 16, shall not engage in any
special event in an area and at any time already authorized for another special
event. The person giving notice shall be issued a receipt indicating the date,
time, area and number of participants.
(Am. Ord. 1430, passed 10-24-02; Am. Ord. 1547, passed 8-23-07; Am. Ord. 1616,
passed 1-14-10; Am. Ord. 1640, passed 8-12-10) Penalty, see §
98.99
§ 98.06 NOTICE TO OTHER OFFICIALS.
   Immediately upon the issuance of a parade, picket line or group
demonstration permit, the Special Events Coordinator shall send a copy thereof
to the following:
   (A)   The Town Manager;
   (B)   The Town Attorney;
   (C)   The Police Chief;
   (D)   The Fire Chief;
   (E)   The Director of the Department of Public Works; and
   (F)   The manager or responsible head of each public transportation utility,
the regular routes of whose vehicles will be affected by the route of the
proposed parade or public assembly.
(Ord. 1616, passed 1-14-10)
§ 98.07 PICKETING REGULATIONS.
   To the extent not inconsistent with the provisions of this section, the
requirements and standards set forth elsewhere in this chapter also apply and
must be satisfied prior to the issuance of a special events permit for
picketing. Where the provisions of this section conflict with other provisions
in this chapter, the provisions of this section shall govern. Picket lines and
picketing shall be subject to the following additional regulations:
   (A)   Picketing may be conducted only on the sidewalks or other areas
reserved for pedestrian movement, and may not be conducted on the portion of a
street used primarily for vehicular traffic;
   (B)   Not more than three pickets promoting the same objective shall be
permitted to use either of the two sidewalks within a single block at any time.
However, if pickets promoting different objectives desire to use sidewalks in
the same block for picketing and the use would result in the presence of more
than three pickets thereon, the Special Events Coordinator shall allot time to
each group of pickets for the use of the sidewalks on an equitable basis, but
each group shall be permitted to picket subject to the provisions of this
section at least one hour of every two hour period;
   (C)   Pickets may carry written or printed placards or signs not exceeding
two feet in width and two feet in length promoting the objective for which the
picketing is done; provided, the words used are not profane or vulgar in
nature, or would not tend to produce violence;
   (D)   Pickets must march in single file and not abreast and must not march
closer together than 15 feet, except in passing one another.
(Am. Ord. 1430, passed 10-24-02; Am. Ord. 1616, passed 1-14-10) Penalty, see §
98.99
§ 98.08 PARADE REGULATIONS.
   To the extent not inconsistent with the provisions of this section, the
requirements and standards set forth elsewhere in this chapter also apply and
must be satisfied prior to the issuance of the requested permit. Where the
provisions of this section conflict with other provisions in this chapter, the
provisions of this section shall govern. Parades shall be subject to the
following additional regulations:
   (A)   No parade or part thereof may be conducted on the streets of the town
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday;
   (B)   No more than one parade may be conducted within the town at any one
time;
   (C)   Every parade shall follow a route approved by the Town Manager. The
Town Manager shall approve no route which is incompatible with the standards in
§
98.04. The Town Manager’s disapproval of a proposed route may be appealed to
the Board of Aldermen; and
   (D)   No one participating in a parade or proceeding along the route of a
parade shall distribute therefrom any candy, cigarettes, prizes or favors of
any kind.
(Ord. 1616, passed 1-14-10) Penalty, see §
98.99
§ 98.09 PUBLIC BEACH REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The Board of Aldermen has made the following findings:
      (1)   That the public beach is a public area which is open and accessible
to all persons;
      (2)   That the public beach is maintained and subjected to reasonable
regulation by the town in order to promote the health, safety, welfare and
morals of all persons using the beach;
      (3)   That the public beach provides a unique area for all persons to
pursue peaceful relaxation and quiet enjoyment in a reasonable manner;
      (4)   That the public beach has been and continues to be a unique public
recreation area, different in respect to all other public areas within the
municipality;
      (5)   That it is desirable and necessary to preserve the unique nature of
the public beaches and to protect all persons who utilize the beaches from
undue annoyance, disturbance and inconvenience.
   (B)   Special events regulated by this chapter and taking place in areas
defined as “public beaches” are limited to an area designated on the permit no
greater than 100 feet in width measured parallel to the shoreline. The area is
further limited to the unvegetated dry sand beach except for water-based
activities which may include the wet sand beach and ocean waters. If the
special event meeting the standards for permit issuance is too large to be
contained in a designated area, but is otherwise in accord with the standards
set forth in this chapter, the Board of Aldermen may enlarge a designated area
to accommodate the event.
   (C)   (Reserved).
   (D)   Certain activities on beaches are prohibited. It shall be unlawful for
any person, organization, society, association or corporation, or any agent,
member or representative thereof, directly or indirectly, (i) to solicit
property, business or financial assistance of any kind, (ii) to distribute free
product samples, admission passes, or entry tickets, (iii) to conduct any sales
or rental business, (iv) to sell or offer to sell any service, article, good,
publication, subscription or other thing of value in the area previously
defined in this chapter as the public beach, unless specifically authorized in
a special event permit issued by the Board of Aldermen.
   (E)   Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, certain activities
subject to division (D) are allowed in accordance with §
92.28.
(Ord. 1616, passed 1-14-10; Am. Ord. 1640, passed 8-12-10) Penalty, see §
98.99
§ 98.10 INTERFERENCE WITH DEMONSTRATIONS AND THE LIKE PROHIBITED.
   No person shall hamper, obstruct, impede, or interfere with any special
event, parade, picket line, or group demonstration being conducted under
authority of a permit duly issued by the Board of Aldermen or Special Events
Coordinator.
(Am. Ord. 1616, passed 1-14-10) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 98.11 POLICE PROTECTION.
   (A)   The Chief of Police shall determine whether and to what extent
additional police protection is reasonably necessary for the special event for
traffic control and public safety. The Chief of Police shall base this decision
on the size, location, duration, time and date of the event, the expected sale
or service of alcoholic beverages, the number of streets and intersections
blocked, and the need to detour or preempt citizen travel and use of the
streets and sidewalks. The speech content of the event shall not be a factor in
determining the amount of police protection necessary. If possible, without
disruption of ordinary police services or compromise of public safety,
regularly scheduled on-duty personnel will police the event. If additional
police protection for the special event is deemed necessary by the Chief of
Police, he or she shall so inform the applicant for the permit. The applicant
then shall have the duty to secure the police protection deemed necessary by
the Chief of Police at the sole expense of the applicant.
   (B)   Persons engaging in special events conducted for the sole purpose of
engaging in expressive activities are not required to pay for any police
protection provided by the town.
(Ord. 1616, passed 1-14-10)
§ 98.12 WEAPONS.
   (A)   No firearms or dangerous weapons of any kind, as defined by state law,
may be possessed contrary to G.S. § 14-277.2.
   (B)   Division (A) does not apply to the following persons while acting
lawfully and within the scope of their duties and authority:
      (1)   Law enforcement officers;
      (2)   Officers and soldiers of the armed forces, and National Guard while
acting lawfully and within the scope of their duties and authority;
      (3)   Students of military science in an accredited program acting in a
ceremonial capacity in connection with the accredited program; and
      (4)   Park rangers, animal control officers.
(Ord. 1616, passed 1-14-10) Penalty, see §
98.99
§ 98.13 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   The Special Events Coordinator, Town Manager, or Board of Aldermen
have the authority to revoke a special event permit if the holder of such
permit fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any terms and
conditions of such permit.
   (B)   A permit revocation may be appealed to the Town Manager by giving
written notice of such appeal within ten days of the date such revocation is
effective. Any appeal shall be heard by the Town Manager within five working
days of the receipt of such written appeal.
(Am. Ord. 1430, passed 10-24-02; Am. Ord. 1547, passed 8-23-07; Am. Ord. 1616,
passed 1-14-10)
§ 98.14 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   This chapter shall not apply to:
      (1)   Funeral processions;
      (2)   The Town of Wrightsville Beach;
      (3)   Any governmental agency acting within the scope of its governmental
functions;
      (4)   Students going to and from school classes or participating in
academic educational activities or classroom based field trips, provided such
special events activity is authorized by appropriate school authorities and is
under the immediate direction and supervision of school authorities authorized
to approve and supervise such special events activity; or
      (5)   Activities involving less than 200 persons which are subject to the
reservation and use system administered by the town for use of the facilities
in the Municipal Complex.
   (B)   The requirement to apply for and obtain a permit under §§
98.03 or
98.05 of this chapter shall not apply to individuals or small groups but
individuals and small groups are subject to the standards or prohibitions in §§
98.07,
98.08,
98.09 and
98.12.
   (C)   Individuals and small groups wishing to engage in a special event
consisting of expressive activities on the public beach shall register with the
Special Events Coordinator prior to engaging in such activity. The registrant
must identify the location and time frame for engaging in a special event
consisting of expressive activity on the public beach and the number of persons
in the small group. The expressive activity shall be limited to an area meeting
the requirements of §
98.09(B). Registration shall be limited to no more than five total participants
per area. If the Special Events Coordinator is not available, such individual
or small group shall register with the Fire Department. A person registering
shall be issued a registration receipt indicating the date, time, area and
number of participants and must carry that receipt on their person at all times
during the special event.
(Am. Ord. 1430, passed 10-24-02; Am. Ord. 1547, passed 8-23-07; Am. Ord. 1616,
passed 1-14-10)
§ 98.15 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any applicant shall have the right to appeal the denial of a special
event permit, the conditions of a special event permit, or the revocation of a
special event permit to the Board of Aldermen. The appealing party shall make
the appeal within five business days after receipt of the decision by filing a
written notice with the Special Events Coordinator and a copy of the notice
with the Town Clerk. The Board of Aldermen shall act upon the appeal at the
next scheduled meeting occurring four or more business days following receipt
of the notice of the appeal.
   (B)   The appeal shall be a quasi-judicial proceeding.
   (C)   In the event that the Board of Aldermen rejects an applicant’s appeal,
the applicant may file an immediate request for review with a court of
competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 1616, passed 1-14-10)
§ 98.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Carry on a special event without a required permit or registration
receipt.
      (2)   Fail to terminate a special event upon revocation of a permit;
      (3)   Conduct a special event in violation of the terms and conditions of
a permit issued for such event; or
      (4)   Undertake or engage in activity prohibited by this chapter.
   (B)   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall subject the
offender to a civil penalty of $500 for the first offense and $1,000 for a
second and subsequent offenses. If a person fails to pay the civil penalties
set forth herein within 20 days after being cited for a violation, the town may
seek to recover the penalty by filing a civil action in the nature of debt.
   (C)   Each day’s continuing violation shall be a separate and distinct
offense.
   (D)   The town may seek to enforce the provisions of this chapter through
any appropriate equitable remedy issued from a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (E)   The town may seek to enforce this chapter by using any one or more
combinations of the foregoing remedies.
   (F)   Any person who is found in violation of this chapter shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor as provided in G.S. § 14-4 and shall be fined not more than
$500.
(Ord. 1430, passed 10-24-02; Am. Ord. 1547, passed 8-23-07; Am. Ord. 1616,
passed 1-14-10)
CHAPTER 99: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
   
99.01   Assembling on sidewalks
   
99.02   Display of goods
   
99.03   Obstructing streets and sidewalks
   
99.04   Construction near sidewalk
   
99.05   Awnings, sheds, and posts
   
99.06   Throwing or burning trash prohibited
   
99.07   Depositing sand, tree trimmings on streets prohibited
   
99.08   Snow and ice removal
   
99.09   Playing ball on sidewalk; prohibited
   
99.10   Excavation on streets; permit required
   
99.11   Safety precautions
   
99.12   Sidewalk construction; permit required
   
99.13   Repair after excavation
   
99.14   Injuring street with machines or tools; prohibited
   
99.15   Injuring and obstructing bridges, culverts, and the like
   
99.16   Injuring lights, signs, and the like
   
99.17   General conditions for use of right-of-way
   
99.18   Permit required
   
99.19   Application requirements
   
99.20   Additional requirements for wireless support structures, wireless
communications facilities, and any other wireless communication facility, small
wireless facility or micro wireless facilities
   
99.21   Enforcement provisions
   
99.22   Definitions
Statutory reference:
   Control over municipal streets, see G.S. § 160A-296
§ 99.01 ASSEMBLING ON SIDEWALKS.
   (A) No person or group of persons shall assemble, gather, stand, or cause,
direct, invite, or in any way induce any person or group of persons to
assemble, gather, or stand so as to obstruct any public sidewalk to pedestrian
traffic or any public street or alley to vehicular traffic, or pedestrian
traffic at designated crosswalks.
   (B) At any place of business where it is necessary for patrons awaiting
entry or service to wait on the sidewalks at the place of business or for entry
to service, it shall be the responsibility of the owner or proprietor, or his
agents or employees, to see that the patrons are lined in a way that pedestrian
traffic is not blocked because of the line of patrons. In no event may any
patrons awaiting service line up, gather, assemble, stand, or wait in the
public streets or alleys of the town.
   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to events sponsored by
the town.
('72 Code, § 17-1) (Am. Ord. 1601, passed 6-11-09)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 99.02 DISPLAY OF GOODS.
   No person shall place for display or sell any goods, wares, or merchandise
of any kind upon any sidewalks. The provisions of this section shall not apply
to events sponsored by the town.
('72 Code, § 17-2) (Am. Ord. 1601, passed 6-11-09)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 99.03 OBSTRUCTING STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.
   No brick, stone, wood, or other substance obstructing the free passage of
persons and vehicles shall be placed or permitted to lie in any street of the
town; nor shall any person place on or in any street or sidewalk any boxes,
crates, casks, barrels, or other obstruction of any kind. However, any person
erecting a building, may with permission, place building material for immediate
use on the streets in a way as not to interfere with the usual traffic. The
provisions of this section shall not apply to events sponsored by the town.
('72 Code, § 17-3) (Am. Ord. 1601, passed 6-11-09)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 99.04 CONSTRUCTION NEAR SIDEWALK.
   Before building or remodeling any place that is in close proximity to a
sidewalk, an overhead covered passageway shall be constructed so as to leave
the sidewalk unobstructed and to provide safe and easy passage.
('72 Code, § 17-4)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 99.05 AWNINGS, SHEDS, AND POSTS.
   No person shall erect or repair over any sidewalk or street any wooden shed
for the support of an awning or erect upon any street or sidewalk a post for
the support of an awning. However, this shall not be construed to prevent the
erection over the sidewalk of cloth awnings supported by metallic frames firmly
suspended from the building and at least seven feet above the level of the
sidewalk.
('72 Code, § 17-5)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 99.06 THROWING OR BURNING TRASH PROHIBITED.
   No paper, straw, lemon peel, banana peel, watermelon rind, or trash of any
kind shall be thrown or swept upon any sidewalk or street, nor shall any trash,
refuse, or rubbish be burned thereon.
('72 Code, § 17-6)
Penalty, see § 10.99
Cross-reference:
   Trash regulations, see
Ch. 95
§ 99.07 DEPOSITING SAND, TREE TRIMMINGS ON STREET PROHIBITED.
   No person shall place or allow to be placed any sand, tree trimmings, or
shrubbery trimmings on any street or sidewalk.
('72 Code, § 17-7)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 99.08 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL.
   Every occupant of a store building, in front of which the sidewalk is paved
with stone, brick, asphalt, or cement, shall remove snow, ice, or other
obstruction from the sidewalk at the earliest possible time and as soon as the
weather permits.
('72 Code, § 17-8)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 99.09 PLAYING BALL ON SIDEWALK; PROHIBITED.
   No person shall play ball or bat or catch ball on any sidewalk or street.
('72 Code, § 17-9)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 99.10 EXCAVATION ON STREETS; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall dig any hole, ditch, or excavation of any kind on any street
in the town without first having secured an encroachment permit therefor in
writing from the Town Manager or designee.
('72 Code, § 17-13) (Am. Ord. 1816, passed 8-13-20)
Penalty, see § 10.99
Cross-reference:
   Required safety precautions, see §
99.11
   Repair after excavation, see §
99.13
§ 99.11 SAFETY PRECAUTIONS.
   Every person making an excavation for any purpose in any street or sidewalk
shall securely cover the excavation with planks or place ropes around the same
three feet from the ground, and shall place a sufficient number of red lights
around the excavation before dark and keep them burning during each night the
excavation is open.
('72 Code, § 17-14)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 99.12 SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall build any sidewalk of any description from brick, wood, or
other material without first securing an encroachment permit from the Town
Manager or designee.
('72 Code, § 17-15) (Am. Ord. 1816, passed 8-13-20)
Penalty, see § 10.99
Cross-reference:
   Required safety precautions, see §
99.11
   Repair after excavation, see §
99.13
§ 99.13 REPAIR AFTER EXCAVATION.
   Every person who opens or digs a ditch, trench, or hole in any street or
sidewalk of the town shall put the street or sidewalk in as good condition in
all respects as it was before.
('72 Code, § 17-16)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 99.14 INJURING STREET WITH MACHINES OR TOOLS; PROHIBITED.
   No person shall drag, run, or cause to be dragged or run any harrow or other
implement, engine, machine, or tool likely to injure the surface upon any dirt
street or permanently paved street of the town.
('72 Code, § 17-10)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 99.15 INJURING AND OBSTRUCTING BRIDGES, CULVERTS, AND THE LIKE.
   No person shall injure or misplace any part of any bridge, culvert, ditch,
drain, or other property belonging to or used by the town or shall place any
obstruction in any culvert, ditch, or drain.
('72 Code, § 17-11)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 99.16 INJURING LIGHTS, SIGNS, AND THE LIKE.
   No person shall injure, tamper with, remove, paint upon, or deface any sign,
sign post, street light, traffic signal, bulletin board, or other municipal
property upon the streets and sidewalks, except employees of the town in
performance of their duties.
('72 Code, § 17-12)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 99.17 GENERAL CONDITIONS FOR USE OF RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   (A)   Rights-of-way in the town may be controlled by N.C. Department of
Transportation (DOT), private parties, and/or the town. The town issues and/or
monitors work and/or encroachments in the town's public right-of-way (the
"PROW"). The town may also issue permits for work on town property in DOT's
rights-of-way. Encroachment permits, or agreements are required to attach or
use any town property. Wireless telecommunication facility encroachments in the
PROW require review by the Planning Department (see UDO §
155.7.18). All PROW encroachments must be reviewed by the Public Works
Department, including attachments to town utility poles, replacement of town
utility poles, and "make ready" requests.
   (B)   The right to perform work in the PROW and the ability to maintain
facilities in the PROW are allowed subject to the conditions below, as
supplemented by those set forth in other sections of this chapter, standards
adopted by the town and requirements contained in permits and/or other
authorizations.
      (1)   An encroachment permit does not convey any legal right, title, or
interest in the PROW. Persons doing work in the PROW and users may need to
obtain approvals from persons with property interests in the property.
      (2)   A permit or authorization does not limit the town's exercise of its
regulatory, police, government, legislative, or contracting authority. The town
retains all rights to use all portions of public rights-of-way for its purposes
not prohibited by law. If a permit or authorization conflicts with the terms of
another permit or authorization, or with the town code, the stricter of the
applicable provisions shall control. The stricter provision shall not control,
however, if a later-issued permit, authorization, or ordinance explicitly and
specifically states that particular terms are to override prior, less strict
terms in an authorization.
      (3)   The town and its officials, officers, and employees are not liable
for any direct, indirect, or consequential damages that result when facilities
in the PROW are damaged during the construction, installation, inspection,
maintenance, use, or repair of public improvements that have received town
funding or that are installed pursuant to a contract with the town.
      (4)   Users and persons who cause work to be done in the PROW shall pay
for all damage that results, directly or indirectly, from work performed for
their benefit in the PROW, and for the installation, repair, maintenance, and
operation of their facilities in the PROW.
      (5)   An encroachment permit creates no third-party rights against the
town and is intended only for the benefit of the person receiving the permit or
authorization.
      (6)   Persons doing work in the PROW shall not interfere with existing
town utilities, such as infrastructure for electricity, water and sewer, the
natural and constructed storm water system, and traffic signals and associated
lines, or the repair or replacement of such systems. Persons doing work in the
PROW shall apply for an encroachment permit at least ten working days prior to
initiating work, to allow time to locate and mark any existing town utility
lines. Persons building structures, including utility poles and/or wireless
facilities shall apply for an encroachment permit at least 30 calendar days
prior to beginning work (see §
99.18 below). The application shall accurately describe the portion of the
street to be affected. Damage to town utilities or other infrastructure shall
be paid for by the person or user contracting for the work that resulted in
such damage. If an encroachment permit is not required, persons doing work in
the PROW shall also give the Town Public Works Department ten working days'
notice to locate and mark any existing town utility lines prior to initiating
work. In addition, persons will give the department a second notice 24-hours
before beginning any work in the PROW as required by §
99.17(B)(15), below.
      (7)   Persons and users performing work in the PROW shall ensure worker,
traffic, and pedestrian safety and shall ensure that all work is performed in
accordance with industry standards. Compliance with all federal, state, and
local regulations, and all federal, state, local, and industry codes and
standards is required. These include, but are not limited to, compliance with
the Occupation Safety and Health Act; compliance with the Manual of Uniform
Traffic Control Devices, National Electrical Code, and National Electrical
Safety Code; compliance with fiber optic installation standards and
telecommunication industry standards; compliance with plumbing and pipe
installation codes and standards; and compliance with standards and codes for
traffic safety and lane closures. Persons and users shall provide all equipment
and personnel necessary to meet applicable regulations, codes, and standards,
and shall furnish additional equipment or personnel if requested by the town.
      (8)   The Public Works Department shall have the discretion to approve,
deny, alter, and condition all proposed locations of facilities in the public
way, and to determine whether placement, if allowed, shall be above ground or
below ground.
      (9)   Wires, fiber, and other similar conduit shall generally be located
underground. A user that wishes to place such facilities above ground shall
demonstrate to the town's satisfaction why above-ground placement is necessary.
      (10)   The town recommends that facilities shall be located in existing
ducts if such ducts are available and practicable to use.
      (11)    A user shall demonstrate to the Public Works Department's
satisfaction that sufficient space exists in the public way for its proposed
facilities without interfering with existing or planned public projects, and
that placement of the facilities will not unduly disrupt use of the public way
or negatively impact the condition of the public way.
      (12)   The town may require a user to post written notice of proposed
work or activities along the public way impacted and/or distribute notices to
individual properties located along the impacted public way.
      (13)   Users shall give the Public Works Department all information it
requests regarding the installation of facilities upon completion. Such
information may include, but is not limited to, as-built or other maps, which
shall be furnished in the form required by the Public Works Department, and
changes to planned locations that were necessary to avoid pre-existing
infrastructure.
      (14)   A person or user that conducts excavation or other activities that
disturb the public rights-of-way or plantings within the public rights-of-way
or facilities within the public way shall restore the area to a functional
condition equivalent to that it was in prior to the disturbance. The
restoration shall include, but is not limited to, installation of pavement,
resurfacing nearby areas, grading other surface areas, restoring below-ground
areas, planting and landscaping, replacing curb ramps to current standards, and
repairing improvements and facilities.
      (15)   Users shall contact the Public Works Department at least 24 hours
prior to actual work performed in the right-of-way, except in the case of an
emergency.
      (16)   To the extent permitted by North Carolina law, the town may
require a performance bond for work to be done in the PROW.
      (17)   A user shall, at its own cost, relocate its facilities within a
time determined at the discretion of the town if the town determines in its
discretion that the facilities:
         (a)   Interfere with the use of the public way, or the provision of
services to town residents;
         (b)   Interfere with the repair or maintenance of any town-maintained
utility; or
         (c)   Will impede the construction of a project funded in part with
public funds, or a project to be dedicated to the public upon completion.
(Ord. 1816, passed 8-13-20)
§ 99.18 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Prior to performing work or placing facilities within a public right-of-way
in the town, a user must obtain an encroachment permit (also called "work
permits") issued by the Town Manager or designee. A user shall acquire an
encroachment permit from the Public Works Department for the following
activities:
   (A)   Excavation or restoration within the public way, including but not
limited to construction of new portions of the sidewalk or public way.
   (B)   Cutting, mobbing, or alteration of pavement, paver (for example, brick
or stone), pipe, conduit, pole, meter, fire hydrant, facility, or other
equipment or structure owned by the town, or attachment to such objects.
   (C)   Installation or repair of facilities within the public way, including,
but not limited to, replacing facilities on other facilities already located in
the public way.
   (D)   Construction of private streets (including, but not limited to, paving
and gutters), sidewalks, or alleys.
   (E)   Installation or repair of facilities for the conveyance of water,
sewer, or stormwater.
   (F)   Installation of repair of facilities for electrical, gas, video,
internet, telephone, cable, telecommunications, television, or other
information or data transfer service to customers within the town.
   (G)   Work in the rights-of-way that affects traffic patterns, either
permanently or temporarily.
   (H)   The installation of any permanent structures or property in the PROW,
including utilities.
   (I)   Make-ready work. The town shall provide estimates for any make-ready
work necessary to enable a town utility pole to support the requested
collocation, including pole replacement, if necessary, within 60 days after
receipt of a complete application. Make-ready work, including any pole
replacement, shall be completed within 60 days of written agreement on the cost
of the work.
   (J)   Attachments to or replacements of town utility poles.
   (K)   Attachments to town property (other than town utility poles) in DOT or
other rights-of-way.
   (L)   The Board of Aldermen may approve agreements for the use of town
property that substitute for encroachment or work permits, such as the lease of
space on a water tower.
   (M)   No sidewalk of any description shall be built by any individual, firm,
or corporation without a written permit from the town.
   (N)   No person shall move any house or building upon or across the public
streets or sidewalks without a permit, and without the deposit of a good and
sufficient bond to cover damage done to any street or sidewalk or to any
property of any person.
   (O)   A permit is required before constructing, reconstructing, repairing,
altering, or grading any driveway on the public streets.
(Ord. 1816, passed 8-13-20)
§ 99.19 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   An application must be filed with the Public Works Department before any
work in the PROW or on public property is carried out, including modification,
change, or replacement of equipment that would be different in size, weight, or
appearance than the existing equipment that is not otherwise exempt under this
chapter. The following information shall be submitted in an application for an
encroachment permit:
   (A)   Contact information for the user of the public right-of-way and
contractors performing the work. Include all contractor's/trade's/professional
licenses held and license numbers.
   (B)   Description of the work to be performed, including the specific
location or the requested make-ready work.
   (C)   Construction drawings demonstrating compliance with the town's
engineering specifications and standard details, the NCDOT Subdivision Road
Manual, the latest edition of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices,
and all relevant portions of the Unified Development Ordinance.
   (D)   Description of all existing infrastructure within the proposed work
area and any proposed modification, improvement, or movement of infrastructure.
   (E)   Evidence that the owners of other utilities or encroachers near the
new work have been notified.
   (F)   Proposed work schedule.
   (G)   Insurance. The town may require persons that do work in the PROW and
users to provide insurance by a company authorized to do business in the state,
including, but not limited to: i) workers' compensation coverage for all
employees; ii) employers' liability insurance; iii) commercial general
liability; and iv) business auto policy. The town may require that the town,
its officials, employees, and consultants be named as additional insureds on
such insurance policies. In such cases, the applicant shall provide a
certificate of insurance. If an applicant has previously damaged town property
or has not adequately repaired damaged town property during the past three
years, the amount of insurance shall be as determined by the town, in part
based on the scope of the work and the tenure or term of occupancy.
   (H)   To facilitate the preparation and submittal of an application in
compliance with this chapter, and thereby expedite the review and permitting of
an application, a pre-application meeting may be held.
   (I)   No permitting of unidentified facilities: no permit or authorization
shall be granted for new equipment or facilities that is not expressly and
individually identified at the time of the application, including the specific
location and design characteristics of each facility.
   (J)   Site visit: a site visit of each facility or proposed location of a
new facility may be conducted to determine the physical condition of the
facility or proposed location and to identify any issues of concern, non-
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations, and any safety issues
or concerns.
   (K)   Installations in the PROW shall be located and constructed to create
the least visual impact on the immediate surrounding area and the least
physical intrusion and impact on the limited space in the PROW. Such
facilities/equipment shall not be constructed in a sight triangle or so close
to the curb or edge of pavement that a safety hazard is created (see UDO §
155.2.6 on Sight Triangles).
   (L)   Riser cable: all riser or other vertically run cable of any kind
attached to a pole or other support structure shall be protected with non-
conductive, nondegradable material matching the color of the pole or support
structure as closely as is reasonably possible.
   (M)   New and replacement wireless telecommunications facilities (poles or
support structures that are not substantial modifications or routine
maintenance): an application for a new or replacement pole or support structure
must include detailed design criteria, including material composition,
aesthetic appearance and structural adequacy analysis with calculations which
must be able to be independently verified using the information submitted by
the applicant.
      (1)   New and replacement installations shall be consistent throughout
town limits;
      (2)   When feasible and in lieu of installing new poles, new
installations shall be accomplished by replacing an existing distribution pole,
secondary pole, or streetlight with a new pole that meets the standards set
forth in this section;
      (3)   Installations shall be on non-conductive poles;
      (4)   All wireless facilities and base stations (including radios,
network equipment and batteries) shall be i) enclosed in a pedestal cabinet
near the pole; ii) in a pole-mounted cabinet; or iii) under a pole-mounted
shroud;
      (5)   Equipment installations shall be on poles that meet or exceed
current NESC standards and wind and ice loading requirements of the latest
edition of TIA 222.
      (6)   New utility poles in residential subdivisions shall comply with the
town's decorative pole standards.
(Ord. 1816, passed 8-13-20)
§ 99.20 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR WIRELESS SUPPORT STRICTURES, WIRELESS
COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES, AND ANY OTHER WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY, SMALL
WIRELESS FACILITY OR MICRO WIRELESS FACILITIES.
   An applicant shall demonstrate compliance with §§
99.10 through
99.17 and provide the additional supplemental information specific to wireless
facilities, structures, and ancillary equipment.
   (A)   Persons adding or modifying wireless communications facilities in a
PROW shall apply for an encroachment permit at least 30 days prior to
initiating work.
   (B)   To facilitate the application process and to mitigate application-
related costs for applicants, depending upon the scope of the proposed work and
its impact, both visual and physical as determined by the Public Works
Department, applications for small/micro wireless facilities may be submitted
in groups of up to 25 facilities in a single application.
   (C)   No taxpayer subsidization: taxpayers may not directly or indirectly
subsidize an applicant's costs.
   (D)   Maximum permitted height:(1) on wireless support structures, utility
poles and town utility poles, the maximum permitted height is 50 feet above
ground level; (2) small wireless facilities may extend ten feet above the
height of the utility pole, town utility pole or wireless support facility on
which they are collocated; (3) In the R1 or R2 Residential zoning districts,
and in areas where the existing utilities are installed underground, the
maximum height is 40 feet above ground level; and (4) On blocks where
decorative light or utility poles are installed, collocations may only occur on
decorative poles if feasible. New poles shall be of the same design and
materials as the decorative poles (see §
99.16 for information on encroachment on town utility poles).
   (E)   Absent a showing by clear and convincing evidence of the need for a
greater lateral distance between poles or other support structures in the PROW,
the minimum lateral distance between poles or other support structures as
measured in any direction shall be 100 feet. This minimum lateral distance
shall not be applicable to poles or support structures that support lines or
cables crossing a street.
   (F)   Compliance with NESC and NEC: all electronic attachments to poles or
other structures in the PROW shall always follow the edition of the National
Electrical Safety Code (NESC) and the National Electrical Code (NEC) in effect
at the later of a) the time the facility was constructed; or b) the time of the
last modification of equipment on the pole or other support structure; or c)
the edition in effect at the time of the current application.
   (G)   Service date: applicants shall attest that small wireless facilities
be activated and placed in service no later than one year from the date the
permit is issued.
   (H)   Abandonment.
      (1)   Wireless service providers are required to remove an abandoned
wireless facility with 180 days of abandonment. Should the wireless services
provider fail to timely remove the abandoned facility, the town may cause such
wireless facility to be removed and may recover the actual cost of such
removal, including legal fees, if any, from the wireless service provider. For
purposes of this division, a wireless facility shall be deemed abandoned at the
earlier of the date that the wireless service provider indicates that it is
abandoning such facility or the date that is 180 days after the date that such
wireless facility ceases to transmit a signal, unless the wireless service
provider giver the town reasonable evidence that it is diligently working to
place such wireless facility back service.
      (2)   This section applies to rights-of-way controlled by the N.C. Dept.
of Transportation.
(Ord. 1816, passed 8-13-20)
§ 99.21 ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Failure to acquire a permit or notify the Public Works Department of
work in the right-of-way may result in a stop work order. The stop work order
shall be in writing and state the conditions under which work may be resumed.
   (B)   The violation of a stop work order issued pursuant to this division
shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable under §§
10.98 and
10.99 and may also be subject to a civil penalty in the amount of $100.00 per
day for each day the violation continues. Civil penalties authorized by this
section may be assessed against the user on whose behalf the work is being
performed and against the contractor or subcontractor who is performing such
work.
   (C)   If a user, contractor, or subcontractor has received a stop work order
within the preceding three months, the user is required to post a performance
bond for up to 125% of the estimated cost of the work.
   (D)   All other provisions of
Chapter 10 of the Code of Ordinances apply to violations of this chapter.
(Ord. 1816, passed 8-13-20)
§ 99.22 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words and terms in this chapter shall have the meaning given
below unless the context indicates otherwise. These meanings shall apply
whether a word is capitalized or not or is singular or plural.
   "ANTENNA." Communications equipment that transmits, receives, or transmits
and receives electromagnetic radio signals used in the provision of all types
of wireless communications services.
   "APPLICATION." A request that is submitted by an applicant to the town for a
permit to collocate wireless facilities or to approve the installation,
modification, or replacement of a utility pole, including town utility poles,
or a wireless support structure.
   "AUTHORIZATION." Written permission from the town to do work in the PROW or
to maintain facilities in the PROW and includes, but is not limited to, a
franchise, a license, a permit, a letter, or construction drawing approval.
Multiple authorizations may be required for certain activities.
   "BASE STATION." A station at a specific site authorized to communicate with
mobile stations, generally consisting of radio receivers, antennas, coaxial
cables, power supplies, and other associated electronics.
   "COLLOCATION." The placement, installation, maintenance, modification,
operation, or replacement of wireless facilities on, under, within, or on the
surface of the earth adjacent to existing structures, including utility poles,
town utility poles, water towers, buildings and other structures capable of
structurally supporting the attachment of wireless facilities.
   "DEPARTMENT." The Public Works Department of the Town of Wrightsville Beach.
   "EMERGENCY." A condition that poses a clear and immediate danger to life or
health, or a significant loss of property, or requires immediate repair to
restore service to a group of users of such service.
   "ENCROACHMENT (OR WORK) PERMIT." A written authorization allowing a user or
applicant to work in the town's rights-of-way, including both temporary
encroachments, such as construction, and permanent encroachments, such as the
installation of fixtures.
   "EXCAVATE." Without limitation, any cutting, digging, grading, tunneling,
boring, or other alteration of the surface or subsurface material of earth in
the public way.
   "FACILITIES." Poles, pipes, culverts, conduits, ducts, cables, wires, fiber,
amplifiers, pedestals, antennae, transmission or receiving equipment,
electrical conductors, manholes, appliances, signs, poles, pavement structures,
irrigation systems, landscaping, monument signs, monument mailboxes and any
other similar equipment, for public or private use.
   "MAKE-READY WORK." Any modification or replacement of a town utility pole
necessary for the town utility pole to support a small wireless facility in
compliance with applicable safety requirements, including the NESC that is
performed in preparation for a collocation installation.
   "MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY." A small wireless facility that is no larger in
dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height
and that has an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than 11 inches.
   "PERSON." Any individual, association, firm, partnership, limited liability
company, join venture, corporation, government, utility, or other organized
entity able to contract for the activities described in this chapter, whether
for profit or not for profit. The term does not include the town.
   "PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY (PROW)." The area that is used as, or offered,
dedicated, or reserved for use as a public street, highway, alley, trail,
sidewalk, curb, gutter, bike lane, bridge, roundabout, tunnel, causeway, or
shoulder, that is in the town or in an area proposed for annexation to the
town. The area also includes, without limitation, drainage areas, and areas
where no roads or other improvements have been constructed but which are
dedicated for one or more of the above uses. The public way encompasses the
surface of the ground, and the area above and below the ground. Sometimes
referred to as town right-of-way or public way.
   "ROUTINE MAINTENANCE." Activities associated with regular and general upkeep
of transmission equipment, including the replacement of existing wireless
facilities with wireless facilities of the same size.
   "SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY." A wireless facility that meets both of the
following qualifications: (1) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no
more than six cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has
exposed elements, the antenna and all its exposed elements, if enclosed, could
fit within an enclosure of no more than six cubic feet; and (2) all other
wireless equipment associated with the facility has a cumulative volume of no
more than 28 cubic feet. For purposes of this definition, the following types
of ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of equipment volume:
electric meters, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation boxes,
ground-based enclosures, grounding equipment, power transfer switches, cut-off
switches, vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services,
or other support structures.
   "TOWN UTILITY POLE." A pole owned by the town in the town's right-of-way
that provides lighting, traffic control, or a similar function.
   "USER." A person that proposes to place facilities in the public way, places
such facilities, or owns or maintains such facilities.
   "UTILITY POLE." A structure not owned by the town that is designed for and
used to carry lines, cables, wires, lighting facilities or small wireless
facilities for telephone, cable television, or electricity, or to provide
lighting or wireless services. (Ord. 1816, passed 8-13-20)
CHAPTER 100: ALARM SYSTEMS
Section
   
100.01   Definitions
   
100.02   Alarm companies, requirement for license
   
100.03   Requirement for permit
   
100.04   Alarm system malfunction; corrective action; and notice to owner of
malfunction
   
100.05   Disconnection of alarm system
   
100.06   Appeal
   
100.07   Failure to disconnect or unauthorized reconnection of an alarm system
   
100.08   Reconnection of alarm system
 
   
100.99   Penalties and remedies
§ 100.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   "ALARM COMPANY." Any private individual or business entity that installs,
monitors or services any alarm system within the town.
   "ALARM MALFUNCTION." An alarm activation which results in the response of
the fire department or police department caused by mechanical failure,
malfunction, improper installation, or any other situation where the
enforcement official is unable to determine the apparent cause of the alarm
activation.
   "ALARM SYSTEM." Any electronic or mechanical device transmitting an alarm
signal outside the location intended to alert law enforcement personnel to an
actual or attempted unauthorized entry into a building or to the commission or
attempted commission of a crime, or intended to alert fire or emergency medical
personnel to an actual or suspected fire or medical emergency.
   "ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL." The fire chief or the police chief of the town or
their designated representatives.
   "FALSE ALARM." An alarm activation which results in the response of the fire
department or police department caused accidentally, avoidably, negligently,
intentionally, or because of misuse of the system by the owner, his or her
immediate family, employees, servants, guests or agents. An alarm is not
considered a false alarm if activated due to malicious causes beyond the
control of the owner.
   "OWNER." Any person, corporation, partnership or other entity owning or
leasing an alarm system.
(Ord. 1254, passed 8-17-95)
§ 100.02 ALARM COMPANIES, REQUIREMENT FOR LICENSE.
   Each alarm company shall be licensed under G.S. Chapter 74C.
(Ord. 1254, passed 8-17-95)
Penalty, see § 100.99
§ 100.03 REQUIREMENT FOR PERMIT.
   (A)   No alarm system shall be installed in any structure or location within
the town without the Alarm Company installing such system first acquiring a
permit in accordance with the provisions of this section.
   (B)   Permits shall be issued by the Town Manager or his designee upon
completion of forms providing the information as specified below and payment of
a fee of $25. No fee shall be charged for alarm systems in existence on the
date of adoption of this chapter provided that the owner submits to the town
the following information within 180 days of the date of adoption of this
subchapter:
      (1)   Name and address of owner;
      (2)   Owner's home and business telephone numbers;
      (3)   The name, address and telephone number of at least three persons
that may be contacted and who are available to respond to an alarm activation
at the owner's property within 30 minutes of the alarm activation if the owner
is not available;
      (4)   The name, address and telephone number of any alarm company that is
charged with notifying the proper authorities of the existence of an alarm
activation on the owner's premises; and
      (5)   The date on which the alarm system became or becomes active.
   (C)   The owner shall notify the town of any changes in the information as
specified in the preceding section within 30 days of the date of such change.
   (D)   In the event information provided by the owner in connection with
securing the permit is found to be false, the permit may be revoked in
accordance with the provisions of § 100.06 hereinafter.
   (E) Each alarm system installed within the town from and after the date of
this chapter shall be "UL" approved and the owner shall be required to provide
evidence satisfactory to the town that the system is so approved.
(Ord. 1254, passed 8-17-95; Am. Ord. 1342, passed 7-29-99)
Penalty, see § 100.99
§ 100.04 ALARM SYSTEM MALFUNCTION; CORRECTIVE ACTION; AND NOTICE TO OWNER OF
MALFUNCTION.
   (A)   A response to an alarm activation shall result when any police officer
or member of the fire department shall be dispatched to the premises where the
alarm has been activated or learns of the activation of the alarm system by any
means whatsoever and responds thereto by travelling to the premises. After
responding to an alarm activation, the enforcement official shall notify any
person identified in the permit required pursuant to § 100.03 of the activation
of the alarm system and such person shall thereupon travel to the premises
within 30 minutes of such notification to ascertain the status thereof. Failure
of such person to appear at the premises within 30 minutes after being notified
to do so shall be deemed a false alarm and shall subject the owner to the
penalties set forth hereinafter.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to reactivate an alarm system
without authorization from the enforcement official following an alarm
activation resulting in the dispatch of a police officer or member of the fire
department to the premises where the alarm was activated.
   (C)   If the enforcement official determines that an alarm signal was
transmitted as the result of an alarm malfunction, then such official shall
deliver to the owner an alarm activation report indicating that an alarm
activation has occurred and that it has been determined to have resulted from
an alarm malfunction.
   (D)   The activation of an alarm system due to an alarm malfunction shall be
deemed a false alarm and shall subject the towner to the penalties set forth
hereinafter.
(Ord. 1254, passed 8-17-95; Am. Ord. 1342, passed 7-29-99)
Penalty, see § 100.99
§ 100.05 DISCONNECTION OF ALARM SYSTEM.
   (A)   The enforcement official is authorized to order the disconnecting or
deactivation of any alarm system for which seven false alarms have occurred
within a 12 consecutive month period. Notice of such action shall be in writing
and be mailed to the owner by certified mail, return receipt requested, at the
address shown on the permit application required under § 100.03. The notice
shall specify the date on which the owner shall be required to disconnect or
deactivate the alarm system, which date shall be at least 20 days following the
day of the notice. The owner may appeal the order of the enforcement official
in accordance with § 100.06.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any alarm system
installed or maintained in accordance with the North Carolina State Building
Code.
(Ord. 1254, passed 8-17-95)
Penalty, see § 100.99
§ 100.06 APPEAL.
   An owner to whom a notice to disconnect or deactivate an alarm system is
mailed pursuant to § 100.05 shall be entitled to appeal the order of the
enforcement official to the Town Manager. An appeal must be in writing and must
be delivered to the Town Manager no later than five days prior to the date
disconnection or deactivation is to occur. The appeal must state the reasons
why the order to disconnect or deactivate should be withdrawn. Upon receipt of
an appeal in proper form, the Town Manager may schedule a hearing at which time
the owner and enforcement official shall appear. The Town Manager is authorized
to waive a hearing and to make a decision based on the written appeal from the
owner and information provided by the enforcement official. The Town Manager is
authorized to reverse the decision of the enforcement official if the Manager
determines that the revocation was based on circumstances beyond the control of
the owner, that medical necessity or other reasons justify reinstatement of the
permit or that justice will be best served by reinstatement of the permit. The
decision of the Town Manager in this matter shall be final. The Town Manager
shall notify the owner of his/her decision in writing by mailing a copy of the
decision by first class mail addressed to the owner at the address provided on
the permit application in accordance with § 100.03. If the Manager affirms the
order to disconnect or deactivate an alarm system, the owner shall have 10 days
from the date of the Manager's decision within which to comply with the order.
The appeal of an order to disconnect or deactivate shall suspend the effective
date of the order until the appeal has been acted upon by the Town Manager.
(Ord. 1254, passed 8-17-95)
§ 100.07 FAILURE TO DISCONNECT OR UNAUTHORIZED RECONNECTION OF AN ALARM SYSTEM.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to disconnect or deactivate an
alarm system which has been ordered disconnected or deactivated pursuant to §
100.05, including situations in which the Town Manager affirmed the order to
disconnect or deactivate. It shall be unlawful for any person to reconnect an
alarm system which has been disconnected or deactivated pursuant to the order
of the enforcement official unless reconnection of the alarm system is
authorized pursuant to § 100.08. In addition to the penalties provided in §
100.99, any person violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to
a civil penalty of $200. If a person fails to pay this civil penalty within 10
days after being cited for a violation, the town may seek to recover the
penalty by filing a civil action in the nature of debt.
(Ord. 1254, passed 8-17-95)
Penalty, see § 100.99
§ 100.08 RECONNECTION OF ALARM SYSTEM.
   Any order to disconnect or deactivate an alarm system may be rescinded by
the enforcement official upon a finding by said enforcement official that the
owner has taken corrective action to remedy the cause of the false alarms or
alarm malfunctions at the premises. In making a request for such a rescission,
the owner shall have the burden to show what corrective action has been taken
and that such action is sufficient to support a finding that the cause of the
false alarms or alarm malfunctions has been remedied. The enforcement official
shall have the right to inspect the alarm system and test it prior to
rescinding the order to disconnect or deactivate. Before any reconnection of an
alarm system after the order to disconnect said system, a reconnection fee of
$25 shall be assessed. The enforcement official shall not rescind an order to
disconnect or deactivate if the owner has failed to pay any fee charged the
owner pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 1254, passed 8-17-95)
Penalty, see § 100.99
§ 100.99 PENALTIES AND REMEDIES.
   (A)   A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute
a misdemeanor punishable as provided in G.S. § 14-4.
   (B)   Activation of an alarm system which is determined to be a false alarm
shall subject the owner to the following civil penalties:
      (1)   A first, second or third violation within any 12 consecutive month
period, no civil penalty.
      (2)   For a fourth violation within any 12 consecutive month period, $75.
      (3)   For a fifth violation within any 12 consecutive month period, $150.
      (4)   For a sixth and any subsequent violation within any 12 consecutive
month period, $400;
      (5)   A violation that occurs more than 12 months from the prior and most
recent violation shall be considered a first violation for purposes of this
section.
If a person fails to pay any civil penalty within 15 days after being cited for
a violation, the town may seek to recover the penalty by filing a civil action
in the nature of debt. Further, in the event the civil penalty is not paid
within said 15 day period, the assessed fine shall be increased by 25%.
   (C)   The town may seek to enforce the provisions of this chapter through
any appropriate equitable action.
   (D)   The town may seek to enforce this chapter by using any one or any
combination of the foregoing remedies.
(Ord. 1254, passed 8-17-95; Am. Ord. 1342, passed 7-29-99)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Chapter
   
110.   LICENSES
   
111.   BARS AND TAVERNS
   
112.   [RESERVED]
   
113.   PUBLIC AMUSEMENTS
   
114.   VEHICLES FOR HIRE
   
115.   OTHER BUSINESSES
   
116.   MOVIE INDUSTRY
   
117.   CABLE TELEVISION REGULATIONS
      APPENDIX: CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS
CHAPTER 110: LICENSES
Section
General Provisions
   
110.01   Definitions
   
110.02   Construction
Levy
   
110.10   Levy of tax
   
110.11   Who must pay tax
   
110.12   Period of license; due date
   
110.13   [Repealed.]
   
110.14   Refunds
   
110.15   Separate businesses
   
110.16   Exemptions
Licenses
   
110.25   Application
   
110.26   Reasons for refusal or revocation of a license
   
110.27   Unqualified applicants; right to a conference
   
110.28   Town to issue license; payment of tax a prerequisite
   
110.29   Amount of tax disputed
   
110.30   Revocation
   
110.31   Form and contents of license
   
110.32   Assignments
   
110.33   Changes in the business conducted by licensee during the tax year
   
110.33   Town to furnish duplicates
   
110.35   Record of conferences
   
110.36   Providing notice to an applicant or licensee
Enforcement and Collection
   
110.45   Duty to determine whether tax due
   
110.46   Town to investigate
   
110.47   Duty to keep books
   
110.48   Duty to permit inspection
   
110.49   Duty to post license
   
110.50   Notice of deficiency
   
110.51   Request for a conference
   
110.52   Deficiency to become final
   
110.53   Conference held
   
110.54   Collection of deficiency
   
110.55   Enforcement of chapter
License Tax Schedules
   
110.65   Schedule of license taxes regulated by G.S. Chapter 105, Article 2,
Schedule B
   
110.66   License fees unregulated by by G.S. Chapter 105, Article 2, Schedule B
   
110.67   Alcoholic beverages
   
110.68   Taxicabs
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 110.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   "BUSINESS." Each trade, occupation, profession, business, and franchise
taxed under this chapter. A business is "SEASONAL" in nature when it is
conducted for profit six months out of the year or less.
   "PERSON." Any individual, trustee, executor, other fiduciary, corporation,
unincorporated association, partnership, sole proprietorship, company, firm, or
other legal entity.
('72 Code, § 7-4.1)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)
§ 110.02 CONSTRUCTION.
   This chapter is enacted for revenue purposes only. Therefore, it should be
construed to require payment of the maximum tax permitted under its terms. In
addition, issuance of a license pursuant to this chapter does not excuse a
licensee from compliance with any other applicable ordinance or statute. This
chapter does not prevent the town from imposing license taxes on additional
businesses, from increasing or decreasing the amount of any license tax, or
from regulating any business taxed.
('72 Code, § 7-4.2)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)
LEVY
§ 110.10 LEVY OF TAX.
   An annual privilege license tax is hereby levied on each business conducted
within this town listed in §§ 110.65 through 110.68 in the amounts set forth in
those sections.
('72 Code, § 7-4.3)(Ord. 1090, passed
1-12-89)
§ 110.11 WHO MUST PAY TAX.
   Each person who conducts a business within this town is subject to this
chapter. A person "CONDUCTS BUSINESS" when he engages in one act of business
taxed under this chapter. He conducts the business "WITHIN THE TOWN" if he
maintains a business location within the town; or if, either personally or
through agents, he solicits business within the town limits or picks up or
delivers goods or delivers services within the town limits.
('72 Code, § 7-4.4)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)
§ 110.12 PERIOD OF LICENSE; DUE DATE.
   (A)   Annual license. Unless the section of this chapter levying the
privilege license tax applicable to a particular business provides otherwise, a
license issued pursuant to this chapter is good for the 12-month period
beginning July 1 and ending June 30. The tax is due on July 1 of each year.
However, if a person begins a business after July 1 of a year, the tax for that
year is due before the business is begun.
   (B)   Licenses for periods shorter than one year. If the section of this
chapter levying the privilege license tax applicable to a particular business
so provides, a license may be issued for a period of one day, one week, or some
comparable period of less than a full license year. A person may not commence a
business conducted within the town and taxed under such provision until the
privilege license tax due is paid and may not continue such a business beyond
the period for which the license is issued.
('72 Code, § 7-4.5)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)
110.13 [REPEALED.]
§ 110.14 REFUNDS.
   If for any reason a licensee discontinues his business during the license
year, he is not entitled to a refund.
('72 Code, § 7-4.7)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)
§ 110.15 SEPARATE BUSINESSES.
   A separate license is required and a separate privilege license tax must be
paid for each place of business unless two or more places of business under
common ownership, each conducting a business subject to the same tax under this
chapter, are contiguous to each other, communicate directly with and open into
each other and are operated as a unit. In addition, a separate privilege
license tax must be paid for each business taxable under this chapter conducted
by the taxpayer at any one location; however, the town may issue a single
license for all taxable businesses conducted at one location by a single
taxpayer.
('72 Code, § 7-4.8)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)
§ 110.16 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Generally. Except as otherwise provided in this section or by state
law, no person is exempt from the payment of a privilege license tax levied by
this chapter.
   (B)   Charitable organizations. A person who operates a business for a
religious, educational, civic, patriotic, charitable, or fraternal purpose,
when the entire gross income of the business is used for such a purpose, is
exempt from paying any privilege license tax levied by this chapter.
   (C)   Blind persons and members of the armed forces and merchant marine.
Blind persons and persons who serve in the United States armed forces or the
merchant marine are exempt from paying any privilege license tax levied by this
chapter to the extent provided by G.S. § 105-249 and G.S. § 105-249.1.
   (D)   Must obtain license. A person exempt from paying a privilege license
tax levied by this chapter shall nevertheless obtain a license from the town.
The license shall state that the licensee is exempt from paying the privilege
license tax.
('72 Code, § 7-4.9)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)
LICENSES
§ 110.25 APPLICATION.
   (A)   A person shall apply to the town for each license required by this
chapter no less than 30 days before the date the tax is due.
   (B)   The application, which shall be submitted on forms provided by the
town, shall contain:
      (1)   The name of the applicant and whether he or it is an individual, a
partnership, a corporation, or some other entity.
      (2)   The nature of the business.
      (3)   Where the business is conducted.
      (4)   An address to which may be mailed notices and statements required
by this chapter.
      (5)   Whether the business is one regulated by a state occupational
licensing board subject to G.S. Chapter 93B, and if so, the serial number of
the state license the application currently holds.
      (6)   Any other information the town determines to be necessary to
compute the amount of tax due.
('72 Code, § 7-4.10)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)
§ 110.26 REASONS FOR REFUSAL OR REVOCATION OF A LICENSE.
   The town shall refuse to issue or shall revoke a license for either of the
following reasons:
   (A)   The applicant misrepresents a fact relevant to the amount of tax due
or his qualifications for a license.
   (B)   The applicant refuses to provide information necessary to compute the
amount of tax due.
('72 Code, § 7-4.11)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)
§ 110.27 UNQUALIFIED APPLICANTS; RIGHT TO A CONFERENCE.
   (A)   After receipt of the completed application, if the town believes that
a reason exists for refusing a license under § 110.26, it shall refuse to
accept payment of the tax and shall not issue the license. At the applicant's
request, the town shall, pursuant to § 110.36, give him a written statement of
the reason for refusing the license. The applicant may, within ten days after
the date he receives this statement, request a conference to discuss the
refusal. In his request, he shall specify why his application for a license
should not be refused. The town shall arrange the conference within a
reasonable time.
   (B)   If the town refuses to issue a license, the applicant may reapply for
a license at any time thereafter. If the reason for which the application was
refused no longer exists, and if no other reason exists for refusing to issue a
license, the town shall issue the license pursuant to § 110.28.
('72 Code, § 7-4.12)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)
§ 110.28 TOWN TO ISSUE LICENSE; PAYMENT OF TAX A PREREQUISITE.
   After receipt of the completed application, if the town believes that no
reason exists for refusal of a license under § 110.26, he shall determine the
amount of tax due and notify the applicant of that amount. The town shall not
issue a license until the tax is paid.
('72 Code, § 7-4.13)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)
§ 110.29 AMOUNT OF TAX DISPUTED.
   If the applicant disputes the amount the town determines to be due, he may
either refuse to pay and request a conference to discuss the determination, or
pay the amount and request a conference to discuss his right for a refund. If a
conference is requested, one shall be arranged within a reasonable time.
('72 Code, § 7-4.14)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)
§ 110.30 REVOCATION.
   (A)   The town shall revoke a license if a reason exists to revoke it as set
forth in § 110.26. Before the town may revoke a license, it shall give the
licensee written notice of the grounds for revocation, pursuant to § 110.36.
The licensee may within ten days after the day on which notice is served
request a conference with the town in writing. The request shall specify the
reasons why the license should not be revoked. The town shall arrange the
conference within a reasonable time.
   (B)   If the licensee fails to request a conference within ten days after
the day on which notice is served, the town shall revoke the license. If the
licensee requests a conference, the town may not revoke the license until after
the conference.
   (C)   If the town revokes a license, the former licensee may apply for a new
license at any time thereafter. If the reason for which the license was revoked
no longer exists and if no other reason exists for refusing to issue a license,
the town shall issue the license pursuant to § 110.28.
('72 Code, § 7-4.15)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)
§ 110.31 FORM AND CONTENTS OF LICENSE.
   A license shall show the name of the person licensed, the place where the
business in conducted (if it is to be conducted at one place), the nature of
the business licensed, the period for which the license is issued, and the
amount of tax paid. In addition, if a machine is licensed, the license shall
show the serial number of the machine. The Tax Collector shall keep a copy of
each license issued.
('72 Code, § 7-4.16)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)
§ 110.32 ASSIGNMENTS.
   A license may be assigned if a business licensed under this chapter and
carried on at a fixed place is sold as a unit to any person, and the purchaser
is to carry on the same business at the same place. Such a change shall be
reported to the town pursuant to § 110.33. Otherwise, each license issued under
this chapter is a personal privilege and is not assignable.
('72 Code, § 7-4.17)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)
§ 110.33 CHANGES IN THE BUSINESS CONDUCTED BY LICENSEE DURING THE TAX YEAR.
   A licensee or his assignee shall report a change in the formation contained
in the license application to the town within ten days after the change occurs.
If information shown on the license itself is affected thereby, the licensee or
his assignee shall surrender the license to the town when reporting the change.
   (A)   Changes affecting the amount of tax due. If there are no reasons for
revoking the license under § 110.26 and the change results in the imposition of
a separate or additional tax, the town shall reissue a license reflecting the
change upon payment of the separate or additional tax.
   (B)   Changes not affecting the amount of tax due. If there are no reasons
for revoking the license under § 110.26 and the change does not result in an
imposition of a separate or additional tax, the town shall reissue a license
reflecting the change upon payment of a fee of $7.50.
   (C)   Change requiring refusal of a license. If there is reason for revoking
the license under § 110.26, the town shall refuse to reissue a license and
shall instead begin proceedings to revoke the license pursuant to § 110.30.
('72 Code, § 7-4.18)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)
§ 110.34 TOWN TO FURNISH DUPLICATES.
   Upon satisfactory proof that a license has been lost or destroyed, the town
shall furnish a duplicate for a fee of $7.50.
('72 Code, § 7-4.19)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)
§ 110.35 RECORD OF CONFERENCES.
   The town shall maintain for three years a record of each conference held
pursuant to this subchapter. The record shall contain the applicant's or
licensee's name, the date of the conference, and a brief statement of the
issues discussed and the result reached. After three years, the town shall
dispose of the record pursuant to G.S. § 121-5.
('72 Code, § 7-4.20)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)
§ 110.36 PROVIDING NOTICE TO AN APPLICANT OR LICENSEE.
   Whenever this chapter requires the town to give a written statement or
notice to an applicant or a licensee, it may do so in one of three ways:
   (A)   By personally delivering the statement or notice to the applicant or
licensee.
   (B)   By mailing the statement or notice by registered or certified mail,
return receipt requested, to the address specified for that purpose in the
license application.
   (C)   By causing the statement or notice to be served on the applicant or
licensee in accordance with the procedures of service of process under Rule 4,
North Carolina Rules of Civil Procedure.
('72 Code, § 7-4.21)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)
ENFORCEMENT AND COLLECTION
§ 110.45 DUTY TO DETERMINE WHETHER TAX DUE.
   Each person has the duty to determine whether the business he conducts is
taxed under this chapter and if so, whether that tax has been paid for the
current tax year.
('72 Code, § 7-4.22)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)
§ 110.46 TOWN TO INVESTIGATE.
   If the town has reason to believe that a person is conducting a business in
the town in violation of this chapter, it shall conduct an investigation to
determine the person's tax liability.
('72 Code, § 7-4.23)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)
§ 110.47 DUTY TO KEEP BOOKS.
   Each person who conducts a business taxed under this chapter shall keep all
records and books necessary to compute his tax liability. If a person fails to
keep books and records as required, the town shall make its own determination
of that person's tax liability from the information available to it.
('72 Code, § 7-4.24)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)
§ 110.48 DUTY TO PERMIT INSPECTION.
   Each person who conducts business in the town shall permit a representative
of the town to inspect his business premises during normal business hours to
determine the nature of the business conducted there and to examine his books
and records to determine the nature and amount of business transacted.
('72 Code, § 7-4.25)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)
§ 110.49 DUTY TO POST LICENSE.
   A licensee shall post his license or licenses conspicuously in the place of
business licensed. If he has no regular place of business, the license must be
kept where it may be inspected at all times by the proper town officials. If a
machine is licensed, the license shall be affixed to the machine.
('72 Code, § 7-4.26)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)
§ 110.50 NOTICE OF DEFICIENCY.
   If the town determines that a person has not paid the full amount of tax due
under this chapter, either for the current license year or for a prior license
year, it shall give the person written notice of the deficiency, pursuant to §
110.36. The notice of deficiency shall specify: the total amount of tax due;
the section of this chapter upon which the tax is based; the amount of tax
paid; any interest due; the balance owed; the manner and time period in which
the person may respond to the notice of the deficiency; and the consequences to
the person if he fails to respond as specified.
('72 Code, § 7-4.27)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)
§ 110.51 REQUEST FOR A CONFERENCE.
   (A)   The person may, within ten days after the day on which notice is
served, request a conference in writing. The request shall specify the person's
objections to the notice of deficiency.
   (B)   By way of illustration but not limitation, a person who receives
notice of a deficiency may object on the following grounds:
      (1)   That the tax due has already been paid;
      (2)   That the town miscalculated the amount of tax due;
      (3)   That the town based its calculation on incorrect or insufficient
information concerning either the nature or the amount of business conducted;
      (4)   That the town based its determination on an erroneous
interpretation of a section of this chapter that establishes a category of
business subject to a particular tax.
('72 Code, § 7-4.28)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)
§ 110.52 DEFICIENCY TO BECOME FINAL.
   If the taxpayer fails to request a conference under § 110.51, the deficiency
becomes final and the town shall proceed to collect the deficiency.
('72 Code, § 7-4.29)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)
§ 110.53 CONFERENCE HELD.
   If the taxpayer requests a conference, the town shall not proceed to collect
the deficiency until it hears the taxpayer's objections and determines that the
deficiency should become final. The town shall maintain a record of each
conference held, pursuant to § 110.35, for three years. The record shall
contain the name of the taxpayer, the date of the conference, and a brief
statement of the issues discussed and the results of the discussion. After
three years, the town shall dispose of the record pursuant to G.S. § 121-5.
('72 Code, § 7-4.30)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)
§ 110.54 COLLECTION OF DEFICIENCY.
   (A)   The town may use any of the following methods to collect a deficiency:
      (1)   Criminal prosecution in accordance with § 110.55(A).
      (2)   Equitable relief in accordance with § 110.55(B).
      (3)   The remedies of levy and sale and attachment and garnishment, in
accordance with G.S. § 160A-207.
      (4)   The remedies of levy and sale of real and personal property of the
taxpayer within the town in accordance with the provisions of G.S. § 105-109.
   (b)   Any person who commences or continues to conduct a business taxed
under this ordinance without payment of the tax is liable for the additional
tax of 5% each 30 days, imposed by G.S. § 105-109.
('72 Code, § 7-4.31)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)
§ 110.55 ENFORCEMENT OF CHAPTER.
   (A)   Criminal remedies. Conducting business within this town without having
paid the privilege license tax imposed by this chapter, or without a valid
license issued pursuant to this chapter, or without posting a license pursuant
to § 110.49, is a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in G.S. § 105-109. Each
day that a person conducts business in violation of this chapter is a separate
offense. Payment of a fine imposed in criminal proceedings pursuant to this
section does not relieve a person of his liability for taxes imposed under this
chapter.
   (B)   Equitable remedies. In addition to the criminal remedies set forth in
division (A) of this section and pursuant to G.S. § 160A-175(d), the town may
seek an injunction against any person who conducts a business in violation of
this chapter.
('72 Code, § 7-4.32)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)
LICENSE TAX SCHEDULES
§ 110.65 SCHEDULE OF LICENSE TAXES REGULATED BY G.S. CHAPTER 105, ARTICLE 2,
SCHEDULE B.
   A license tax shall be levied and collected for the privilege of engaging in
the following businesses:
   AMUSEMENTS
   Motion Picture Shows, Theatres, and Opera Houses. (G.S. § 105.37)
   (1)   Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of operating
a motion picture show, theatre, or opera house where public exhibitions or
performances are given for compensation
      Per year   $ 200.00
   (2)   Theatres in resort towns operated for less than 6 months each year; or
theatres open 3 days or less each week
      Per year   $ 100.00
   Dances and Athletic Contests. (G.S. § 105-37.1)
    Every person, firm or corporation offering or managing any dance or
athletic contest of any kind, except high school and elementary school athletic
contests, for which the admission fee is in excess of $.50
      Per year   $ 25.00
   Amusements Not Otherwise Taxed. (G.S. § 105-37.1)
   Every person. firm or corporation engaged in the business of giving or
offering or managing any form of entertainment or amusement not otherwise taxed
or specifically exempted under Schedule "B" for which an admission is charged
for each room, hall, tent or other place where admission is charged
      Per year   $ 25.00
   ATHLETIC CONTESTS (See AMUSEMENTS)
   AUTOMOBILE EQUIPMENT DEALERS, WHOLESALE (G.S. § 105-89)
      (1)   Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of
buying, selling, distributing or delivering automotive accessories, parts,
tires, tools, batteries, or other automotive equipment or supplies at wholesale
      Per year   $ 37.50
      (2)   This tax does not apply to businesses taxed as automobile service
stations under G.S. § 105-89(b). (See next heading - AUTOMOBILE SERVICE
STATIONS)
   AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATIONS (G.S. § 105-89)
    Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of servicing,
storing, painting, or repairing automobiles, or selling or delivering tires,
tools, batteries, motor fuels, lubricants or other automotive accessories
      Per year    $ 12.50
   BARBER SHOPS (G.S. § 105-75.1)
   Every person, firm, or corporation engaged in the business of conducting a
barber shop
      Per year    $ 2.50
   BEAUTY SHOPS (G.S. § 105-75.1)
   For each barber, manicurist, cosmetologist, beautician or beauty shop
operator
      Per year    $ 2.50
   BICYCLE DEALERS. (G.S. 105-49)
       (1)   Any person, firm, or corporation engaged in the business of buying
or selling bicycles, bicycle supplies or accessories
      Per year   $ 25.00
      (2)   If a dealer pays the tax imposed under the section governing
motorcycle dealers, no additional tax may be levied for handling bicycles or
bicycle supplies
   BILLIARD AND POOL TABLES (G.S. § 105-64)
   (1)   Every firm, person, or corporation renting, maintaining or owning a
building wherein there is a table or tables at which billiards or pool is
played, whether operated by slot or otherwise.
      Per year:   $25.00
   (2)   This tax does not apply to fraternal organizations having a national
charter or to the American Legion, YMCA or YWCA
   BOWLING ALLEYS (G.S. § 105-64.1)
       (1)   Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of
operating a bowling alley
      Per year, per alley   $10.00
      (2)   This tax does not apply to fraternal organizations having a
national charter, the American Legion, YMCA or YWCA
   CAFES AND CAFETERIAS (See RESTAURANTS)
   CAMPGROUNDS, TRAILER PARKS, TENT CAMPING AREAS (G.S. § 105-61.1)
   Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of operating any
campground, trailer park, tent camping area, or similar place for profit (but
excluding those businesses taxed in G.S. § 105-61 of this section) and
advertising in any manner for transient patronage, or soliciting such business
      Per year   $12.50
   CHAIN STORES (G.S. § 105-98)
       (1)   Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of
operating, under the same general management, supervision or ownership, two or
more stores where goods, wares or merchandise is sold is deemed to be a branch
or chain store operator, except for the particular store which is designated as
the principal office in the chain
      Per store, per year   $50.00
      (2)   This tax does not apply to:
      (a)   Retail and wholesale dealers in motor vehicles and automotive
equipment;
      (b)   Retail stores of non-profit organizations engaged exclusively in
the sale of merchandise processed by handicapped persons employed by a non-
profit organization; and
      (c)   Manufacturers, retail or wholesale sellers of fertilizers, farm
chemicals, soil preparants or seeds.
   CLEANERS (See DRY CLEANERS)
   COLLECTING AGENCIES (G.S. § 105-45)
   Every person, firm, or corporation engaged in the business of collecting,
for a profit, claims, accounts, bills, notes, or other money obligations for
others, and of rendering an account for same, shall be deemed a collection
agency
      Per year   $50.00
   CONSTRUCTION COMPANIES (See CONTRACTORS)
   CONTRACTORS AND CONSTRUCTION COMPANIES (G.S. § 105-54)
       (1)   Every person, firm or corporation which for a fixed price,
commission, fee, or wage offers or bids to construct any building, street,
sidewalk, bridge, sewer or water system, grading or other improvement or
structure.
      Per year   $10.00
      (2)   This tax does not apply to plumbers, electricians, or heating
contractors who are taxed under G.S. § 105-91. (See listing under heading of
PLUMBERS)
   DANCES (See AMUSEMENTS)
   DRY CLEANERS, PRESSING CLUBS AND HAT BLOCKERS (G.S. § 105-74)
      (1)   Every person, firm or corporation operating a dry cleaning plant,
pressing club, or hat blocking establishment located inside the corporate
limits
      Per business, per year   $50.00
      (2)   Every person, firm or corporation soliciting cleaning work or
pressing work to be done by a dry cleaning plant which has not paid the license
tax provided for in division (1) above.
      Per year, per vehicle   $200.00
      (3)   Cities and towns may not collect a license tax under this section
unless the state license tax, if due, has first been paid
   ELECTRICIANS (See PLUMBERS, HEATING CONTRACTORS AND ELECTRICIANS)
   ELECTRONIC VIDEO GAMES (G.S. § 105-66.1)
   Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of owning or
operating machines that play electronic video games when a coin or other thing
of value is deposited in the machine
      Per year, per machine   $ 5.00
   EMIGRANT AND EMPLOYMENT AGENTS (G.S. § 105-90)
   Every person, firm or corporation, either as agent or principal, engaged in
the business of soliciting, hiring, and/or contracting with laborers, male or
female, in this state, for employment out of the state
      Per year   $100.00
   FORTUNETELLERS, PALMISTS, ETC (G.S. § 105-58)
      (1)   Any person or persons receiving rewards for pretending to tell
fortunes, practicing the art of palmistry, clairvoyance and other crafts of a
similar kind
      (2)   The town shall not collect a tax and issue a license under this
section unless the state license (G.S. § 105-58b) has first been procured from
the Secretary of Revenue
      Per year   $200.00
   GARAGES (See AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATIONS)
   GUN DEALERS (See PISTOL, KNIFE AND WEAPON DEALERS)
   HAIRDRESSERS (See BEAUTY SHOPS)
   HAT BLOCKERS (See DRY CLEANERS)
   HEATING CONTRACTORS (See PLUMBERS)
   HOTELS, MOTELS, TOURIST COURTS, AND TOURIST HOMES (G.S. § 105-61)
      (1)   Every person, firm, or corporation engaged in the business of
operating a hotel, motel, tourist court or tourist home
      Per year, per room   $ 1.00
      (2)   (There is a minimum tax under this section of $25.00)
   ICE CREAM DEALERS AND MANUFACTURERS (G.S. § 105-97)
      (1)   Every person engaged in manufacturing ice cream, or storing ice
cream for distribution where ice cream is manufactured or stored for
distribution if the machines or equipment used is of the continuous freezer
type:
      $.37½ per gallon capacity per year, based on rated capacity per hour
according to manufacturer's rating, provided in no case shall the tax be less
than $2.50 per year for any freezer used
      (2)   Where the equipment used is not of the continuous freezer type:
      $1.25 per gallon capacity per year for the freezer used; provided,
however, that in no case shall the tax be less than $2.50 per year for any
freezer used
      (3)   Where no standard freezer equipment with manufacturer's capacity
rating is used:
      Per year:   $12.50
      (4)   Trucks or other vehicles from another state selling or delivering
Ice Cream, on which the tax has not been paid as outlined above:
      Per truck, per year   $25.00
      (5)   Retail dealers selling ice cream purchased from a manufacturer or
distributor who has not paid a license tax as imposed by this section:
      Per year   $ 2.50
      (6)   Manufacturers using counter freezer equipment and selling at retail
only:
      Per year   $ 2.50
      (7)   Farmers who manufacture and sell only the products of their own
cows are exempt from this tax
   INTOXICATING BEVERAGES (See §
110.67)
   ITINERANT MERCHANTS AND SALESMEN (G.S. § 105-53)
      (1)   Every itinerant salesman or merchant selling goods, wares or
merchandise, either on the streets or in a building, not being a regular
merchant of the municipality
   Per year   $100.00
   (2)   Any salesman or merchant offering for sale goods, wares or
merchandise, other than fruits and farm products, shall be deemed an itinerant
within the meaning of this section, if he conducts business within a
municipality for less than six consecutive months. When any salesman or
merchant does not pay the tax herein levied due to a stated intention to become
a regular merchant, the municipal Tax Collector may require him to post a cash
deposit in the sum of $100.00, which bond shall be forfeited for the payment of
the tax herein levied in the event such person discontinues the business within
six months for any reason other than death, disability, insolvency, or
destruction of stock by fire or other catastrophe
   (3)   This tax shall not apply to persons who sell books, periodicals,
printed music, ice, wood for fuel, fish, beef, mutton, pork, bread, cakes,
pies, dairy products, poultry, eggs, livestock or articles produced by the
individual offering them for sale. but shall apply to medicines, drugs or
articles assembled
   JUKEBOXES (See MUSIC MACHINES)
   KNIVES (See PISTOLS, KNIVES AND WEAPON DEALERS)
   LAUNDRIES (G.S. § 105-85)
      (1)   Out-of-Town Laundries
      Every person, firm, or corporation engaged in the business of laundry
work or supplying or renting clean linens, towels and wearing apparel. Tax may
be charged only if the business is located inside the corporate limits
      Per year   $ 50.00
      (2)   Soliciting Laundry Work
      Every person, firm, or corporation engaged in the business of soliciting
laundry work to be done by a laundry or plant which has not paid the license
tax set forth in division (1) above
      For each vehicle used in carrying the laundry work,
      per year   $200.00
      (3)   Laundries Located in Town
      Every person, firm, or corporation engaged in the business of laundry
work, or supplying or renting clean linen, towels or wearing apparel who is not
subject to divisions (1) or (2) above
      Per year   $ 50.00
      (4)   The town may not collect a license tax under this section unless
the state license tax, if due, has been paid first
   LOAN AGENCIES OR BROKERS (G.S. § 105-88)
      Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the regular business of
making loans or lending money, accepting liens on, or contracts of assignments
of, salaries or wages, or any part thereof, or other security or evidence of
debt for repayment of such loans in installment payment or otherwise, and
maintaining in connection with same any office or other located or established
place for the conduct, negotiation, or transaction of such business and
advertising or soliciting such business in any manner whatsoever
      Per year   $100.00
   MOTELS (See HOTELS)
   MOTION PICTURE SHOWS (See AMUSEMENTS)
   MOTORCYCLE DEALERS (G.S. § 105-89.1)
      (1)   Every person, firm, or corporation engaged in the business of
buying, selling, or distributing motorcycles or motorcycle supplies
      Per year   $ 12.50
      (2)   Motorcycle dealers taxed under this section are not liable for any
additional tax as bicycle dealers if they also handle bicycles and bicycle
supplies
   MUSIC MACHINES (G.S. § 105-65)
      Every person, firm, or corporation engaged in the business of operating,
maintaining or placing on location any machine which plays records or produces
music
      Per year, per machine   $ 5.00
   MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS AND EQUIPMENT (G.S. § 105-82)
      (1)   Every person, firm, or organization engaged in the business of
selling or offering for sale pianos, organs, records or record players, radios
or radio accessories, television sets or accessories, and repair parts thereto
      Per year   $ 5.00
      (2)   Agents selling these commodities when the dealer is located outside
of the municipality
      Per year   $ 5.00
   PIANOS (See MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS)
   PISTOL, KNIFE, AND WEAPON DEALERS (G.S. § 105-80)
      Every person, firm, or corporation engaged in the business of selling
pistols, knives or blank cartridge pistols
      Per year:
      Pistols   $ 50.00
      Bowie knives, daggers, or articles of like kind    $200.00
      Blank cartridge pistols   $ 50.00
   PLUMBERS, HEATING CONTRACTORS, AND ELECTRICIANS (G.S. § 105-91)
      (1)   Every person, firm, or corporation engaged in the business of a
plumber, of a steam or gas fitter, or of installing heating systems or
electrical equipment
      Per year   $ 50.00
      (2)   Businesses licensed under this section shall not be taxed as a
contractor, or as an elevator or automatic sprinkler salesman or repairman.
(See headings of CONTRACTORS and ELEVATORS AND AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEMS)
   POOL TABLES (See BILLIARD AND POOL TABLES)
   RADIOS (See MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS)
   RESTAURANTS, CAFES, AND CAFETERIAS (G.S. § 105-62)
      (1)   Every person, firm, or corporation engaged in the business of
operating a restaurant, cafe, cafeteria, hotel with dining service or other
place where prepared food is sold
      Per year:
      0 - 4 seats   $25.00
      5 seats or more   $42.50
      (2)   Sandwiches made only of crackers, or cookies with food filling, are
not subject to the tax. Sales of any commodity through vending machines are
also exempt from the tax
   SALESMEN (See ITINERANT MERCHANTS AND SALESMEN)
   SANDWICH STANDS (See RESTAURANTS)
   SERVICE STATIONS (See AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATIONS)
   SUNDRIES LICENSE TAX (G.S. § 105-65.2)
      (1)   Every person, firm, or corporation engaged in any one or more of
the following business activities:
      (a)   Sale of sandwiches in drug stores, service stations, or any other
stands or places not licensed and taxed as a restaurant under G.S. § 105-62;
however, as used in this division, the word "SANDWICHES" shall not be
interpreted or construed to include crackers or cookies in combination with any
food filling;
      (b)   Operating, maintaining or placing on location fewer than five of
the following types of dispensers or machines;
         1.   Dispensers of cigarettes or other tobacco products;
         2.   Dispensers of soft drinks;
         3.   Dispensers of food or other merchandise, or
         4.   Weighing machines;
      (c)   Operating a soda fountain or soft drink stand; or
      (d)   Retailing or jobbing cigarettes, cigars, chewing tobacco, snuff or
any other tobacco products
      Per year   $ 4.00
      (2)   Only one sundries license shall be required for any one location
regardless of the number of enumerated businesses being engaged in at that
location
      (3)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to the sale, through
dispensers or otherwise, of milk, milk drinks, dairy products, or newspapers,
or to dispensers dispensing merchandise for $.05 or less
   TAXICABS (See § 110.68)
   TELEVISION (See MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS)
   THEATRES AND SHOWS (See AMUSEMENTS)
   TOURIST COURTS AND HOMES (See HOTELS)
   WEAPONS (See PISTOLS)
   WINE (See § 110.67)
('72 Code, § 7-4.33)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89; Am. Ord. 1295, passed 9-25-97)
Statutory reference:
   Most of the statutes cited in this section have been repealed. For the
continued authority of these statutes, however, see G.S. §160A-211.
§ 110.66 LICENSE FEES UNREGULATED BY G.S CHAPTER 105, ARTICLE 2, SCHEDULE B.
   ANTIQUE AND GIFT SHOP
      Every person, firm, or corporation operating an antique or gift shop
within the corporate limits
      Per year   $ 50.00
   BAKERY PRODUCTS - RETAIL
      Every person, firm, or corporation operating a bakery products (retail)
shop within the corporate limits
   Per year   $ 40.00
   BAKERY PRODUCTS - WHOLESALE
      Every person, firm, or corporation operating a bakery products
(wholesale) shop within the corporate limits
      Per year   $ 40.00
   BINGO
      Every person, firm, or corporation operating a commercial bingo game
within the corporate limits
      Per year   $100.00
   BOATS AND BOAT MOTORS SALES OR SERVICE
      Every person, firm, or corporation operating a boat or boat motors sales
or service shop within the corporate limits
      Per year   $ 50.00
   BOOK STORES
      Every person, firm, or corporation operating a book store within the
corporate limits
      Per year   $ 25.00
   CLOTHING STORES
      Every person, firm, or corporation operating a clothing store within the
corporate limits
      Per year   $ 35.00
   COMMERCIAL FISHING PIERS
      Every person, firm, or corporation operating a commercial fishing pier
within the town limits
      Per year   $100.00
   DANCING
      Every person, firm, or corporation operating a commercial establishment
which provides for dancing and having the required square footage for same
      Per year   $100.00
   DECORATORS, INTERIOR
      Every person, firm, or corporation operating an interior decorators shop
within the corporate limits
      Per year   $ 20.00
   DEPARTMENT STORES
      Every person, firm, or corporation operating a department store within
the town limits
      Per year   $100.00
   DRUG STORES
      Every person, firm, or corporation operating a drug store within the
corporate limits
      Per year   $ 35.00
   GAS - BOTTLED AND BULK
      Every person, firm, or corporation operating a gas station (bottled and
bulk) within the corporate limits
    Per year   $ 30.00
   GROCERY STORES
      Every person, firm, or corporation operating a grocery store within the
corporate limits
      Per year   $ 35.00
   HARDWARE STORES
      Every person, firm, or corporation operating a hardware store within the
corporate limits
      Per year   $ 35.00
   HOBBY AND PET SHOPS
      Every person, firm, or corporation operating a hobby or pet shop within
the corporate limits
      Per year   $ 25.00
   INSULATION (INSTALLERS)
      Every person, firm, or corporation operating an insulation shop
(installers) within the corporate limits
      Per year   $ 30.00
   LOUNGES, TAP ROOMS, BARS OR SIMILAR BUSINESSES
      Any person, firm, or corporation engaged in the operation of a lounge,
tap room, bar or similar business wherein alcoholic beverages are sold to the
public for consumption on the premises
      Per year   $100.00
   MARINAS
      Every person, firm, or corporation operating a commercial marina or
conducting the business of storage, dockage, repair or service of boats for the
public
      Per year   $ 50.00
   MEATS - RETAIL
      Every person, firm, or corporation operating a meat store (retail) within
the corporate limits
      Per year   $ 25.00
   WHOLESALE SEAFOOD
      Every person, firm, or corporation engaged in the wholesale sale of
seafood
      Per year   $ 50.00
   MISCELLANEOUS (not otherwise taxed and not exempt)
      Per year   $ 25.00
('72 Code, § 7-4.34)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)
§ 110.67 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   WINE AND BEER
   (A)   Beer (Retail): (G.S. § 105-113.79)
      "On premises", per year   $ 15.00
      "Off premises", per year   $ 5.00
   (B)   Wine (Retail): (G.S. § 105-113.79)
      "On Premises", per year   $ 15.00
      "Off Premises", per year   $ 10.00
*(C)   Wholesale Dealers: (G.S. § 105-113.73)
      Beer - Per year   $ 37.50
      Wine - Per year   $ 37.50
      Both wine and beer under same license   $ 62.50
   *Only if dealer has a place of business in that municipality; cannot tax
deliveries only
('72 Code, § 7-4.35)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)
§ 110.68 TAXICABS.
   TAXICABS (G.S. § 20-97)
      Per vehicle. per year   $ 15.00
('72 Code, § 7-4.36)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)
CHAPTER 111: BARS AND TAVERNS
Section
   
111.01   Definitions
   
111.02   Bathroom facilities
   
111.03   Air cooling and ventilation
   
111.04   Manager on duty; required
   
111.05   Location restrictions
   
111.06   (Reserved)
   
111.07   Chapter is prospective
   
111.08   Transfer of ownership; effect
 
   
111.98   Remedies
   
111.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Licenses, see
Ch. 110
   License fee schedules, see §§
110.65 through 110.68
Statutory reference:
   Alcohol Beverage Control Board, see G.S. Ch. 18B et seq.
§ 111.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   "BAR OR TAVERN LICENSED BY THE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL BOARD OF
NORTH CAROLINA." Any place primarily engaged in the sale of malt beverages as
provided in G.S. Ch. 18B.
(Ord., passed 10-8-81)
§ 111.02 BATHROOM FACILITIES.
   All bars and taverns shall provide bathroom facilities as required by the
North Carolina State Building Code, Volume I.
(Ord., passed 10-8-81)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.03 AIR COOLING AND VENTILATION.
   All bars and taverns during the hours of operation shall keep the windows
and doors closed. Air cooling and ventilation shall be from mechanical means
only and shall comply with the standards contained in Table 1500, Ventilation
Design Criteria of the North Carolina State Building Code, Volume III, for
restaurants.
(Ord., passed 10-8-81)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.04 MANAGER ON DUTY; REQUIRED.
   All bars and taverns shall have a person managing the business on the
premises during the hours of operation at all times. The name of the person
shall be conspicuously displayed at the entrance of the business premises.
(Ord., passed 10-8-81)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.05 LOCATION RESTRICTIONS.
   No bar or tavern shall be allowed to open and operate within 500 feet of any
establishment licensed by the North Carolina State Alcoholic Beverage Control
Board to sell alcoholic beverages as provided in G.S. Ch. 18B which is in
existence and doing business at the time of the proposed opening and operation
of any new bar or tavern. Distances shall be determined by straight line
measurements from the nearest corner of the proposed establishment to the
nearest corner of the existing establishment licensed by the State Alcoholic
Beverage Control Board.
(Ord., passed 10-8-81)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.06 (RESERVED).
§ 111.07 CHAPTER IS PROSPECTIVE.
   (A)   This chapter is prospective and not retrospective, and is in no way
intended to affect any existing bars or taverns as described herein, unless any
existing bar or tavern shall close and remain closed for a period in excess of
12 consecutive months, the existing bar or tavern shall be deemed a new bar or
tavern and be controlled by the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Should the use of any bar or tavern change for any period of time, it
may not again be used as a bar or tavern unless it complies in all respects as
a new bar or tavern with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord., passed 10-8-81)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.08 TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP; EFFECT.
   No bar or tavern shall be affected by this chapter by the reason of the mere
transfer of ownership so long as it remains in operation as a bar or tavern.
(Ord., passed 10-8-81)
§ 111.98 REMEDIES.
   (A)   Whenever the Board of Aldermen has reasonable cause to believe that
any person is violating or threatening to violate any section of this chapter,
the town may either before or after the institution of any other action or
proceeding authorized by this chapter, institute a civil action in the name of
the town for injunctive relief to restrain the violation or threatened
violation.
   (B)   The action shall be brought in the appropriate division of the General
Court of Justice in New Hanover County. The institution of an action for
injunctive relief under this section shall not relieve any party to the
proceeding from any civil or criminal penalty prescribed for violations to this
chapter.
(Ord., passed 10-8-81)
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any operator of any bar or tavern who violates any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be subject to a civil penalty of $50 per day of
continuing non-compliance.
   (B)   Criminal penalty as provided by § 10.99 shall be imposed for any
violation of any section of this chapter and shall be in addition to any civil
penalty imposed.
(Ord., passed 10-8-81)
CHAPTER 112: [RESERVED]
CHAPTER 113: PUBLIC AMUSEMENTS
Section
General Provisions
   
113.01   Definitions
   
113.02   Ferris wheels and other riding devices
Music and Dance Halls
   
113.10   Dance hall regulations
   
113.11   License required; application
   
113.12   License nontransferable
   
113.13   License denial; notice and hearing
   
113.14   Public places having live music
   
113.15   Music machines regulations
Bingo
   
113.20   Permit required
   
113.21   Permit fee
   
113.22   Permit revocation
   
113.23   Special permits
   
113.24   Hours of operation
   
113.25   Operation of game after permit revoked; prohibited
   
113.26   Soliciting outside building; prohibited
Pool, Billiards, and Bowling
   
113.35   License required
   
113.36   Application for license
   
113.37   License denial; grounds
   
113.38   License denial; notice and hearing
   
113.39   Form and content of license
   
113.40   Licensee and employees; prohibitions
   
113.41   Rules for operation of pool rooms
   
113.42   Liability of licensee
   
113.43   License suspension; revocation; notice and hearing
   
113.44   Equitable remedies for violations
Cross-reference:
   Licenses, see,
Ch. 110
   License fee schedules, see §§
110.65 through 110.68
Statutory reference:
   Regulation of places of amusements, see G.S. § 160A-181
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 113.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   "AGENT." The person having the agency for the manufacturer, producer, or
distributor.
   "BUSINESS." Any business, trade, occupation, profession, avocation, or
calling of any kind, subject by the provision of this chapter to a license tax.
   "DANCE HALL." Any place where the public is allowed to dance in a public
dance hall or public business establishment.
   "ENGAGED IN THE BUSINESS." Engaged in the business as owner or operator.
   "FISCAL YEAR." The period beginning with July l and ending with June 30 next
following.
   "LIVE MUSIC." Any music produced by one or more persons singly or in concert
with one another, vocally or by means of any musical instrument, whether the
music is produced professionally or otherwise.
   "PLACE OF AMUSEMENT." Any pool hall, game room, billiard hall, bowling
alley, combination of these, or other establishment at which any game is played
for a fee or charge (whether direct or indirect).
   "PUBLIC PLACE." Any place that is open to the public for business on either
a seasonal or year-round basis.
   "QUARTER." Any three consecutive months. ('72 Code, § 5-l)
§ 113.02 FERRIS WHEELS AND OTHER RIDING DEVICES.
   No person shall maintain or operate a carnival company, circus, show of like
kind, ferris wheel, merry-go-round, whip, other similar riding devices and
other shows, amusements, and enterprises of like kind, with or without a name,
within the town.
('72 Code, § 5-2)
Penalty, see § 10.99
MUSIC AND DANCE HALLS
§ 113.10 DANCE HALL REGULATIONS.
   All public dances where any kind of music is furnished shall stop not later
than l:00 a.m. on Sunday morning; all dances shall stop promptly at 2:00 a.m.
on weekdays.
('72 Code, § 5-15)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.11 LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION.
   Every person desiring to operate a dance hall shall first secure a license
from the town. The person shall apply in writing to the Board of Aldermen for
the license, specifying in writing the street and building in which the
applicant intends to operate the dance hall and the name of the person who
shall actively manage the dance hall. The application shall contain the number
of square feet available in the dance hall and shall be signed by at least five
residents in the town.
('72 Code, § 5-16)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.12 LICENSE NONTRANSFERABLE.
   No license issued under this subchapter shall be transferred either to other
parties or to a new location, except after application to and expressed
permission of the Board of Aldermen.
('72 Code, § 5-17)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.13 LICENSE DENIAL; NOTICE AND HEARING.
   (A)   Before the Board of Aldermen shall refuse to issue a license or refuse
to renew a license previously issued, the Board shall provide the applicant
with adequate notice and opportunity to be heard in accordance with division
(B) and (C).
   (B)   When directed by the Board, the Town Manager shall give written notice
to the applicant that the Board has made a preliminary decision to deny the
license applied for and unless the person notifies the Town Manager within ten
days after receipt of the written notice that he requests a hearing before the
Board, the Board will proceed to deny the license.
   (C)   If a hearing is requested in accordance with division (B), the Board
shall set a date for the hearing at the earliest convenient time, and shall
take no final action on the license until after this hearing has been
completed. At the hearing, the reason or reasons for the Board's preliminary
decision to deny the license in question shall be explained. The applicant
shall be given an opportunity to explain why the Board's preliminary decision
should not become final.
   (D)   In deciding whether to deny a license, the Board may consider by way
of illustration and limitation, those requirements and prohibitions for
licensees contained in this subchapter.
§ 113.14 PUBLIC PLACES HAVING LIVE MUSIC.
   No person operating a public place shall have live music in the place unless
there is at least 1100 square feet of enclosed floor space in the place.
('72 Code, § 5-21)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.15 MUSIC MACHINES REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No type of music machine located within the town limits shall be
played except between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and l:00 a.m. Monday through
Friday, 2:00 a.m. Saturday being considered a part of Friday for the purposes
of this section; between 10:00 a.m. on Saturday and 2:00 a.m. on Sunday; and
between 10:00 a.m. on Sunday and 2:00 a.m. on Monday. ('72 Code, § 14-8)
     (B)   No person shall operate or allow to be operated any coin-operated
music machine, juke box, or piccolo, other than in a completely walled and
roofed enclosure. ('72 Code, § 14-9)
Penalty, see § 10.99
Cross-reference:
   Noise regulations, see
Ch. 97
BINGO
§ 113.20 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate the game of bingo in the town without first having
obtained a permit from the Board of Aldermen.
('72 Code, § 5-22)
Penalty, see § 10.99
Statutory reference:
   Bingo and raffles, see G.S. § 14-292.l
§ 113.21 PERMIT FEE.
   Every person granted a permit to operate the game of bingo by the Board of
Aldermen shall pay for the permit the sum of $200 per annum.
('72 Code, § 5-23)
§ 113.22 PERMIT REVOCATION.
   All permits issued by the town shall be conditional permits and subject to
revocation at the will of the Board of Aldermen.
('72 Code, § 5-24)
§ 113.23 SPECIAL PERMITS.
   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as preventing the Board
of Aldermen from issuing special permits for bingo games for charitable or
public purposes.
('72 Code, § 5-25)
§ 113.24 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   No person holding a permit from the Board of Aldermen shall operate a game
of bingo between the hours of l:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m.
('72 Code, § 5-26)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.25 OPERATION OF GAME AFTER PERMIT REVOKED; PROHIBITED.
   No person shall engage in or operate the game of bingo within the town after
a permit to operate the game has been revoked by the Board of Aldermen.
('72 Code, § 5-27)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.26 SOLICITING OUTSIDE BUILDING; PROHIBITED.
   No person holding a permit to operate the game of bingo shall, outside the
building in which the game is to be played, solicit, induce, or attempt to
solicit or induce any person to engage in a game of bingo.
('72 Code, § 5-28)
Penalty, see § 10.99
POOL, BILLIARDS, AND BOWLING
§ 113.35 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall maintain or operate any pool or billiard table, game room
(including two or more pinball machines), bowling alley, or other table or
alley for any game or play for which a charge is made, either directly or
indirectly, unless he secures a license from the Board of Aldermen to do so.
The license shall expire on June 30 each year, and shall not be transferable,
nor shall the license be issued to anyone other than the operator.
Penalty, see § 10.99
Cross-reference:
   License tax, see
§ 110.10
Statutory reference:
   Billiards and pool tables, see G.S. § 105-64(C)
§ 113.36 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   An application for the license shall be made upon forms provided by
the Town Clerk and shall contain all information necessary for the Board of
Aldermen to act upon the application. In addition, there shall be a block to be
checked indicating the applicant has read the entire chapter regulating public
amusements and will comply with the rules and regulations therein.
   (B)   Completion of the application authorizes the Board or their agents to
verify the information contained therein by checking official records within
the framework of the National Privacy Act of l974.
   (C)   Completion of the application authorizes the Board or their agents to
inspect the premises, so licensed, upon reasonable notice at reasonable times
without a search warrant to determine if § 113.40 and § 113.41 are being
complied with.
§ 113.37 LICENSE DENIAL; GROUNDS.
   The Board of Aldermen shall not issue a license to any person:
   (A)   Who has been convicted of unlawfully selling intoxicating liquors
within the last five years;
   (B)   Who has received a conviction for any violation of any provision of
this chapter;
   (C)   Who has been convicted of unlawfully selling narcotic drugs.
§ 113.38 LICENSE DENIAL; NOTICE AND HEARING.
   (A)   Before the Board of Aldermen shall refuse to issue a license or refuse
to renew a license previously issued, the Board shall provide the applicant
with adequate notice and opportunity to be heard in accordance with division
(B) and (C).
   (B)   When directed by the Board, the Town Clerk shall give written notice
to the applicant that the Board has made a preliminary decision to deny the
license applied for and unless the person notifies the Town Clerk within ten
days after receipt of the written notice that he requests a hearing before the
Board, the Board will proceed to deny the license.
   (C)   If a hearing is requested in accordance with division (B), the Board
shall set a date for the hearing at the earliest convenient time, and shall
take no final action on the license until after this hearing has been
completed. At the hearing, the reason or reasons for the Board's preliminary
decision to deny the license in question shall be explained. The applicant
shall be given an opportunity to explain why the Board's preliminary decision
should not become final.
   (D)   In deciding whether to deny a license, the Board may consider by way
of illustration and limitation, those requirements and prohibitions for
licensees contained in §§ 113.36, 113.39, and 113.40 of this subchapter.
§ 113.39 FORM AND CONTENT OF LICENSE.
   Every license issued pursuant to this subchapter shall specify the premises
for which it is issued, the number of games, tables, or alleys to be operated
thereunder, the name of the operator, and the dates upon which the license
begins and shall expire. The license shall be posted in a prominent place on
the premises at all times.
§ 113.40 LICENSEE AND EMPLOYEES; PROHIBITIONS.
   Licensees under this subchapter shall not, and neither shall their
employees:
   (A)   Suffer or permit any gambling on the licensed premises at any time; or
the sale or use of any racing, football, or other parlay cards;
   (B)   Suffer or permit the licensed premises to become disorderly; or permit
any profane, obscene, or indecent language thereon;
   (C)   Suffer or permit any intoxicating liquors or narcotic drugs to be
sold, kept, or consumed on the licensed premises; or
   (D)   Suffer or permit any person under the age required by law to possess
or consume alcoholic beverages on the premises.
Cross-reference:
   Remedies for violation of this section, see §§
113.43 and 113.44
Statutory reference:
   Permitting minors to enter billiard rooms, see G.S. § 14-317
§ 113.41 RULES FOR OPERATION OF POOL ROOMS.
   The following rules shall be observed by all operators of pool rooms within
the town:
   (A)   No play on any table shall be allowed during the times when pool rooms
are required by this chapter to remain closed.
   (B)   All pool rooms shall be operated only on the ground floor of a
building, and clear glass windows of a size not less than 50% of the frontal
area shall be in those parts of the building facing any street, so that a clear
view may be had from the street.
   (C)   No screens, curtains, blinds, partitions, or other obstructions shall
be placed between the entrance to the room where pool is played and the rear
wall of the room. A clear view of the interior from the entrance to the rear of
the room must be maintained at all times.
   (D)   No partitions forming rooms, stalls, or other enclosures where the
public congregates shall be permitted; however, this shall not be construed so
as to prohibit the maintenance of closets used exlusively for storage purposes,
or of toilets.
   (E)   There shall not be permitted or maintained any open or secret
connections through doors, windows, trap doors, hidden doors, panels,
stairways, or other devices within any place.
Cross-reference:
   Remedies for violations of this section, see §§
113.43 and 113.44
§ 113.42 LIABILITY OF LICENSEE.
   The acts and conduct of the agents and employees of the licensee in the
conduct of the business shall be deemed to be the acts and conduct of the
licensee.
§ 113.43 LICENSE SUSPENSION; REVOCATION; NOTICE AND HEARING.
   The Board of Aldermen, upon receipt of a clear cut, significant violation of
the rules and regulations set forth in § 113.40 and § 113.41 shall direct the
Town Clerk to inform the licensee of a hearing to be held within five days. The
notice will be in writing and proof of delivery required. The Board shall
review the charges of violation and the licensee shall have the opportunity to
either refute the charges or offer evidence of extenuation or mitigation. The
licensee shall have the right to benefit of counsel, at his expense, in the
hearing. The Board, after hearing the case, shall determine the appropriate
action to be taken, i.e., specified suspension, revocation, warning, or
dismissal of charges.
§ 113.44 EQUITABLE REMEDIES FOR VIOLATIONS.
   In addition to the provisions of § 113.43, the provisions of this subchapter
may be enforced by an appropriate equitable remedy issuing from a court of
competent jurisdiction.
CHAPTER 114: VEHICLES FOR HIRE
Section
   
114.01   Definitions
   
114.02   Vehicle for hire license requirements
   
114.03   Liability insurance requirements
   
114.04   Term of vehicle for hire license
   
114.05   Maximum number of licenses
   
114.06   [Reserved]
   
114.07   [Reserved]
   
114.08   Vehicle for hire license holders to file information on authorized
drivers
   
114.09   Refusal to issue or revocation of license
   
114.10   Revocation of vehicle for hire license; notice and hearing
   
114.11   [Reserved]
   
114.12   Refusal to pay charges
   
114.13   Establishment of taxi stands
   
114.14   Taxi stand regulations
   
114.15   [Reserved]
   
114.16   [Reserved]
   
114.17   Records to be maintained
   
114.18   Compliance with traffic regulations
   
114.19   Fares
   
114.20   Soliciting fares and persons for transportation
   
114.21   Display of certain information
   
114.22   Regularity of operation
§ 114.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   “BUS.” A motor vehicle which has the capacity to transport more than 15
passengers, for hire at a fixed rate on regular routes, with a fixed schedule
or between fixed terminals on the streets of the town. A van, trolley or jitney
with the capacity to transport more than 15 persons shall be classified as a
“BUS”.
   “CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.” The geographic areas of the Town of
Wrightsville Beach located between the northern line of Salisbury Street
(located between its easternmost point and the eastern end of the bridge
crossing Banks Channel) and the northern line of Latimer Street (extended
eastwardly to the 1939 Property Line and westwardly to the high water mark of
Banks Channel).
   “HORSE-DRAWN VEHICLES FOR HIRE.” Any hack, carriage, wagon or similar
vehicle which is operated by being drawn by a horse or mule or other beast of
burden, for the transportation “for hire” of passengers.
   “LIMOUSINE.” A motor vehicle for hire with the capacity to seat no more than
15 persons, which does not accept passengers indiscriminately between points
and along streets, provided that compensation is not computed by means of a
taximeter.
   “LOW SPEED VEHICLE.” A four-wheeled electric or gas vehicle that can only be
operated on streets or roads with speeds of 35 miles per hour or less.
   “OWNER.” The person or entity engaging in the vehicle for hire business in
the town by causing vehicles for hire which are under the owner’s ownership or
control to be used by the owner or someone under his or her direction or
supervision for the purpose of carrying passengers for hire. The “OWNER” is
also referred to herein as the “holder of the vehicle for hire license.”
   “PEDICAB.” A cycle with three or more wheels operated by one person for the
purpose of, or capable of, transporting passengers for hire in seats or on a
platform made part of any “PEDICAB”.
   “RICKSHAW.” A two-wheeled vehicle pulled by one person for the purpose of,
or capable of, transporting not more than two passengers for hire.
   "TAXI STAND." A parking area located on a public street reserved exclusively
for a designated period of time for the parking of taxicabs.
   “TAXICAB.” A motor vehicle for hire which transports passengers for a fare,
which fare is determined in whole or in part, by a measurement to be made
during the trip, of the distance over which the passenger is transported.
   “TAXIMETER.” A mechanical instrument or device by which the charge for the
hire of a taxicab at a predetermined rate is mechanically calculated and
registered for the distance travelled and for the waiting time separately and
upon which such a charge shall be indicated by means of figures.
   “TOUR SERVICE MOTOR VEHICLE.” A motor vehicle engaged in the business of
carrying passengers for hire or offering to carry passengers for hire through
any part of the town when the primary purpose of riding in such vehicle is not
transportation but touring and sightseeing.
   “VEHICLE FOR HIRE.” Any motor vehicle, horse-drawn vehicle, or other vehicle
or device designed or used for the transportation of passengers for hire, the
charges for which are determined by agreement, mileage or by the length of
time, or donation for which the vehicle is engaged. As used in this chapter a
vehicle for hire does not include:
      (1)   School buses;
      (2)   Vehicles used or operated under the control of the United States,
the State of North Carolina, or any political subdivision of the State of North
Carolina;
      (3)   Vehicles used for ride-sharing programs on a non-profit basis;
      (4)   Vehicles used for commuter services operated by an employer for the
exclusive use of its employees;
      (5)   Vehicles used as ambulances;
      (6)   Vehicles without a taximeter that are used exclusively to provide
transportation for persons with a mental or physical disability or illness,
older adults, or persons who require non-emergency medical treatment and are
operated by a non-profit corporation or a state or local social service agency;
      (7)   Vehicles which are the subject of a cost sharing arrangement
between passengers and drivers, which arrangements are not designed to generate
a profit;
      (8)   Vehicles providing shuttle transportation of passengers to or from
prescribed locations such as hotels, motels, shopping centers, business or
commercial buildings, factories or theaters pursuant to a contract with a
business at the prescribed location where the passengers are not charged a fee
and passengers are not accepted or discharged indiscriminately between
prescribed locations; and
      (9)   Vehicles excluded from the town’s regulatory authority by state
law, including vehicles regulated by the Utilities Commission under the
provisions of G.S. § 62-260.
   “VEHICLE FOR HIRE LICENSE.” The license issued to any person who is the
owner of any vehicle for hire under this chapter.
   “‘W’ STICKER.” A sticker issued by the City of Wilmington to taxicabs which
serves as proof of passing the safety checks performed by the City of
Wilmington. All such stickers shall have an assigned number which is displayed
on the sticker.
(Ord. 1630, passed 6-24-10; Am. Ord. 1655, passed 5-12-11; Am. Ord. 1664,
passed 11-16-11; Am. Ord. 1689, passed 8-16-12; Am. Ord. 1712, passed 6-13-13)
§ 114.02 VEHICLE FOR HIRE LICENSE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Before any person shall operate a vehicle for hire on the streets of
the town, he or she shall first obtain a vehicle for hire license (the
“license”) to do so. The application shall be in writing on forms supplied by
the town and shall be filed with the Town Manager or designee. A separate
application shall be filed for each vehicle for hire and a separate license
shall be obtained for each vehicle for hire. The application shall include such
information deemed reasonably necessary to determine whether the license shall
be issued in accordance with the criteria set forth in this chapter. All such
information shall be accurate, to the best of the applicant’s knowledge. The
information shall include, but not limited to the following:
      (1)   The name(s) of the owner(s) of the business operating the vehicle
for hire;
      (2)   Copies of registration cards showing VIN numbers and appropriate
tag numbers as required by the State of North Carolina for the type of vehicle;
or copies of leases showing VIN numbers and appropriate tag numbers as required
by the State of North Carolina for the type of vehicle for any leased vehicles;
      (3)   Certificates of insurance complying with the requirements set forth
in this chapter;
      (4)   Copy of the current North Carolina Safety Inspection Certificate
completed by a certified North Carolina Inspection Station;
      (5)   Proof that each taxicab has passed a current safety inspection
covering the taxicab and its metering device. A current permit from the
Wilmington International Airport, the City of Wilmington, or the City of
Jacksonville will serve as sufficient proof that such inspection has occurred;
      (6)   Copy of a current business license issued by the city.
   (B)   The Town Manager or designee shall determine whether or not licenses
shall be issued in accordance with this chapter for the privilege of operating
a vehicle for hire within the town. The Town Manager may refuse to issue a
license if the applicant fails to comply with or meet the requirements set
forth in this chapter.
   (C)   A vehicle for hire license shall expire on June 30 of each calendar
year. The license issued for the operation of any vehicle for hire may not be
transferred. Any change in the ownership of the business shall require that the
new owner of the business apply for a new license for each vehicle to be
operated in the town.
   (D)   A vehicle for hire license shall be issued only in the name of the
owner of the business operating the vehicle for hire.
   (E)   An annual license fee of $15 shall be charged for each vehicle for
hire operated upon the public streets of the town.
(Ord. 1630, passed 6-24-10; Am. Ord. 1664, passed 11-16-11)
§ 114.03 LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   No person shall operate or cause to be operated any vehicle for hire
over and upon the streets of the town without first taking out and keeping in
force at all times a policy or policies of liability insurance with a company
licensed to do business in the State of North Carolina. Coverage will be
applicable for claims arising from bodily injury and/or property damage,
including accidental death which may arise directly or indirectly from the
operation of such vehicle. The insurance shall be in the following minimum
amounts:
      (1)   For taxicabs, the amounts set forth in G.S. § 20-280;
      (2)   For all other vehicles for hire, the amount of such insurance shall
be $500,000 combined single limits for bodily injury and/or property damage
unless otherwise limited by law or regulation.
   (B)   Any person who is otherwise qualified for operating vehicles for hire
in the town as provided in this chapter shall file with the Town Manager a
certificate of insurance coverage certifying that there is in effect a policy
or policies of liability insurance as specified in division (A) above. The
insurance provider or its agent shall also certify on these documents that it
will notify the town by registered or certified mail at least 20 days prior to
any cancellation or non-renewal of coverage.
   (C)   If the vehicle for hire is to be operated by a lessee, such insurance
shall be furnished by the owner or the lessee or by both.
(Ord. 1630, passed 6-24-10)
§ 114.04 TERM OF VEHICLE FOR HIRE LICENSE.
   (A)   A vehicle for hire license shall constitute a franchise from the town
for the operation of a vehicle for hire within the town subject to the
provisions of this chapter for one year. All certificates shall expire on June
30 following the date of issuance.
   (B)   Applications for renewal shall be filed upon the expiration of the
license and shall be filed on forms provided by the Town Manager.
(Ord. 1630, passed 6-24-10)
§ 114.05 MAXIMUM NUMBER OF LICENSES.
   (A)   The maximum number of vehicles for hire allowed to meet the
requirements for the convenience and necessity of the public within the town
are as follows:
      (1)   Taxicabs: 175;
      (2)   Buses/trolleys: 10;
      (3)   Horse-drawn vehicles for hire: 5;
      (4)   Limousines: 25;
      (5)   Low speed vehicles: 10;
      (6)   Pedicabs/rickshaws: 10.
   (B)   Licenses for each category will be issued on a first-come-first-serve
basis. No new license to operate vehicles for hire in the town shall be issued
once the maximum in the applicable category has been reached.
(Ord. 1630, passed 6-24-10; Am. Ord. 1664, passed 11-16-11; Am. Ord. 1717,
passed 9-12-13)
§ 114.06 [RESERVED.]
§ 114.07 [RESERVED.]
§ 114.08 VEHICLE FOR HIRE LICENSE HOLDERS TO FILE INFORMATION ON AUTHORIZED
DRIVERS.
   The holder of a vehicle for hire license shall keep on file with the Police
Department a copy of the current North Carolina driver’s license showing the
name, address, picture ID and age of any person authorized and hired by the
license holder to drive the taxicab or vehicle for hire of the license holder.
Prior to hiring or allowing any such authorized person to drive the holder’s
taxicab or vehicle for hire, the holder shall furnish the Police Department, in
addition to the above information, satisfactory evidence of the person’s
qualifications as required by law.
(Ord. 1630, passed 6-24-10)
§ 114.09 REFUSAL TO ISSUE OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   The Town Manager shall have the authority to refuse to issue a vehicle for
hire license or to revoke a license for any of the following reasons:
   (A)   If the applicant for a license or the holder of a current license has
failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Failure to maintain liability insurance as required by the state and
the town.
   (C)   Failure to obtain and display proper license tags as required by law.
   (D)   Failure to maintain motor equipment in good repair.
   (E)   Fraudulent sale or transfer of a Wrightsville Beach license.
   (F)   The holder of the license or any driver of a licensed vehicle for hire
is convicted of a felony against this state or convicted of any offense against
another state that would have been a felony if committed in this state.
   (G)   The holder of the license or any driver of a licensed vehicle for hire
is convicted of a violation of any federal or state laws including but not
limited to the use, possession or sale of alcoholic beverages or narcotic or
barbiturate drugs and prostitution.
   (H)   Habitual violation of traffic laws or ordinances. If an applicant for
a license or the holder of a current license has, or employs drivers that have,
violated traffic laws or regulations resulting in an accumulation, under G.S. §
20-16, within a three year period, of 12 or more points; or eight or more
points within the three year period following the reinstatement of a state
driver’s license that has been suspended or revoked, or any comparable
provisions of the law in another state; or has been convicted of any other
violation resulting in the suspension or revocation of the state driver’s
license.
   (I)   If an applicant for a license has had a vehicle for hire license
revoked three times in any five year period.
   (J)   If an applicant for a license has failed to timely pay any penalty
assessed for a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 1630, passed 6-24-10)
§ 114.10 REVOCATION OF VEHICLE FOR HIRE LICENSE; NOTICE AND HEARING.
   (A)   Upon the refusal to issue or the decision to revoke a vehicle for hire
license, the Town Manager shall give the applicant or the licensee written
notice of the grounds for the refusal or revocation. The applicant or licensee
may, within ten days after the day on which notice is served, request in
writing a conference with the Town Manager to discuss the refusal or
revocation. The request shall specify the reasons why the license should be
issued or should not be revoked. The Town Manager shall arrange the conference
within a reasonable time.
   (B)   If the applicant or licensee fails to request a conference within ten
days after the day on which notice is served, the Town Manager shall revoke the
license or the refusal to issue shall stand.
   (C)   If the Town Manager refuses to issue a vehicle for hire license, or
revokes a license, the applicant, or former licensee, may apply for a new
license at any time thereafter if the reason for which the license was refused
or revoked no longer exists, and if no other reason exists for refusing to
issue a license.
(Ord. 1630, passed 6-24-10)
§ 114.11 [RESERVED.]
§ 114.12 REFUSAL TO PAY CHARGES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to fraudulently engage or use any
taxicab or vehicle for hire, not intending at the time to pay for the use of
the same, and then refuse to pay the rates prescribed.
(Ord. 1630, passed 6-24-10)
§ 114.13 ESTABLISHMENT OF TAXI STANDS.
   (A)   A taxi stand is hereby established on the east side of South Lumina
Avenue beginning at the intersection of the eastern line of South Lumina Avenue
with the southern line of Stone Street and extending southwardly for a distance
of 124 feet.
      (1)   The northernmost 69 feet of the taxi stand referred to in division
(A) above has been further designated as a vehicle loading and unloading zone
during the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. under the provisions of
Chapter 76. The area so designated as a vehicle loading and unloading zone
shall be used exclusively for that purpose during the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 6:
00 p.m. and shall be used exclusively as a taxi stand during the hours of 6:00
p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
      (2)   The southern portion of the designated taxi stand consists of three
marked and metered parking spaces. These three spaces shall be used exclusively
as general/metered parking for the public during the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m. and shall be used exclusively as a taxi stand during the hours of 6:00
p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
      (3)   Drivers of taxicabs or other vehicles for hire are prohibited from
blocking any driveway or property access that is located in the designated taxi
stand.
   (B)   A taxi stand is hereby established on the east side of North Lumina
Avenue beginning at the intersection of the eastern line of North Lumina Avenue
with the northern line of Birmingham Street extending in a northerly direction
to the intersection of the eastern line of North Lumina Avenue with the
southern line of East Columbia Street.
      (1)   The southernmost 78 feet of this designated taxi stand has been
further designated as a loading and unloading zone during the hours of 6:00
a.m. to 6:00 p.m. under the provisions of
Chapter 76. The area so designated as a vehicle loading and unloading zone
shall be used exclusively for that purpose during the hours 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m. and shall be used exclusively as a taxi stand during the hours of 6:00
p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
      (2)   The northern portion of the designated taxi stand consists of two
marked and metered parking spaces. These two spaces shall be used exclusively
as general/metered parking for the public during the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m. and shall be used exclusively as a taxi stand during the hours of 6:00
p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
   (C)   A taxi stand is hereby established on the west side of North Lumina
Avenue beginning at the intersection of the western line of North Lumina Avenue
with the southern line of Columbia Street and extending southwardly for a
distance of 164 feet. This designated taxi stand consists of seven marked and
metered parking spaces. These seven spaces shall be used exclusively as
general/metered parking for the public during the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m. except from 6:00 p.m. Friday until 6:00 p.m. Sunday and at any time on the
legal holidays of Memorial Day, Independence Day and Labor Day when these
spaces shall be used exclusively as a fire safety lane. During the hours of 6:
00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m., these seven spaces may be used as a taxi stand on the
condition that during the time that such spaces are used as a fire safety lane,
drivers of taxi cabs must remain in their cabs at all times and shall
immediately vacate the fire safety lane for emergency vehicles.
   (D)   Drivers of taxicabs using this taxi stand established by this section
may utilize any space within the taxi stand to pick up or drop off passengers.
   (E)   Within the Central Business District as defined in this chapter,
drivers of taxi cabs may only pick up or drop off passengers within the
designated taxi stands established by this chapter. Provided, that this
prohibition shall not apply in those circumstances where a taxi cab is
responding to a call to pick up a passenger at a specific residential structure
located within the Central Business District.
(Ord. 1630, passed 6-24-10; Am. Ord. 1634, passed 7-15-10; Am. Ord. 1689,
passed 8-16-12)
§ 114.14 TAXI STAND REGULATIONS.
   (A) Taxi drivers shall not stand or park on any street except at designated
taxi stands, except while actually engaging in pick-up or delivery of
passengers.
   (B)   No driver shall park his or her taxicab in such a manner as to
interfere with traffic, either vehicular or pedestrian, at any location.
   (C)   No more than two taxis operated by any single business shall occupy
any one taxi stand at any one time.
(Ord. 1630, passed 6-24-10)
§ 114.15 [RESERVED.]
§ 114.16 [RESERVED.]
§ 114.17 RECORDS TO BE MAINTAINED.
   The Town Manager or designee shall have the right to inspect the records of
the holder of a vehicle for hire license at any time during normal business
hours of the operation. Additionally, the holder of such license shall provide
reports to the Town Manager or designee as follows:
   (A)   A report of the termination of employment of any driver for any reason
within 15 days of such termination.
   (B)   A copy of the North Carolina Safety Inspection Certificate within 15
days of the annual inspection of each vehicle, if applicable.
   (C)   A summary of any changes in the insurance coverage for any vehicle for
hire.
   (D)   A report of the revocation of the North Carolina driver’s license of
the holder of such license or any driver of a licensed vehicle for hire or any
conviction of the holder of such license or any driver of a licensed vehicle
for hire of any of the offenses described in §
114.09 hereinabove within five days of the date of such revocation or
conviction.
   (E)   A report of any changes in the ownership of the business within five
days of such change.
(Ord. 1630, passed 6-24-10)
§ 114.18 COMPLIANCE WITH TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   Any person having been issued a vehicle for hire license under this chapter
shall be subject to all traffic provisions of the State of North Carolina and
this code, as well as those rules and regulations established by the Town
Manager under the authority of this chapter.
(Ord. 1630, passed 6-24-10)
§ 114.19 FARES.
   (A)   Every vehicle for hire shall have at all times prominently displayed
so as to be easily visible to passengers therein the rates of fare charged by
the owners of such vehicles for hire.
   (B)   If demanded by the passenger, the driver in charge of a vehicle for
hire shall deliver to the person paying for the hiring of the same, at the time
of such payment, a receipt in legible type or writing containing the name of
the owner, the name of the driver, the Wrightsville Beach number of the vehicle
for hire, and any items for which a charge has been made, the total amount
paid, and the date of such payment.
   (C)   No person may operate a taxicab unless the taximeter is used in
determining the fare to be charged for distance traveled, and no greater fare
shall be charged to a passenger than is recorded on the reading face of the
taximeter for a trip or waiting time. No other rates or methods of measuring
the distance or waiting time charges shall be allowed.
(Ord. 1630, passed 6-24-10)
§ 114.20 SOLICITING FARES AND PERSONS FOR TRANSPORTATION.
   Whenever any vehicle for hire is being operated as such upon the streets of
the town, the driver thereof shall not leave his or her vehicle for the purpose
of soliciting passengers, except upon request to assist with the handling of
baggage for a passenger.
(Ord. 1630, passed 6-24-10)
§ 114.21 DISPLAY OF CERTAIN INFORMATION.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle for hire, as well as the owner thereof,
shall be responsible for insuring that the following items are displayed so as
to be visible to passengers:
      (1)   The vehicle for hire license shall be affixed to the upper left
hand corner of the driver’s side front window of the vehicle;
      (2)   A photograph of the driver;
      (3)   A schedule of fares.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle for hire shall, upon the request of any
passenger, give to such passenger the correct name and address of such driver
and such other information as will identify the vehicle, driver and owner
thereof.
(Ord. 1630, passed 6-24-10; Am. Ord. 1658, passed 7-14-11)
§ 114.22 REGULARITY OF OPERATION.
   (A)   Every person having complied with the provisions of this chapter and
obtained a license, as provided for in §
114.02, shall operate such vehicle for hire in such businesses with reasonable
regularity. Every owner shall have a telephone number listed or to be listed in
a Wilmington telephone directory.
   (B)   Every owner who fails to operate the same as herein provided over any
period of 30 days shall be given ten days’ notice to appear before the Town
Manager to show cause why such license should not be revoked. If, upon such
hearing, it shall appear that such vehicle for hire is not being operated at
least three days per week, the Town Manager is authorized to revoke such
license. Upon revocation of a license, the Town Manager may issue said license
to a different owner in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 1630, passed 6-24-10)
CHAPTER 115: OTHER BUSINESSES
Section
   
115.01   Definitions
   
115.02   Rental, sale, leasing of motorcycles, midget cars, and the like
   
115.03   Solicitors and canvassers
   
115.04   Motor boats for hire
   
115.05   Retail sale of food and beverages from mobile vehicle; prohibited
   
115.06   Public parking lots
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate businesses, see G.S. § 160A-194
§ 115.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   "AGENT." The person having the agency for the manufacturer, producer, or
distributor.
   "BUSINESS." Any business, trade, occupation, profession, avocation, or
calling of any kind, subject by the provision of this chapter to a license tax.
   "DANCE HALL." Any place where the public is allowed to dance in a public
dance hall or public business establishment.
   "ENGAGED IN THE BUSINESS." Engaged in the business as owner or operator.
   "FISCAL YEAR." The period beginning with July l and ending with June 30 next
following.
   "LIVE MUSIC." Any music produced by one or more persons singly or in concert
with one another, vocally or by mean of any musical instrument, whether the
music is produced professionally or otherwise.
   "PUBLIC PLACE." Any place that is open to the public for business on either
a seasonal or year-round basis.
   "QUARTER." Any three consecutive months.
('72 Code, § 5-1)
§ 115.02 RENTAL, SALE, LEASING OF MOTORCYCLES, MIDGET CARS, AND THE LIKE.
   No person shall operate, maintain, or engage in any business, trade, or
activity which involves or includes the rental, sale, or leasing of any
motorcycles, motor bikes, midget cars, or other fuel or electrically driven
vehicles.
('72 Code, § 5-3)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 115.03 SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS.
   No person shall go upon the town streets or upon any private property,
residence, or premises in the town for the purpose of soliciting from any
occupant thereof for orders and sales of goods and merchandise or services of
any character, for the purpose of offering to give or furnish any goods and
merchandise or services of any character, or for the purpose of inducing or
inviting orders or making solicitations without having first obtained from the
Chief of Police a permit to do so. However, this section shall not apply to
brokers and regularly employed traveling salesmen engaged in soliciting sales
and selling to merchants and regularly operating firms and industries.
('72 Code, § 5-4)
Penalty, see § 10.99
Statutory reference:
   Regulation of solicitors and merchants, see G.S. § 160A-178
§ 115.04 MOTOR BOATS FOR HIRE.
   All operators for hire of motor boats who ply the waters of the Banks
Channel adjoining the town and who, through representation or otherwise,
solicit business in the town shall obtain a license from the town and shall pay
therefor $12.50. The license shall cover the period between June 1 and
September 30 of each year. The Mayor and Board of Aldermen reserve the right to
revoke any license issued at any time for cause.
('72 Code, § 5-5)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 115.05 RETAIL SALE OF FOOD AND BEVERAGES FROM MOBILE VEHICLE; PROHIBITED.
   No person shall, within the jurisdiction of the town, operate, maintain, or
engage in any business, trade, or activity, which includes or involves the
retail sale of food or beverages from a mobile vehicle, either motorized or
otherwise. The provisions of this section shall not apply to events sponsored
by the town.
(Ord., passed 5-28-78; Am. Ord. 1603, passed 6-11-09)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 115.06 PUBLIC PARKING LOTS.
   All persons desiring to establish and maintain a public parking place or
garage for motor vehicles, for the use of which a charge shall be made, shall
apply in writing to the Mayor and Board of Aldermen, setting forth the location
of the proposed public garage or parking place and the size thereof. If the
location for the garage or parking place is approved by the Mayor and Board,
the Town Clerk shall issue a license to the person and shall charge and collect
in advance therefor 1/2 of $.01 for each square foot of land to be used and
maintained as a parking place or public garage. However, in no event shall the
amount to be collected be less than $15. The license shall contain the
provision that the public parking place or garage shall be used and conducted
in an orderly manner and shall conform to all provisions of this code and other
ordinances of the town.
('72 Code, § 5-6)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 116: MOVIE INDUSTRY
Section
   
116.01   Definitions
   
116.02   Requirement for permit
   
116.03   Town Manager to issue permits
   
116.04   Payment of security deposit
   
116.05   Use of town equipment or personnel
   
116.06   Issuance of permit, denial or permit and appeal
   
116.07   Changes in permit
   
116.08   No filming during certain periods
   
116.09   Required use of law enforcement officers
   
116.10   Use of explosives, special effects and similar devices
   
116.11   Changes in structures
   
116.12   Damage to berm; discharge into waterways
   
116.13   Notice to adjacent residents
   
116.14   Evidence of insurance
   
116.15   Restriction on filming hours
   
116.16   Solid waste disposal
   
116.17   Suspension or revocation of permit
   
116.18   Permit exemptions
 
   
116.99   Penalty
§ 116.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   "NEWS PURPOSES." Any filming activity conducted for the purposes of
reporting on persons, events or scenes which are in the news for newspapers,
television news, and other news media. News purposes shall not include
advertising or publicity films.
   "PRODUCTION COMPANY." Any person, partnership or corporation engaged in the
business of film making activities subject to regulation under this provisions
of this chapter.
   "PUBLIC PROPERTY." Any property owned by or controlled by the town. Such
property shall include, but not be limited to, public street rights of way
within the town.
(Ord. 1216, passed 8-26-93; Am. Ord. 1278, passed 8-8-96)
§ 116.02 REQUIREMENT FOR PERMIT.
   Any production company undertaking filming activities within the town shall
be required to secure a permit on forms provided by the office of the Town
Manager and in accordance with the terms and conditions of this chapter.
(Ord. 1216, passed 8-26-93; Am. Ord. 1278, passed 8-8-96)
§ 116.03 TOWN MANAGER TO ISSUE PERMITS.
   Permits required under the provisions of this chapter shall be issued by the
Town Manager or his designee. Applications for permits shall be submitted
utilizing forms provided by the office of the Town Manager and must be
submitted to the Town Manager at least seven days in advance of any activities
requiring issuance of such permit.
(Ord. 1216, passed 8-26-93)
§ 116.04 PAYMENT OF SECURITY DEPOSIT.
   (A)   If the activities described in the permit are to occur on public
property, the applicant shall make a deposit of up to $7,500 as required by the
Town Manager prior to issuance of a permit along with a Certificate of
Insurance with policy amounts satisfactory to the town. Additional requirements
will be based on the overall impact production may have on public property. The
deposit required under the provisions of this section shall be paid in cash or
by certified funds or bank check payable to the town. Such deposit shall be
delivered to the town at the time the application described in this chapter is
delivered. The application required in accordance with the terms of this
chapter shall be considered incomplete and shall not be considered by the Town
Manager until and unless the deposit, as required herein, is made.
   (B)   In the event the production company damages any public property in the
course of carrying out its activities, the town may use the deposit described
herein for the purpose of repairing such damages. Further, to the extent the
town incurs costs which result solely from the activities pursuant to the
permit and the production company fails to reimburse the town for such costs,
then the town shall be permitted to utilize the deposit for payment in whole or
in part of such expenses. Provided, however, that the giving of the deposit and
use thereof as described in this section shall in no way limit the town's
rights to recover from the production company for any loss, claim or damage
resulting from the activities undertaken by the production company.
   (C)   Upon completion of the activities pursuant to the permit, the deposit
shall be returned to the production company in the event there is no damage or
loss resulting from the activities of the production company pursuant to the
permit. No refund of deposit will be made until appropriate clearance has been
received from the Town Manager or his or her designee.
(Ord. 1216, passed 8-26-93; Am. Ord. 1378-A, passed 4-26-01)
§ 116.05 USE OF TOWN EQUIPMENT OR PERSONNEL.
   (A)   The production company may request use of town equipment and/or
personnel at the time its application for a permit is submitted. The Town
Manager shall have the sole discretion to determine whether such equipment and
personnel shall be made available in accordance with such request. In the event
equipment or personnel are made available, payment by the production company
for the use of such equipment or personnel shall be made in accordance with the
provisions of a schedule of charges approved by the Board of Aldermen and
maintained in the office of the Town Manager. Payment for such equipment or
personnel must be made prior to any refund of deposit. Such requests may be
cancelled up to 24 hours prior to the time that such equipment or personnel are
required and in such event, the amount paid by the production company shall be
refunded in full. In the event the request is cancelled later than 24 hours
prior to the time such personnel or equipment is requested, no refund shall be
made.
   (B)   Town equipment made available pursuant to this section shall be
operated only by authorized and qualified town employees.
(Ord. 1216, passed 8-26-93; Am. Ord. 1378-A, passed 4-26-01)
§ 116.06 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT, DENIAL OF PERMIT AND APPEAL.
   (A)   The Town Manager or his designee is charged with the responsibility
for issuing the permit to a production company as described herein. The Town
Manager may refuse to issue a permit when the activity described in the request
for the permit would create a situation that would prejudice the safety of the
town or its inhabitants, would unnecessarily disturb the residents of the town,
would unnecessarily impede traffic on streets within the town limits, or would
violate any ordinance, statute or regulation of the town, state or United
States Government. In the event the Manager denies a request for a permit, the
applicant may appeal the Manager's decision to the Board of Aldermen. Such
appeal will be heard by the Board of Aldermen at the next regularly scheduled
meeting at which the appeal can be scheduled consistent with agenda deadlines
established by the Town Manager. The decision of the Board of Aldermen shall be
final.
   (B)   Any application that requires the closing of a street or the beach
strand for any period of time whatsoever shall be approved by the Board of
Aldermen. The decision of the Board of Aldermen in such event shall be final.
   (C)   Each filming location shall require a separate permit application. In
cases where a security deposit is required, there shall only be one deposit
required.
   (D)   The issuance of a permit as described hereinabove does not include the
right to use or occupy private property. In addition to the permit required
under this chapter, a production company shall obtain a property owner's
written permission to use such private property in any manner whatsoever.
(Ord. 1216, passed 8-26-93; Am. Ord. 1278, passed 8-8-96)
§ 116.07 CHANGES IN PERMIT.
   No schedule, proposed activity, filming location or other matter as outlined
in the permit application shall be changed by the production company without an
amendment to the permit approved by the Town Manager. Any request for a permit
amendment shall be submitted to the Town Manager at least 24 hours before any
activity described in the amendment is to occur. Any services contracted under
§ 116.05 will be billed if 24-hour notification is not received.
(Ord. 1216, passed 8-26-93; Am. Ord. 1378-A, passed 4-26-01)
§ 116.08 NO FILMING DURING CERTAIN PERIODS.
   No permit will be issued to a production company for filming during the
weekend of the North Carolina Azalea Festival or on any weekend (Friday after
5:00 p.m., Saturday or Sunday) from May 1st of each year through September 30
unless specifically allowed in the permit issued by the Town Manager.
(Ord. 1216, passed 8-26-93; Am. Ord 1378-A, passed 4-26-01; Am. Ord. 1776,
passed 5-10-18)
§ 116.09 REQUIRED USE OF LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS.
   A production company shall be required to utilize Wrightsville Beach law
enforcement officers together with appropriate equipment as determined by the
Town Manager to assist in any circumstance where traffic is affected by the
filming activities or where such activities may cause crowd control problems.
The determination as to whether law enforcement officers and equipment are
needed and the required number of law enforcement officers and equipment shall
be made exclusively by the Town Manager. In the event law enforcement officers
and associated equipment are required, the cost of such shall be paid by the
production company in accordance with the schedule referred to in § 116.05
above. All payments for services must be paid prior to release of any deposit
made by the production company.
(Ord. 1216, passed 8-26-93; Am. Ord. 1218, passed 9-9-93; Am. Ord. 1378-A,
passed 4-26-01)
§ 116.10 USE OF EXPLOSIVES, SPECIAL EFFECTS AND SIMILAR DEVICES.
   No filming activity may be undertaken which involves the use of explosives,
pyrotechnics, fire, smoke-making machines or other special effects designed for
simulation of fire or explosion unless specifically approved by the Fire Chief
acting through the Town Manager. The use of such equipment shall be strictly in
accordance with any local, state or federal ordinances, statutes and
regulations. The permit application submitted in conjunction with any filming
activities undertaking the use of such materials shall include a specific
description of the plans for the storage, handling and transfer of any
explosive devices, pyrotechnics or other incendiary devices or any materials of
a hazardous nature that may be used in connection with such filming.
(Ord. 1216, passed 8-26-93)
§ 116.11 CHANGES IN STRUCTURES.
   Any alteration of a structure in connection with filming, either temporarily
or permanently, shall be carried out in accordance with the North Carolina
State Building Code and shall require any applicable permits from the Town's
Building Inspection Division.
(Ord. 1216, passed 8-26-93)
§ 116.12 DAMAGE TO BERM; DISCHARGE INTO WATERWAYS.
   Any production company undertaking filming operations which might cause
damage to the berm and dune system adjacent to the Atlantic Ocean or which
might result in the discharge of any substances into the waterways surrounding
the town will specifically outline in their application a plan for preventing
such damage or discharge.
(Ord. 1216, passed 8-26-93)
§ 116.13 NOTICE TO ADJACENT RESIDENTS.
   All residents of premises in any area where filming activities may cause an
inconvenience or an interruption of normal activities are required to be
notified at least five days prior to the filming of the date and time such
filming is to be undertaken. Such notice shall give the residents the name,
local address and local telephone number of a person employed by the production
company that can be contacted concerning such filming. The Town Manager, or his
or her designee, may require signed acknowledgments from such residents
acknowledging receipt of such notification in the case of unusual filming
circumstances or where the residents may be particularly sensitive to filming
activities because of the location or configuration of the surrounding area.
(Ord. 1216, passed 8-26-93; Am. Ord. 1278, passed 8-8-96; Am. Ord. 1378-A,
passed 4-26-01)
§ 116.14 EVIDENCE OF INSURANCE.
   If required as a condition of issuance of the permit, the production company
shall submit a policy of insurance naming the town as an additional insured,
such policy to be written with a company and in an amount satisfactory to the
town.
(Ord. 1216, passed 8-26-93)
§ 116.15 RESTRICTION ON FILMING HOURS.
   No filming shall be conducted in residential areas between the hours of 10:
00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. unless specifically allowed in the permit issued by the
Town Manager.
(Ord. 1216, passed 8-26-93; Am. Ord. 1595, passed 4-9-09)
§ 116.16 SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL.
   If required by the permit issued by the town, the production company shall
utilize a dumpster or other recepticle as required by the town for the
disposition of solid waste, trash or garbage generated as a result of the
filming activities. The production company shall be charged based on the then
existing fees utilized by the town. The production company shall be required to
utilize the solid waste disposal services provided by the town. And solid
waste, trash or garbage generated as a result of the production company
activities which is subject to recycling shall be recycled at the town's
recycling center located at the municipal complex.
(Ord. 1216, passed 8-26-93)
§ 116.17 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   The film permit may be suspended or revoked by the Town Manager, or
his designee, if the permittee, its agents, employees or contractors, fails to
comply with the requirements as set forth in this chapter, or with conditions
imposed in the filming permit; or, if the Town Manager or his designee
determines that the permit was issued based on false or misleading information,
or that the public safety or welfare is being imperiled by the filming
activity.
   (B)   If a permit is suspended or revoked, the production company shall
cease operations immediately. The permit shall only be reactivated upon
approval of the Town Manager, or his designee.
   (C)   Except for activities necessary to close down the location and remove
equipment and other property of the permit holder, no permittee shall allow any
filming activity to continue after the suspension or revocation of a film
permit pursuant to this section.
   (D)   Appeals of the permit suspension or revocation shall be conducted in
the manner specified in § 116.06.
(Ord. 1278, passed 8-8-96)
§ 116.18 PERMIT EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Filming activities for news purposes as defined in this section.
   (B)   Filming activities conducted for use in a criminal investigation or
other governmental use.
   (C)   Filming activities conducted solely for private or family use.
   (D)   Filming activities by students for the purpose of fulfilling class
work assignments; filming activities conducted by recognized public or private
schools.
   (E)   Filming performed by a business entity conducted at the place of
business to promote sales events, announcements or other lawful activities.
   (F)   Non-commercial still photography.
(Ord. 1278, passed 8-8-96)
§ 116.99 PENALTY.
   Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor punishable
as provided in G.S. § 14-4, to include, but not be limited to, a fine not to
exceed $500.
(Ord. 1278, passed 8-8-96)
CHAPTER 117: CABLE TELEVISION REGULATIONS
Section
Article I: In General
   
117.01   Statement of intent and purpose
   
117.02   Short title
   
117.03   Definitions
   
117.04   Discriminatory practices prohibited
   
117.05   Subscriber privacy
   
117.06   Rate regulation
   
117.07   Rights reserved to grantor
   
117.08   Non-enforcement by the town
   
117.09   Governing law and choice of forum
   
117.10   Severability
   
117.11   Publication of notices
Article II: FRANCHISE
   
117.12   Unlawful to operate without a franchise
   
117.13   Franchises non-exclusive
   
117.14   Franchises competitively neutral and non-discriminatory
   
117.15   Term of the franchise
   
117.16   Federal, state, and town jurisdiction
   
117.17   Rights reserved to grantor
   
117.18   Franchise agreement
   
117.19   Initial franchise applications
   
117.20   Consideration of initial applications
   
117.21   Franchise renewal
   
117.22   Grant of additional franchise
   
117.23   Permits for non-franchised entities
   
117.24   Review for competition
   
117.25   Application and renewal fees
   
117.26   System design
   
117.27   The system
   
117.28   Drops to public buildings
   
117.29   Use of grantee facilities
   
117.30   Upgrade of system
   
117.31   Non-discriminatory access to cable system
   
117.32   Institutional network, access channels
   
117.33   General technical standards and customer service practices
   
117.34   [Reserved]
   
117.35   Books and records available to the grantor
   
117.36   Reports required
   
117.37   Technical standards
   
117.38   Test and compliance procedure
   
117.39   Emergency requirements
   
117.40   Programming decisions
   
117.41   Cable system office hours and telephone availability
   
117.42   Parental control
   
117.43   Installations exceeding standard installation
   
117.44   Service area and line extension policy
   
117.45   Town monitoring
   
117.46   Access to inside wiring
Article III: Construction Standards
   
117.47   Right-of-way construction
   
117.48   Compliance with laws
   
117.49   Minimum interference
   
117.50   Repair of property
   
117.51   Erection of poles
   
117.52   Reservations of street rights
   
117.53   Underground installation
   
117.54   Conduit
   
117.55   Clearing poles and cables
   
117.56   Moving facilities
   
117.57   Work performed by others
   
117.58   Duty to grantee
   
117.59   System construction capabilities and schedule
Article IV: General Financial and Insurance Provisions
   
117.60   Franchise fee
   
117.61   Performance bond
   
117.62   Penalties procedure
   
117.63   Bonds, indemnification, and insurance
   
117.64   Grounds for revocation
   
117.65   Procedure
   
117.66   Foreclosure
   
117.67   Receivership
   
117.68   Purchase by grantor upon termination or revocation of franchise
   
117.69   Sale or transfer of franchise
   
Appendix: Customer Service Standards
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL
§ 117.01 STATEMENT OF INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   The town, pursuant to applicable federal and state law, is authorized
to grant one or more nonexclusive franchises to construct, operate, maintain,
and reconstruct cable systems within the incorporated areas of the town.
   (B)   The Board of Aldermen of the town finds that cable service has become
an integral part of its citizens’ lives and that evolving cable systems have
the potential to play an even more dramatic role in the future, providing great
benefits and advanced capabilities to the town. At the same time, the Board
further finds that the public convenience, safety, and general welfare can best
be served by establishing regulatory powers that are vested in the town or such
persons as the town designates.
   (C)   In order to ensure that the town and its residents receive state-of-
the-art cable services and capabilities as this technology further evolves, all
franchises granted pursuant to this chapter will be subject to periodic review
and modifications to keep current with changing law, technology, and services.
It is the intent of this chapter to help ensure that local cable operators
provide the best possible cable service to residents of the town, and any
franchises issued pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed to include this
finding as an integral part thereof.
   (D)   Further, it is recognized that cable systems have the capacity to
provide entertainment and information services to the town’s residents and may
have the capacity to provide a variety of broadband, interactive communications
services to institutions and individuals. For these purposes, the following
goals underlie the regulations contained herein:
      (1)   Cable television services should be made available to all of the
town’s residents at the lowest reasonable cost.
      (2)   The system should be capable of accommodating both the present and
reasonably foreseeable future state-of-the- art cable television needs of the
town.
      (3)   The systems authorized by this chapter shall be responsive to the
needs and interests of the local community and shall provide the widest
possible diversity of information sources and services to the public.
      (4)   Each of the above-enumerated goals shall be sought to the maximum
extent, taking into account the costs and benefits to the residents of the
town.
   (E)   The Board further finds that on- going industry consolidation could
result in less local accountability, and that, therefore, stringent customer
service standards, including liquidated damages provisions, may be the only
practical means of ensuring compliance and approximating the costs of franchise
agreement noncompliance to the town and its residents.
§ 117.02 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as “Town of Wrightsville Beach
Cable Television Services Ordinance” (hereinafter referred to as this
“chapter”), and it shall become a part of the code of the town. This chapter
shall take effect and be in force from and after its adoption for the grant of
any new franchise agreement or renewal of any franchise existing at the time of
adoption. All ordinances or parts of the Town Code in conflict with the
provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent
with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense,
words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the
singular number include the plural number. The words “shall” and “will” are
mandatory and “may” is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their
common and ordinary meaning.
   “ADDITIONAL SERVICE.” Any cable service other than basic service provided
over the system.
   “BASIC CABLE SERVICE.” Any cable service tier that includes the lawful
retransmission of local television broadcast signals and any public,
educational, and governmental access programming required by this chapter or a
franchise agreement to be carried on the basic tier. “BASIC CABLE SERVICE” as
defined herein shall be consistent with 47 U.S.C. § 543(b)(7) (1997), and shall
include any signal of any television broadcast station that is provided by a
grantee to any subscriber, except a signal which is secondarily transmitted by
a satellite carrier beyond the local service area of such station. Additional
signals may be added to the basic tier by the grantee.
   “BOARD.” The Board of Aldermen of the town or its delegates.
   “CABLE ACT.” The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, Pub. L. No. 98549,
(codified at 47 U.S.C. §§ 521—611 (1982 & Supp. V. 1987) as amended by the
Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, Pub. L. No.
102-385, and the Telecommunications Act of 1996, Pub. L. No. 104-104 (1996) as
may, from time to time, be amended.
   “CABLE INTERNET SERVICE.” Any service offered by a grantee whereby persons
receive access to the internet or high-speed data information services through
the cable system.
   “CABLE SERVICE” or “SERVICE.”
      (1)   The one-way transmission to subscribers of (i) video programming or
(ii) other programming service;
      (2)   Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection
or use of such video programming or other programming service.
   “CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM” or “CABLE SYSTEM.” A facility consisting of a set
of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and
control equipment that is designed to provide cable service to multiple
subscribers within the franchise area, but such term does not include:
      (1)   A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of
one or more television broadcast stations;
      (2)   A facility that serves subscribers without using any public right-
of-way; or
      (3)   A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in
part, to the provisions of 47 U.S.C. §§ 201—226, except that such facility
shall be considered a cable system to the extent such facility, whether on a
common carrier basis or otherwise, is used in the transmission of video
programming directly to subscribers
   “CAPITAL CONTRIBUTION.” A contribution provided by a grantee as determined
in a franchise agreement that may at the town’s discretion be utilized for the
capital costs of the municipal access channel facilities or to help defray the
costs of an I-Net.
   “CAPITAL COSTS.” Costs associated with the purchase of assets, products, or
other resources that are designed to provide service for more than one year,
whether incurred during initial construction or throughout the life of the
system.
   “CHANNEL.” A portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum that is
capable of carrying one standard video signal, in either analog or digital
form. Consistent with future changes in technology and/or applicable law, the
parties may mutually agree to a different definition in an individual franchise
agreement.
   “COMMUNITY ACCESS CORPORATION” or “CAC.” A non-profit access corporation
serving the town, or any other person designated by the grantor whose duties
shall include the financing, management, and programming of public access
channels, and whatever other duties with respect to the public access channels
that the grantor from time to time may delegate.
   “COMPLAINT.” Any written or electronic inquiry, allegation, or assertion
made by a person regarding service.
   “CONTROL.” The holding of legal or financial control of or over the holder
of the franchise, regardless of whether such control is direct or indirect, or
is exercised or is permitted to be exercised directly or indirectly through
other persons, holdings, or entities. Control shall always be deemed to rest in
the hands of any person that has the right or authority to establish or change
any policy or practice of the holder of the franchise, whether such control may
be exercised directly, or indirectly through other persons.
   “CONVERTER.” An electronic device that converts signals to a frequency not
susceptible to interference within the television receiver of a subscriber and,
through the use of an appropriate channel selector, permits a subscriber to
view all authorized subscriber signals delivered at designated converter dial
locations.
   “DIRECT INCREMENTAL COSTS.” The costs actually incurred by grantee in
meeting an obligation under its franchise which grantee would not otherwise
have incurred in order to either operate and conduct the business of its cable
system or meet another obligation of the franchise.
   “DOWNSTREAM SIGNAL.” A signal originating from or provided by a system to a
subscriber terminal or other terminal including video, audio, or digital
signals or any other type of data or information for either programs or other
uses such as security alert services, etc.
   “DROP.” The cable or cables that connect users of the system to the
distribution system in order to receive service.
   “EDUCATIONAL ACCESS CHANNELS.” Channels specially designated for locally
produced non-commercial educational access programming use.
   “EFFECTIVE DATE.” The date a franchise becomes effective in accordance with
the franchise and the rules and procedures of the town.
   “FAIR MARKET VALUE.” The price that a willing buyer would pay to a willing
seller for a going concern based on the system valuation prevailing in the
industry at the time.
   “FCC.” The Federal Communications Commission or its designated
representative.
   “FRANCHISE.” The rights and obligations extended by the town pursuant to an
initial authorization or a renewal thereof, to a person to own, lease,
construct, maintain, or operate a cable system in the right-of- way within the
franchise area for the purpose of providing cable services. Any such
authorization, in whatever form granted, shall not mean or include: (i) any
other permit or authorization required for the privilege of transacting and
carrying on a business within the town required by the ordinances and laws of
the town, including the provision of telecommunications services; (ii) any
generally applicable nondiscriminatory permit, agreement, or authorization
required in connection with operations in the right-of-way, including, without
limitation, permits and agreements for placing devices on or in poles,
conduits, or other structures, whether owned by the town or a private entity,
or for excavating or performing other work in or along the right-of-way.
   “FRANCHISE AGREEMENT.” That document which grants a franchise pursuant to
this chapter.
   “FRANCHISE AREA.” The geographic area for which a franchise is granted under
the authority of this chapter. If not otherwise specifically stated in the
franchise agreement, the franchise area shall be the entire geographic area
within the town as it is now, or may in the future be, constituted.
   “FRANCHISE FEE.” Any tax, fee, or assessment of any kind imposed by the town
or other governmental entity on a grantee or cable subscriber, or both, solely
because of status as such. The term “FRANCHISE FEE” does not include: (i) any
tax, fee, or assessment of general applicability; (ii) capital costs that are
required by a franchise agreement to be incurred by a grantee for public access
channels equipment and facilities; (iii) requirements or charges incidental to
the award or enforcement of a franchise, including payments for bonds, security
funds, letters of credit, insurance, indemnification, penalties, or liquidated
damages; or (iv) any fee imposed under Title 17 of the United States Code.
   “GOVERNMENT ACCESS CHANNELS.” Channels specially designated for locally
produced non-commercial governmental access programming use.
   “GRANTEE.” A person who is granted a franchise or that person’s lawful
successors, transferees, or assignees.
   “GRANTOR.” The town.
   “GROSS REVENUES.”
      (1)   Any and all revenue of any kind, arising from, attributable to, or
in any way derived by the grantee from the operation of a grantee’s system to
provide cable service (it being agreed that for purposes of this franchise
agreement the term “cable service” shall be defined by reference to FCC
regulations), whether such revenue is received by the grantee, its affiliates,
or any person in which the grantee has a financial interest, or by any other
person who operates the system, directly or indirectly. “GROSS REVENUE”
includes, by way of illustration and not limitation, amounts charged for basic
service; tier services; optional premium, per-channel, per-program services;
cable programming services; audio services; channel guide subscriptions;
installation, disconnection, reconnection, and changes-in-service; equipment
sales or rentals; leased channel fees; late fees and administrative charges of
any type; advertising revenue; and revenue from the sale of subscriber names
and addresses. To the extent that grantee receives revenue from cable services
provided to a subscriber for a fixed price that also includes non-cable
services (that is, those services are “bundled”), grantee shall allocate an
appropriate portion of those revenues for inclusion in “GROSS REVENUES.” If the
fixed price of the bundled services is lower than the aggregate of the prices
of those services if purchased individually, then the appropriate amount of the
revenue to be allocated to each service shall be proportional to the individual
price of that service when compared to the aggregate of the individual prices
of those services when unbundled.
      (2)   “GROSS REVENUES” shall not include:
         (a)   Deposits, refunds, and credits made to subscribers and bad debt,
except to the extent that bad debt is recovered.
         (b)   Pass-through payments received by the grantee from third-party
programmers to purchase services from entities other than the grantee, which
services benefit only the third-party programmers and for hich the grantee
neither received nor provides any consideration.
         (c)   Any taxes on services furnished by the grantee which are imposed
directly on any subscriber by the state, the town, or other governmental unit
and which are collected by the grantee on behalf of said governmental unit.
         (d)   Any franchise fees collected by grantee under the terms of this
agreement.
      (3)   To the extent the scope of “GROSS REVENUES” is limited by federal
law or judicial action, the definitions herein shall be so amended.
   “HEADEND.” The electronic control center of the system including components
that amplify, filter, and convert incoming broadcast and other television and
electronic signals for distribution over the cable system.
   “INSTITUTIONAL NETWORK” or “I-NET.” Capacity, fibers, or both, from both
within the primary cable network and/or separately constructed networks that
are dedicated to municipal users or other governmental and educational users as
determined by the town for two-way, broadband, non-commercial, non-
competitive, not-for-profit communications. The I-Net includes all equipment
and maintenance of equipment required to make the capacity available, including
but not limited to fiber, cable modems, coaxial cable, and all switching,
routing, transmitting, and receiving equipment necessary for the use of the I-
Net as determined in the individual franchise agreement.
   “INSTITUTIONAL NETWORK SERVICES.” The provision of an I-Net by a grantee to
municipal users and other governmental and educational users as determined by
the town, pursuant to the terms of a franchise agreement for non-commercial,
noncompetitive, not-for-profit applications, including but not limited to two-
way dedicated voice, data, video, Internet, and telephony channels connecting
and interconnecting user facilities; computerized traffic control systems; GIS
systems; and the interconnection of facilities serving police, fire, and other
public safety systems.
   “LOCKOUT DEVICE.” A mechanical or electrical accessory to a subscriber’s
terminal that inhibits the video or audio portions of a certain program or
certain channel(s) provided by way of a cable system.
   “NON-COMMERCIAL.” Channels or programming operated on a not-for-profit
basis.
   “NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS.” Those hours during which most similar businesses in
the community are open to serve customers. In all cases, “NORMAL BUSINESS
HOURS” must include some evening hours at least one night per week and/or some
weekend hours.
   “NORMAL OPERATING CONDITIONS.” Those service conditions that are within the
control of the franchisee. Those conditions that are not within the control of
the franchisee include but are not limited to natural disasters, civil
disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual
weather conditions. Those conditions that are ordinarily within the control of
the franchisee include but are not limited to special promotions, pay-per- view
events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and
maintenance or upgrade of the cable system.
   “OTHER PROGRAMMING SERVICE.” Information that a grantee makes available to
all subscribers generally.
   “PERSON.” Any corporation, partnership, proprietorship, individual,
organization, company, governmental entity, or any natural person.
   “PUBLIC ACCESS CHANNELS.” Channels specially designated for locally produced
non-commercial public access programming use.
   “PUBLIC BUILDING.” A building, or any portion thereof, owned, leased, or
otherwise occupied by the town.
   “REASONABLE NOTICE.” Written notice addressed to the town or grantee at such
location as the parties have designated in the franchise agreement as the
address to which notice shall be transmitted to it, which notice shall be sent
by certified mail and postmarked not less than seven business days prior to
that day in which the party giving such notice shall commence any action which
requires the giving of notice. In computing said seven days, holidays
recognized by the town shall be excluded.
   “RESIDENT.” Any person residing in the town.
   “RIGHT-OF-WAY.” Each of the following which have been, or are hereafter,
dedicated to the public and maintained by any public authority or by others and
located within the town, including, without limitation, the surface and space
within, above, and below any real property in which the town has an interest in
law or equity, whether held in fee or other estate or interest, or as a trustee
for the public, including but not limited to any public street, boulevard,
road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, swale, river,
tunnel, viaduct, bridge, park, or any other place, area, easements, rights-of-
way and similar public property and areas, or real property owned by or under
the control of the town.
   “SCHOOL.” Any state-accredited public or nonprofit educational institution
including primary and secondary schools, both public and private.
   “SERVICE INTERRUPTION.” The loss of picture or sound on one or more cable
channels.
   “STANDARD INSTALLATION.” Any service drop not exceeding 150 feet from a
single point or pedestal attachment to the subscriber’s residence.
   “STATE-OF-THE-ART.” The addition of new services and associated equipment as
they are developed, available, and when economically feasible and marketable to
subscribers as specifically required under the terms of a franchise agreement.
   “SUBSCRIBER.” Any person who or which elects to subscribe for any purpose to
cable service provided by a grantee by means of, or in connection with, the
cable system, and whose premises or facilities are physically wired and
lawfully activated to receive cable service from grantee’s cable system.
   “SYSTEM.” A grantee’s cable system operated pursuant to a franchise
agreement within the franchise area.
   “TOWN.” The Town of Wrightsville Beach, North Carolina, as it is now, or may
in the future be, constituted.
   “TOWN ADMINISTRATOR.” A person designated by the town to represent the town
in all business with the grantee.
   “TRAINED REPRESENTATIVE.” Employees of the grantee who have the authority
and capability while speaking with a subscriber to, among other things, answer
billing questions, adjust bills, and schedule service and installation calls.
   “UPSTREAM SIGNAL.” A signal originating from a subscriber’s terminal to the
headend of the system, including video, audio, or digital signals or any other
type of data or information for either programs or other uses such as security
alert services, etc.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.04 DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES PROHIBITED.
   No grantee shall deny service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate
against subscribers, programmers, or general citizens on the basis of race,
color, religion, national origin, sex, disability, or age. Every grantee shall
strictly adhere to the equal employment opportunity requirements of state and
federal law. Each grantee shall comply at all times with all other applicable
federal, state, and local laws, and all executive and administrative orders
relating to non-discrimination.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.05 SUBSCRIBER PRIVACY.
   Grantees shall at all times comply with the federal subscriber privacy
requirements codified at 47 U.S.C. §551.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.06 RATE REGULATION.
   The town reserves the right to regulate rates for basic cable service and
any other services offered over the cable system, to the extent permitted by
federal or state law. Grantee shall be subject to the rate regulation
provisions provided for herein, and those of the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) at 47 C.F.R., Part 7117.900, Subpart N. The town shall follow
the rules relating to cable rate regulation promulgated by the FCC at 47
C.F.R., Part 7117.900, Subpart N. To the extent required by applicable federal
or state law, grantee shall establish rates that are nondiscriminatory within
the same general class of subscribers and which must be applied fairly and
uniformly to all subscribers in the franchise area for all services. Nothing
contained herein shall prohibit the grantee from offering (i) discounts to
commercial and multiple-family dwelling subscribers billed on a bulk basis;
(ii) promotional discounts; (iii) reduced installation rates for subscribers
who have multiple services; (iv) discounts for senior citizens and/or low
income residents; or (v) reduced rates to subscribers who receive non-cable
services in addition to cable services.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.07 RIGHTS RESERVED TO GRANTOR.
   (A)   Upon either the expiration or revocation of a franchise, grantor may
permit and/or require a grantee to continue to operate the cable system for an
extended period of time not to exceed three months from the date of such
expiration or revocation. A grantee shall continue to operate the system under
the terms and conditions of this chapter and the applicable franchise agreement
and to provide cable service and any and all other services that grantee had
been providing.
   (B)   The grantor shall have the right to compel continued operation of the
cable system, whether by the grantee or a trustee or receiver or by the
grantor, and to ensure that such operation is consistent with public interest
as determined by a court of competent jurisdiction. The grantee may not remove
equipment or documents necessary for continued operation of the system.
   (C)   At all reasonable times, grantee shall permit examination by the town
of the system, together with any appurtenant property of grantee situated
within or without the town when necessary to ascertain the grantee’s compliance
with this chapter, the franchise agreement, and all applicable laws.
   (D)   The town shall have the right of intervention in any suit or
proceeding to which the grantee is a party relative to grantee’s operations in
the town, and the grantee shall not oppose such intervention by the town.
   (E)   Except as otherwise provided by applicable law, the grantee shall have
no recourse whatsoever against the town or its officials, boards, commissions,
agents, or employees for any loss, cost, expense, or damage arising out of any
provision or requirements of this chapter or the franchise agreement, or of
their enforcement.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.08 NON-ENFORCEMENT BY THE TOWN.
   Grantee shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the
provisions of this chapter or the franchise agreement by reason of any failure
of the town to enforce prompt compliance.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.09 GOVERNING LAW AND CHOICE OF FORUM.
   Any dispute arising with respect to this chapter or a franchise agreement
granted pursuant to it shall be subject to review by the state and federal
courts having primary jurisdiction in the town.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.10 SEVERABILITY.
   If any material portion of this chapter, or a franchise agreement adopted
pursuant to it, is held by an authority of competent jurisdiction, to be
invalid or unlawful as conflicting with applicable laws now or hereafter in
effect, or is held by a court or competent governmental authority to be
modified in any way in order to conform to the requirements of any such
applicable laws, such provision shall be considered a separate, distinct, and
independent part of this chapter or franchise agreement, and, to the extent
possible, such holding shall not affect the validity and enforceability of all
other provisions thereof.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.11 PUBLICATION OF NOTICES.
   All public notices required to be published by grantor under this chapter or
any franchise agreement shall be published in a manner consistent with the
public notice laws of the state.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
ARTICLE II: FRANCHISE
§ 117.12 UNLAWFUL TO OPERATE WITHOUT A FRANCHISE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, operate, or maintain a
cable system or to provide cable service in the town without a franchise. Any
such person shall be subject to a fine of $500 per day. The payment of such
fine notwithstanding, all such violators shall be subject to all other
applicable provisions of this chapter, including but not limited to the payment
of a franchise fee.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.13 FRANCHISES NON-EXCLUSIVE.
   Any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be nonexclusive. The
grantor specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional
franchises for a cable system or any component thereof to any other person,
including itself, as it deems appropriate, subject to applicable federal and
state law.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.14 FRANCHISES COMPETITIVELY NEUTRAL AND NON-DISCRIMINATORY.
   (A)   (1)   The town shall grant franchises on terms that are competitively
neutral and non-discriminatory and shall include similar terms pertaining to:
         (a)   Term;
         (b)   Franchise fees;
         (c)   Public, educational, and governmental (“PEG”) access channels;
         (d)   PEG access capital and operating support
      (2)    Any franchise granted, when evaluated as a whole, shall not be
more favorable or less burdensome than any other franchise granted under this
chapter.
   (B)   Procedure for review and equal requirements.
      (1)   The town will notify existing grantees in writing at least 30 days
in advance, with a copy of a proposed additional franchise, of its intent to
grant an additional franchise for cable services.
      (2)    Within ten days after receipt, existing grantees may give written
notice to town that the proposed additional franchise is inconsistent with (A)
above.
      (3)   The town shall, prior to approving the additional franchise, notify
existing grantees of the town’s determination related to notice under the terms
of this chapter.
      (4)   If the town determines that the terms of an additional franchise
are more favorable or less burdensome than those imposed upon the grantees,
then:
         (a)   Except for PEG capital and operating grant requirements:
            1.    The town may make such modifications as it deems necessary to
ensure that the terms of the additional franchise are no more favorable or less
burdensome than those imposed upon existing grantees; or
            2.   The town may modify the terms and requirements of existing
franchises as mutually agreed to by existing grantees, and if the existing
grantees do not reasonably so agree, the town shall be deemed to have fulfilled
its obligations under (A) above.
         (b)   The town may adjust the peg capital and operating grant
requirements to ensure the total dollars contributed by a new grantee are the
same as required of existing grantees. In the event existing grantees have paid
town amounts in excess of the amounts required of the new grantee, the town
will refund the difference to existing grantees.
      (5)   The town shall provide notice to existing grantees of the date,
time, and place of its proceedings relating to the approval of the proposed
franchise.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.15 TERM OF THE FRANCHISE.
   A franchise agreement shall establish the term of each individual franchise.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.16 FEDERAL, STATE, AND TOWN JURISDICTION.
   (A)   The town shall exercise appropriate regulatory authority under the
provisions of this chapter, the Cable Act, and all applicable laws. This
authority shall be vested in the Town Board and administered through the Town
Manager or his/her designee in order to provide day-to- day administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and any franchise granted
hereunder, and to carry out the town’s responsibilities with regard to cable
service.
   (B)   This chapter shall be construed in a manner consistent with all
applicable federal and state laws.
   (C)   In the event that the federal or state government discontinues
preemption in any area of cable communications over which it currently
exercises jurisdiction in such manner as to expand rather than limit municipal
regulatory authority, grantor may, if it so elects, adopt rules and regulations
in these areas to the extent permitted by law, provided that the same do not
materially alter the rights and obligations of a grantee under any existing
franchise.
   (D)   Grantee’s rights are subject to the police powers of the town to adopt
and enforce ordinances necessary to the health, safety, and welfare of the
public. Grantee shall comply with all applicable general laws and ordinances
enacted by the town pursuant to that power.
   (E)   (1)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all franchises
granted or renewed after the effective date of this chapter. This chapter shall
also apply to all existing franchises, to the extent not inconsistent with the
terms of any such franchise or applicable law. In the event of any conflict
between the terms and conditions of a franchise agreement and the provisions of
this chapter, and other generally applicable regulatory ordinances of the town,
the specific terms of the franchise agreement shall control. A franchise
agreement (including all of grantee’s particular rights, powers, protections,
privileges, immunities, and obligations associated therewith as the same exist
on the date hereof) shall constitute a legally binding contract between the
town and grantee, and as such, cannot be amended, modified, or changed by the
town without the consent of grantee in any manner whatsoever, whether by
ordinance, rule, regulation, or otherwise, to impose on grantee more stringent
or burdensome requirements or conditions, provided, however, that nothing
herein contained shall preclude the town from the proper exercise of its police
powers or its powers of eminent domain.
      (2)   In the event of a change in state or federal law which by its terms
would require the town to amend this chapter, the parties shall modify the
existing franchise in a mutually agreed upon manner.
   (G)   Grantee shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of
the provisions of this chapter or a franchise agreement by reason of any
failure of the town to enforce prompt compliance.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.17 RIGHTS RESERVED TO GRANTOR.
   In addition to any rights specifically reserved to grantor by this chapter
or a franchise agreement, grantor reserves to itself every right and power that
is required to be reserved by a provision of any other ordinance or under any
other franchise.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.18 FRANCHISE AGREEMENT.
   (A)   Every grantee shall agree to the terms and provisions of a franchise
agreement as negotiated between the grantee and the grantor.
   (B)   In addition to those matters required elsewhere in this chapter to be
included in the franchise agreement, each franchise agreement must contain the
following express representations by each grantee:
      (1)   Grantee has examined all of the provisions of this chapter and
accepts and agrees to all of the provisions of this chapter, as it exists as of
the effective date of the grantee’s franchise agreement, except as set forth in
this chapter and any supplementary specifications as to construction,
operation, or maintenance of the system which the town may include in the
franchise agreement, unless otherwise agreed in the applicable franchise
agreement.
      (2)   Grantee recognizes, unless otherwise agreed in the applicable
franchise agreement, the right of the town to adopt such additional regulations
of general applicability as it shall find necessary in the exercise of its
police power.
   (C)   Every franchise agreement shall contain such further conditions or
provisions as may be negotiated between the town and a grantee, except that no
such conditions or provisions shall be such as to conflict with any provisions
of state or federal law. In case of any conflict or of any ambiguity between
any terms or provisions of a franchise agreement and this chapter, the
provisions of the franchise agreement shall control.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.19 INITIAL FRANCHISE APPLICATIONS.
   Any person desiring an initial franchise for a cable system shall file an
application with the town. An application for an initial franchise for a cable
television system shall contain, where applicable:
   (A)   A statement as to the proposed franchise area;
   (B)   Resumé of prior history of applicant, including the legal, technical,
and financial expertise of applicant in the cable television field;
   (C)   List of the partners, general and limited, of the applicant, if a
partnership, or a list of the principals of the applicant, if a limited
liability company, or the percentage of stock owned or controlled by
shareholders holding 10% or greater, if a corporation;
   (D)   List of officers, directors, and managing employees of applicant,
together with a description of the background of each such person;
   (E)   The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of applicant or
any other business entity owning or in control of applicant, in whole or in
part, or owned or controlled in whole or in part by applicant;
   (F)   A current financial statement of applicant verified by a CPA audit or
otherwise certified to be true, complete, and correct to the reasonable
satisfaction of the town;
   (G)   Proposed preliminary construction and cable service schedule; and
   (H)   Any additional information that the town may require for the
administration of the franchise.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.20 CONSIDERATION OF INITIAL APPLICATIONS.
   Upon receipt of any application and application fee for an initial
franchise, the Town Administrator shall prepare a report and make his or her
recommendations respecting such application to the Board.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.21 FRANCHISE RENEWAL.
   Franchise renewals shall be in accordance with applicable law, including but
not limited to the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended. Grantor
and a grantee, by mutual consent, may enter into renewal negotiations at any
time during the term of the franchise.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.22 GRANT OF ADDITIONAL FRANCHISE.
   In considering whether to grant one or more additional franchises, the town
shall consider granting such additional franchise on a competitively neutral
basis with terms that, when taken, as a whole are no less burdensome than any
current franchise(s). The purpose of this section is to ensure that any
competition which may occur among grantees will be on terms which when taken as
a whole are nondiscriminatory according to federal law.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.23 PERMITS FOR NON-FRANCHISED ENTITIES.
   (A)   The town may issue a license, easement, or other permit to a person
other than the grantee to permit that person to traverse any portion of the
grantee’s franchise area within the town in order to provide service outside,
but not within the town. Such license or easement, absent a grant of a
franchise in accordance with this chapter, shall not authorize nor permit said
person to provide cable service to any subscriber within the town nor render
any other service within the town.
   (B)   The granting of such license, easement, or permit shall be conditioned
upon the payment of fee for occupancy of the public right-of-way to the extent
permitted by applicable law.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.24 REVIEW FOR COMPETITION.
   The town recognizes that the cable television and telecommunications
industries are in a period of convergence, that the technologies and services
provided by these industries are rapidly changing, and that the
Telecommunications Act of 1991 promoted and encouraged competition between and
among these formally discrete industries. At this time it is premature to know
fully the extent to which there will be changes in law, technology, or services
that may impact entities that have been or may be granted franchises or
licenses to use the town’s rights-of-way. It is the desire of the town to be a
communications friendly town that encourages the development of competitive
advanced communications capabilities for the benefit of all its citizens. For
this reason the regulatory ordinances and franchises of the town should not
impede or restrict the fair opportunity to compete, but rather are intended to
provide uniform and consistent requirements for all similarly situated
providers.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.25 APPLICATION AND RENEWAL FEES.
   (A)   An application fee shall not be deemed to be “franchise fees” within
the meaning of Section 11722 of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. §542), and such
payments shall not be deemed to be (i) “payments in kind” or any involuntary
payments chargeable against the compensation to be paid to the town by grantee,
or (ii) part of the compensation to be paid to the town by grantee pursuant to
this chapter or a franchise agreement.
   (B)   All applicants for an initial franchise grant shall submit an
application fee of $6,500 to compensate the town for its costs in reviewing,
preparing, and awarding a franchise, including the costs of outside
consultants. Upon grant of a franchise the town may request the payment of an
additional fee to the extent that the reasonable costs of the franchise review
and negotiation process exceed the initial application fee amount. Consistent
with the Cable Act, all such fees shall not constitute or be credited towards a
grantee’s franchise fee obligations. Reasonable costs include staff time,
professional fees, and administrative costs as determined by the town to be
necessary.
   (C)   The town reserves the right, unless prohibited by applicable law, to
require a grantee to pay the reasonable costs of the franchise renewal and
negotiation process. Reasonable costs include staff time, professional fees,
and administrative costs determined by the town to be necessary and generally
will not exceed $7,500, the payment of which shall not be treated as a
franchise related cost or passed through to subscribers.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.26 SYSTEM DESIGN.
   (A)   Every grantee shall offer service that meets the current and future
needs of the town, taking into account the costs of meeting those needs. The
franchise agreement shall incorporate a description of the grantee’s proposal
including the general design and capabilities of the system to identify for the
town how the system will meet the current and future cable service needs of the
town.
   (B)   State-of-the-art review. The grantee shall ensure that cable service
and the cable system is compatible with changes in law, technology, and
programming and services to maintain a state-of-the-art system throughout the
franchise term in accordance with the provisions contained in the franchise
agreement.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.27 THE SYSTEM.
   Every system shall pass by every single- family dwelling unit and multiple-
family dwelling unit within the franchise area in accordance with line
extension policies set forth in this chapter. Service shall be provided to
subscribers in accordance with the schedules and line extension policies.
Unless specified otherwise, service shall also be extended to commercial
buildings on a consistent basis with the residential line extension policies.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.28 DROPS TO PUBLIC BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Every grantee shall provide installation of at least one cable drop
and provide monthly CPST service, without charge, to public buildings in
accordance with the line extension policies of this chapter, or as otherwise
specified in the applicable franchise agreement. Schools shall also receive one
cable drop and monthly CPST service at no charge. Following the town’s
designation of additional public buildings(s) to receive cable service, and
upon the town’s request, a grantee shall complete construction of the drop and
outlet within 30 days to that new building.
   (B)   All such cable service outlets shall not be utilized for commercial
purposes.
   (C)   In instances where the drop to the public building exceeds 150 feet,
the grantee may charge for the actual and reasonable cost of its labor and
materials.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.29 USE OF GRANTEE FACILITIES.
   The town shall have the right to install and maintain town equipment upon
the poles and conduit owned by the grantee, at the actual cost of the space and
on terms mutually agreeable to the town and the grantee. Installed town
equipment shall not unreasonably interfere with the operation of the cable
system. The town shall relinquish its use of such poles and conduit upon 90
days’ notice from grantee that town’s use interferes with the grantee’s actual
or anticipated use of same.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.30 UPGRADE OF SYSTEM.
   Every grantee shall upgrade its system (herein referred to as the “system
upgrade”), if required, as set forth in its respective franchise agreement.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.31 NON-DISCRIMINATORY ACCESS TO CABLE SYSTEM.
   Grantee may be required to allow non- discriminatory access to its cable
system if such shall be required by federal law. Prior to the enactment of any
such requirement, a grantee shall be provided with reasonable notice and an
opportunity to be heard, including the right to present evidence with respect
to the need for such a requirement. Grantee reserves, and has not waived, any
right it may have, or may later be determined to have, to challenge the town’s
implementation of an open access requirement.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.32 INSTITUTIONAL NETWORK, ACCESS CHANNELS.
   (A)   Every grantee may, to the extent required by the franchise agreement,
provide institutional networks as a condition of an initial grant or renewal,
or transfer of a franchise. To the extent that a grantee is obligated to
provide such support pursuant to its franchise agreement, such obligation will
be implemented in a competitively neutral manner, on a per subscriber basis
with respect to any other franchises granted after the adoption of this
chapter. Costs associated with construction and operation of an I-Net shall not
be a franchise fee unless otherwise specified in the franchise agreement.
   (B)   Every grantee may provide a channel or channels, bandwidth capacity,
service, and funding for public, educational, and government (“PEG”) access
channels, as specified in its franchise agreement. Such PEG access channel(s)
shall be available to all subscribers as part of basic cable service, unless
mutually agreed upon by the town and the grantee or as per state or federal
law.
   (C)   Oversight and administration of the PEG access channel(s) shall be set
forth in the franchise agreement. The town may designate a community access
corporation or similar entity to administer one or more of the PEG access
channel(s).
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.33 GENERAL TECHNICAL STANDARDS AND CUSTOMER SERVICE PRACTICES.
   (A)   This chapter incorporates technical standards and establishes customer
service practices with which a grantee must comply. In addition, a grantee
shall comply with any additional or stricter requirements established by FCC
regulations, or other federal regulation that may be adopted or amended from
time to time.
   (B)   A grantee shall maintain such equipment and keep such records as are
required to enable the grantor to determine whether the grantee is in
compliance with all standards required by these regulations and other
applicable laws.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.34 [RESERVED]
§ 117.35 BOOKS AND RECORDS AVAILABLE TO THE GRANTOR.
   (A)   The grantee shall maintain an office conveniently located to serve the
subscribers of the town. The town shall have the right, upon reasonable
request, to inspect and copy or transcribe at any time during normal business
hours all books, records, maps, plans, financial records, service complaint
logs, performance test results, and other like materials of the grantee kept or
maintained by grantee or under its control concerning the operations, finances,
affairs, transactions, or property of grantee when necessary to ascertain the
grantee’s compliance with this chapter or the franchise agreement. Access to
the aforementioned records shall not be denied by the grantee on the basis that
said records contain “proprietary” information.
   (B)   If any of such maps or records are not kept in the town, or upon
reasonable request made available to the town, and if the town shall determine
that an examination of such records is necessary or appropriate, all reasonable
expenses necessarily incurred in making such examination shall be paid by
grantee.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.36 REPORTS REQUIRED.
   The grantee shall file with the town, upon reasonable request by the town,
unless otherwise noted:
   (A)   Regulatory communications. All reports required by the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC), including but not limited to annual proof of
performance tests and results, equal employment opportunity (EEO) reports, and
all petitions, applications, and communications of all types submitted by
grantee to the FCC, the Security and Exchange Commission (SEC), or any other
federal or state regulatory commission or agency, having jurisdiction over any
matter affecting operation of grantee’s system.
   (B)   Facilities report. An annual report setting forth the physical miles
of plant construction and plant in operation at the end of the fiscal year will
be made available at the local office of the grantee for review by the town.
   (C)   Rebuild/upgrade/construction reports. Such reports shall be sent to
the town 30 days after the initial franchise agreement is awarded and monthly
thereafter until construction is completed as specified in this chapter or the
franchise agreement.
   (D)   Proof of performance tests. Proof of performance test results
performed as required by the FCC shall be supplied to the town.
   (E)   Tests required by town. Tests required by town as specified in this
chapter shall be submitted within 30 days of notification.
   (F)   Grantee rules. The grantee’s schedule of charges, regular subscriber
service policy regarding the processing of subscriber complaints, delinquent
subscriber disconnect and reconnect procedures, and any other terms and
conditions adopted as the grantee’s policy in connection with its subscribers.
All such charges and policies shall be in accordance with applicable state and
federal laws, rules, or regulations.
   (G)   Proof of bonds and insurance. Grantee shall submit to the town the
required performance bond, or a certified copy thereof, and insurance
certificates as required under the terms and conditions described in this
chapter.
   (H)   Financial and ownership reports. The following financial reports for
the franchise area shall be submitted to the town, upon reasonable notice and
as required by the town:
      (1)   A statement verifying the amount of gross annual revenues derived
from the franchise, certified by the Vice President for Finance or a duly
authorized officer or manager of the grantee.
      (2)   An annual list of officers and members of the board of directors of
grantee and of grantee’s parent corporation, if applicable.
   (I)   Additional reports. The grantee shall prepare and furnish to the town
at the times and in the form prepared by grantee in the ordinary course of
business, such additional reports with respect to its operation, affairs,
transactions, or property as may be reasonably necessary and appropriate to
ascertain grantee’s compliance with this chapter or the franchise agreement.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.37 TECHNICAL STANDARDS.
   The technical standards used in the operation of a system shall comply, at a
minimum, with the technical standards promulgated by the FCC relating to cable
systems pursuant to the FCC’s rules and regulations found in Title 47, Sections
7117.11701 to 7117.11717, as may be amended or modified from time to time,
which regulations are expressly incorporated herein by reference. The results
of any tests required by the FCC, or a franchise agreement shall be made
available to the town within 30 days of written request.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.38 TEST AND COMPLIANCE PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Tests for a system shall be performed periodically in a manner so as
to conform with FCC specifications. The town shall notify the grantee of its
desire to witness such tests for a period of 90 days beyond the date of
request. Grantee shall notify the town at least three business days prior to
conducting such tests. Representatives of the town may witness the tests and
written test reports shall be made available to the town upon request. If any
test locations fail to meet such specifications, the grantee shall be required
to indicate what corrective measures have been or will be taken. Grantee shall
have the site retested on a timely basis as needed.
   (B)   Complaints. Whenever there have been similar complaints made or when
there exists other evidence, which, in the reasonable judgment of the town,
casts doubt on the reliability or quality of the grantee’s system, the town
shall have the right and authority to compel the grantee to test, analyze, and
report on the performance of its system. The town may require additional tests,
full or partial repeat tests, different test procedures, or tests involving a
specific subscriber’s terminal. Reports on such tests shall be delivered to the
town no later than 30 days after the town formally requests the tests and shall
include the following information: the nature of the complaints which
precipitated the special tests; what system component was tested; the equipment
used, and procedures employed in said testing; the results of such tests; and
methods by which said complaints were resolved. Said tests and analyses shall
be supervised by an engineer or other trained technical specialist who shall
sign all records of the special tests and forward same to the town with a
report interpreting the results of the tests and recommending what actions
should be taken by the town. All such tests conducted by grantee shall be at
the expense of the grantee.
   (C)   Consultants. The town shall have the right to employ or contract with
qualified consultants and attorneys if necessary or desirable, to assist in the
administration of this or any other section of this chapter or the franchise
agreement. If an independent qualified consultant makes a finding that
grantee’s test results differ (negatively) by more than 10% from the FCC
technical standard, the grantee shall reimburse the town for its reasonable
costs associated with the testing.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.39 EMERGENCY REQUIREMENTS.
   Each grantee must provide emergency alert override capabilities in a manner
consistent with the FCC’s emergency alert system (“EAS”) rules and consistent
with any state and/or regional emergency alert system plans adopted in response
to the FCC’s EAS rules that are applicable to the franchise area.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.40 PROGRAMMING DECISIONS.
   Each grantee shall provide programming from each of the broad programming
categories identified in its franchise agreement. All programming decisions
remain within the sole discretion of each grantee, provided that each grantee
complies with federal law regarding notice to grantor and subscribers prior to
any channel additions, deletions, or realignments, and further subject to the
grantee’s signal carriage obligations pursuant to 47 U.S.C. §§531—53117, as may
be amended, and subject to the town’s rights pursuant to 47 U.S.C. §545, as may
be amended. The grantee shall use its good faith efforts to ensure diversity of
programming.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.41 CABLE SYSTEM OFFICE HOURS AND TELEPHONE AVAILABILITY.
   Attached as Appendix A are the Federal Communication Commission (FCC)
customer service standards with which grantee must comply.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.42 PARENTAL CONTROL.
   Every grantee shall make available to any subscriber upon request a
“lockout” device for blocking both video and audio portions of any channel(s)
of programming entering the subscriber’s premises. Such device shall be
provided at a reasonable charge, except to the extent that federal law
specifically provides otherwise. The grantee may, however, require a reasonable
security deposit for the use of such a device. This section shall not apply to
channels that are on the basic or expanded basic tier of programming unless the
subscriber receives service via a programmable terminal device, such as a
converter.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.43 INSTALLATIONS EXCEEDING STANDARD INSTALLATION.
   Service drops in excess of 150 feet and concealed wiring in the home shall
be charged to the subscriber based upon time and material. The desire of the
subscriber as to the point of entry into the residence shall be observed
whenever possible. Runs in building interiors shall be as unobtrusive as
possible. The grantee shall use due care in the process of installation and
shall repair any damage to the subscriber’s property caused by said
installation. Such restoration shall be undertaken within no more than ten days
after the damage is incurred and shall be completed as soon as possible
thereafter.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.44 SERVICE AREA AND LINE EXTENSION POLICY.
   (A)   No grantee may discriminate in the build-out of its system to a
particular area of the town in providing service to an individual or groups of
residents on the basis of race, creed, religion, or economic condition. Unless
the franchise agreement provides otherwise, every grantee shall serve all areas
of the town equally. Unless the franchise agreement provides otherwise, every
grantee shall extend service to commercial areas at no additional cost.
   (B)   During the initial construction phase of a new system, a grantee may
implement its system in stages pursuant to a schedule and line extension policy
established in its franchise agreement that serves all areas of the town
equally, provided that any deviation from the service and line extension
requirements of this chapter do not discriminate between different areas of the
town on the basis of race, creed, religion, or economic condition. A grantee of
any such new franchise shall comply with all customer service obligations with
respect to customers whose premises are passed by portions of the grantee’s
network that are fully activated, tested, and available for service.
   (C)   Cost-sharing. In newly annexed areas with less than 20 homes per
proposed cable mile, grantee shall offer a cost- sharing arrangement to
residents. Grantee shall bear its pro rata share of the current construction
costs based upon the actual number of homes per mile. The cost-sharing
arrangement shall consist of the following: on the request of a resident
desiring service, grantee shall prepare, at its cost, an engineering survey and
cost analysis to determine the cost of the plant extension required to provide
service to the resident from the closest usable point on the cable system. The
cost of construction shall be allocated based on the following formula: if a
request for extension into a residential area requires the construction of
cable plant which does not pass at least 20 homes per cable mile, a
proportionate share of construction costs shall be borne by grantee and by the
subscribers. For example, if there are ten dwelling units per mile, grantee’s
share will equal 10/20ths of the construction cost. The remaining cost will be
shared equally by each subscriber in the area to be constructed. The line
extension formula shall also be applied to a portion of a cable mile meeting
proportionate density requirements. For example, if there are ten dwelling
units per one-half mile, the grantee shall construct the plant. The cost
sharing described above would be utilized if there were less than the
proportionate share of dwelling units per the portion of a mile needed to reach
the dwelling units. Should additional subscribers request cable service,
subscribers utilizing the cost-sharing plan for extension shall be reimbursed
pro rata for their contribution or a proportional share thereof. In such case,
the pro rata shares shall be recalculated and each new subscriber shall pay the
new pro rata share, and all prior subscribers shall receive refunds. In any
event, at the end of 24 months from completion of the project, the subscribers
are no longer eligible for refunds, and the amounts paid by subscribers will be
credited to the plant account of the grantee. The average cost of the line
extension shall be recalculated annually based upon the current costs of labor
and material. Each subscriber contributing toward the direct cost of the line
extension shall waive all ownership interest in the line extension. All
equipment and components of the line extension, including but not limited to
cable wire, electronics, and pedestals, shall at all times remain the exclusive
property of the grantee.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.45 TOWN MONITORING.
   In addition to free cable service required by the chapter, grantee shall
provide one service feed to Town Hall (unless otherwise specified by town) that
shall receive without charge all basic and expanded basic cable programming
provided by grantee. Such service shall be provided in such a manner that the
town may monitor the programming and use of the cable system for compliance
with the franchise agreement and this chapter. The service provided pursuant to
this requirement shall be in a secure office location, and not in a location
open to public viewing.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.46 ACCESS TO INSIDE WIRING.
   Access to, and ownership of, inside wiring shall be in accordance with
Section 7117.800 et. seq. of the FCC rules and regulations as the same may be
amended from time to time.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
ARTICLE III: CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
§ 117.47 RIGHT-OF-WAY CONSTRUCTION.
   Prior to commencing any construction in the town, a grantee must obtain all
necessary permits and licenses required by federal, state, and generally
applicable town laws, ordinances, and rules and pay all associated non-
discriminatory fees. Further, a grantee shall comply with all applicable laws,
ordinances, rules, and standards relating to the construction, operation, and
maintenance of a cable system.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.48 COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS.
   The construction, installation, and maintenance of the cable system shall be
effectuated by grantee in a manner that is consistent with the laws,
ordinances, and construction standards of the state, the Occupational Safety
and Health Administration, the National Electrical Safety Code, National
Electrical Code, and the FCC to the extent applicable, as well as all other
laws, rules, regulations, and ordinances that are generally applicable and
promulgated pursuant to the town’s lawful police power. All open connections on
splitters, couplers, and other devices shall be properly terminated.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.49 MINIMUM INTERFERENCE.
   All of grantee’s construction, installation, operation, repair, and
maintenance and the arrangement of its lines, cables, and other appurtenances
on public or private property shall be conducted in such a manner as to not
unreasonably interfere with the rights and reasonable convenience of property
owners that may be affected. In the event such work is not in accordance with
applicable rules and regulations, the town may require the removal, within such
period of time after notice as is reasonable under the circumstances, of
grantee’s lines, cables, and appurtenances from the rights-of-way in question,
at the sole expense of the grantee.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.50 REPAIR OF PROPERTY.
   Grantee shall promptly repair and restore any town or private property that
may be damaged as a result of the construction, installation, operation,
repair, maintenance, or removal of the cable system. Any such property damaged
or destroyed shall be promptly repaired and restored by grantee, at grantee’s
sole cost and expense, to the reasonable satisfaction of the town to its
condition prior to being damaged or shall be replaced by grantee with
equivalent property. The town may inspect and approve the condition of the
right-of- ways and cables, wires, attachments, and poles after restoration. The
liability, indemnity, insurance, and performance bond as provided herein shall
continue in full force and effect during the period of any removal and until
the grantee has fully complied with the terms and conditions of this chapter
and the franchise agreement. In the event of a failure by the grantee to
complete any restoration work required by the town within the time as may be
established by the town and to the reasonable satisfaction of the town, the
town may, following reasonable notice to the grantee, cause such work to be
done, and the grantee shall reimburse the town the cost thereof within 30 days
after receipt of an itemized list of such costs, or the town may at its option
recover such costs through the performance bond provided by grantee. The town
shall be permitted to seek legal and equitable relief to enforce the provisions
of this section.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.51 ERECTION OF POLES.
   Grantee shall not erect any pole on or along any rights-of-way in an
existing aerial utility system without the advance written approval of the
town. If additional poles in an existing aerial route are required, grantee
shall negotiate, as needed, with the owners thereof for the installation of the
needed poles. Grantee shall negotiate the lease of pole space and facilities
from the existing pole owners for all aerial construction, under mutually
acceptable terms and conditions.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.52 RESERVATIONS OF STREET RIGHTS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the town from
constructing storm or sanitary sewers, grading, paving, repairing, or altering
any rights-of-way, or laying down, repairing, or removing water mains, traffic
signal control systems, town fiber plant, or constructing or establishing any
public utility, service, or other public work that the town may operate or
undertake now or in the future. All such work shall be done, insofar as
practicable, in such manner as not to obstruct, injure, or prevent the free use
and operation of poles, wires, conduits, conductors, pipes, or appurtenances of
grantee. If town in its reasonable judgment shall determine that grantee’s
facilities interfere with the construction, location, or repair of any rights-
of-way or public improvement, then all such facilities of grantee shall be
removed or replaced, or temporarily disconnected, in such manner as shall be
directed by the town so that the same shall not interfere with the public works
of the town. Such removal or replacement shall be at the expense of grantee,
provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall preclude grantee from
seeking reimbursement for removal or replacement costs from any public funds
generally available to rights-of-way users for the reimbursement of such costs.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.53 UNDERGROUND INSTALLATION.
   In those areas within the town where cable television, telephone, or
electrical facilities are currently placed underground, all cable system
facilities shall remain or be placed underground. In areas where either
telephone or electric utility facilities are above ground at the time of
installation, grantee may install its cable system facilities above ground,
provided that at such time as both electric and telephone utility facilities
are placed underground, grantee shall likewise place its cable system
facilities underground without cost to the town. Nothing contained in this
section shall require a grantee to construct, operate, and maintain underground
any ground-mounted appurtenances, except that grantee shall take steps to
minimize the number and visual impact of such facilities. If the grantor
reimburses any utility for such relocation, grantee shall be similarly
reimbursed. This section shall not prevent the town or any of its agencies or
joint agencies from requiring the installation or relocation of cable services
facilities underground pursuant to a separate ordinance or regulation or
requirement imposed in accordance with the exercise of the general police power
or regulatory function of such agency or joint agency.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.54 CONDUIT.
   (A)   The town shall not be responsible for any cuts or damage to buried or
underground facilities of a grantee that are not clearly marked or cannot be
located through the state “one-call” service.
   (B)   Grantee shall provide strand and trench maps without detailed
measurement, calculations in a format mutually agreeable to both the town and
grantee. Such information shall be subject to and not restrict any other town
ordinances. Town agrees to treat the maps as proprietary information to the
extent provided under law, or as may be indicated in town ordinances.
   (C)   Grantee shall provide a contact number for the town to call in
emergency situations requiring an immediate response on the part of the town.
If the grantee does not properly and effectively identify the precise location
of its facilities within a reasonable period of time, taking into account the
circumstance of an emergency call from the town, the town shall not be
responsible for damage to the grantee’s facilities.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.55 CLEARING POLES AND CABLES.
   Grantee shall have the right to remove, trim, and cut and to keep clear of
its poles, cables, underground conduits, and related equipment the trees in and
along the rights-of-way, but, in the exercise of such right, grantee shall not
cut such trees to any greater extent than is reasonably necessary for the
construction, erection, installation, maintenance, and use of cable system
equipment. Except in emergency situations, grantee shall not remove, trim, or
cut such trees from any rights-of-way without first providing reasonable
written notice to the town of its intention to do so, such notice to be
delivered not less than ten days in advance. No clearing may go forward without
written approval from town. Town agrees to use its best efforts to provide such
written approval no later than 48 hours in advance of the scheduled clearing.
Town may, at its discretion, have town staff observe the scheduled clearing.
Such personnel are authorized to stop all clearing activities if it appears to
such staff that the clearing exceeds the authority granted by town or for other
good and sufficient reasons. The grantee shall compensate the town or any
private owners of such trees for any damage proximately caused by grantee’s
negligent conduct.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.56 MOVING FACILITIES.
   Grantee, on the request of the town, or any person holding a building permit
issued by the town, or any permit issued by an appropriate state agency, shall
temporarily move its wires, cables, poles, or other cable system facilities to
permit the moving of large objects, vehicles, buildings, or other structures.
The expense of such temporary moves shall be paid to grantee by the person
requesting the same, and grantee shall have the authority to require such
payment in advance. Grantee shall be given not less than 30 days advance notice
to arrange for such temporary moves.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.57 WORK PERFORMED BY OTHERS.
   To the extent applicable, all provisions of this chapter shall apply to any
subcontractors or others performing any work or services pursuant to the
provisions of a franchise agreement on behalf of a grantee.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.58 DUTY TO GRANTEE.
   Nothing contained in this chapter shall relieve any person from liability
arising out of the failure to exercise reasonable care to avoid injuring
grantee’s facilities while performing any work connected with grading,
regrading, or changing the line of any rights-of-way or with the construction
or reconstruction of any sewer or water system or utility system.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.59 SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION CAPABILITIES AND SCHEDULE.
   (A)   The cable system shall generally conform to the system design and
channel capacity specifications set forth by the grantee in its application for
a franchise submitted to the town. The grantee is permitted to modify its
design and implementation plan, pursuant to the conditions provided herein, to
accommodate technological innovations and refinements, which enhance system
reliability and capacity.
   (B)   The initial construction required under initial franchise agreement
shall be completed in compliance with a schedule specified therein. If the
grantee shows, notwithstanding its due diligence, that it has been unable to
extend service to a specified area because the acts or omissions of a third
party (excluding the grantee’s subcontractors or agents) or that other factors
have caused a delay in construction beyond that reasonably expected during the
course of construction, and the grantee proposes a reasonable alternative
deadline for extension of service to that area, the town shall grant reasonable
extensions of time to complete construction.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
ARTICLE IV: GENERAL FINANCIAL ANDINSURANCEPROVISIONS
§ 117.60 FRANCHISE FEE.
   (A)   The administration of this chapter or the franchise agreement imposes
upon the town additional regulatory responsibility and expense, and in
consideration of permission to use the rights-of-way of the town for the
construction, operation, and maintenance of a cable system within the town, a
grantee of any franchise hereunder shall pay to the town a franchise fee in an
amount as designated in the franchise agreement, up to the maximum amount
allowed by applicable law. To the extent that applicable law changes the
maximum authorized franchise fee, the town reserves the right to change the
franchise fee as stated in the franchise agreement, by adopting an ordinance
establishing the new franchise fee rate and allowing reasonable notice to the
grantee for administration of the change. The town shall hold a public hearing
prior to adopting any change in the franchise fee.
   (B)   Payments due grantor under this section shall be computed quarterly,
for the preceding quarter. Each quarterly payment shall be due and payable no
later than 30 days after the end of the preceding quarter. Each payment shall
be accompanied by a brief report by a grantee showing the basis for the
computation and a “franchise fee worksheet” listing all of the sources of
revenues attributable to the operation of grantee’s system in the town. All
such payments shall be certified as correct by an officer of the grantee.
   (C)   No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as an accord that the
amount paid is in fact the correct amount, nor shall such acceptance of payment
be construed as a release of any claim grantor may have for further sums
payable under the provisions of this chapter or a franchise agreement. All
amounts paid shall be subject to audit and re-computation by grantor or its
designee at any time during any calendar year (but not more than once per
calendar year) upon 20 calendar day’s notice, which shall include a request for
any documents sought to be reviewed. Audits shall be at the expense of the
grantee if the additional amount due is greater than 10% of the amount paid.
Any additional amount due to the town as a result of the audit shall be paid
within 60 days following written notice to the grantee by the town which notice
shall include a copy of the audit report. Grantor’s right to audit and
grantee’s obligation to retain records related to the franchise fee audit shall
expire three years from the date on which the most recent franchise fee payment
by the grantee was due from the time of written notice of request of audit.
   (D)   In the event that any franchise payment or recomputed amount is not
made on or before the dates specified herein, grantee shall pay as additional
compensation an interest charge, computed from such due date, at the annual
rate equal to the commercial prime interest rate of the town’s primary
depository bank during the period that such unpaid amount is owed.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.61 PERFORMANCE BOND.
   Each grantee shall maintain a performance bond with the town to ensure
compliance with this chapter and the applicable franchise agreement, in an
amount and in a manner as set forth in the grantee’s franchise agreement.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.62 PENALTIES PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Whenever grantor has reason to believe that a grantee has violated any
material provision of a franchise agreement or this chapter, grantor shall
first notify the grantee of the material violation and demand correction within
a reasonable time, which shall not be less than 20 days in the case of the
failure of a grantee to pay any sum or other amount due the grantor under a
franchise agreement, and 30 days in all other cases. If a grantee fails to
correct the violation within the time prescribed, or if a grantee is unable to
correct the violation and fails to commence corrective action within the time
prescribed and to diligently remedy such violation thereafter, the grantee
shall then be given written notice of not less than 20 days for public comment.
Said notice shall indicate with reasonable specificity the violation alleged to
have occurred.
   (B)   At the public hearing, the Board shall hear and consider all relevant
evidence and thereafter render findings and a decision based upon the evidence.
Any such hearing must, at a minimum, provide the grantee a full and fair
opportunity to be heard by the Board.
   (C)   In the event the Board finds that a grantee has corrected the
violation or promptly commenced correction of such violation after notice
thereof from grantor and is diligently proceeding to fully remedy the violation
or that no violation has occurred, the proceedings shall terminate and no
penalty or other sanction shall be imposed.
   (D)   In the event the Board finds that a violation exists and that a
grantee has not corrected the same in a satisfactory manner or did not promptly
commence and diligently proceed to correct the violation, the Board may impose
liquidated damages to be collected from the security fund, as set out in the
franchise agreement.
   (E)   If the Board elects to assess liquidated damages, then such election
shall constitute grantor’s exclusive remedy for a period of 60 days.
Thereafter, if a grantee remains in non-compliance, the grantor may pursue any
other available remedy.
   (F)   In the event that a franchise is cancelled or terminated by reason of
the default of a grantee, the security fund deposited pursuant to a franchise
agreement shall remain in effect and be available to the grantor until all
pending claims or penalties are resolved or settled, after which point any
remaining amounts in the security fund shall revert to the grantee.
   (G)   The rights reserved to grantor with respect to the security fund are
in addition to all other rights of grantor, whether reserved by a franchise
agreement, this chapter, or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding, or
exercise of a right with respect to such security fund shall affect any other
right grantor may have.
   (H)   In instances of repeated violations, whether remedied or not, the
grantor shall serve special notice outlining additional remediation
requirements. Failure to cure, as measured by repeated instances of the same
violation, is evidence of an evasive practice and may lead to revocation under
§117.64.
   (I)   Grantee acknowledges that non- compliance with the provisions of the
franchise agreement and this chapter will harm subscribers and the town and
that the amounts of actual damages will be difficult or impossible to
ascertain. The town may therefore assess the following liquidated damages
against grantee for unexcused non- compliance with the requirements of the
franchise agreement and this chapter.
   Grantee acknowledges that the liquidated damages set forth below are a
reasonable approximation of actual damages and that this provision is intended
to provide compensation and is not a penalty. All damages provided shall be
cumulative, unless expressly stated.
      (1)   For failure to materially complete construction or extend service
in accordance with the chapter and the franchise agreement: $250 per calendar
day for each day the violation continues;
      (2)   For failure to materially comply with requirements for public
access channels: $250 per calendar day for each day the violation continues;
      (3)   For failure to pay franchise fees in accordance with this chapter/
franchise agreement: $100 per calendar day for each day the violation
continues, plus interest computed on the unpaid amount computed at the current
bank rate of interest.;
      (4)   For repeated, willful, or continuing failure to submit reports,
maintain records, or provide documents or information: $50 per calendar day for
each day the violation continues;
      (5)   For failure to comply with the material requirements of the
customer service standards: $50 per calendar quarter the violation continues;
      (6)   For failure to comply with the transfer provisions: $250 per
calendar day for each day the violation continues;
      (7)   For violation of other material provisions of the chapter and the
franchise agreement: $50 per calendar day for each day the violation continues.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.63 BONDS, INDEMNIFICATION, AND INSURANCE.
   Each grantee shall maintain bonds and insurance with the town in amounts and
in a manner as set forth in the grantee’s franchise agreement. Each grantee
also shall be required to indemnify the town in a manner as set forth in the
grantee’s franchise agreement.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.64 GROUNDS FOR REVOCATION.
   Grantor reserves the right to revoke the franchise, and all rights and
privileges pertaining thereto, in the event that:
   (A)   A grantee substantially violates any material provision of this
chapter or a franchise agreement;
   (B)   A grantee attempts to evade any of the material provisions of this
chapter or a franchise agreement;
   (C)   A grantee practices an act of fraud or deceit upon the grantor;
   (D)   A grantee becomes insolvent, unable, or unwilling to pay its debts or
is adjudged bankrupt;
   (E)   A grantee fails to provide or maintain in full force and effect the
liability and indemnification coverage or the performance bond as required
pursuant to its franchise; or
   (F)   A grantee violates any orders or rulings of any regulatory body having
jurisdiction over the grantee relative to this chapter or the franchise and,
after notice thereof, shall continue the violation and not remedy the same
within 60 days.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.65 PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Whenever grantor has reason to believe that there may be grounds for
revocation of a franchise, grantor shall first notify the grantee in writing of
its basis for believing grounds for revocation exist. Such notice shall
indicate with reasonable specificity the grounds for revocation that are
believed to exist so that the grantee may have a reasonable opportunity to cure
or otherwise address the same. If a grantee fails to adequately cure or address
the purported grounds for revocation within 30 days of such notice, then the
grantor may, upon 30 days written notice to the grantee, commence a public
administrative hearing to determine whether there exists any ground for
revocation.
   (B)   The administrative hearing shall be conducted so as to protect the
full due process rights of the parties and provide for, at a minimum, the right
to have counsel, the right to call and cross examine witnesses, and the right
to a full transcript of the proceedings.
   (C)   After the close of the hearing, grantor or the designated hearing
officer shall issue a written decision based on the record of the proceedings,
stating with specificity the findings and reasons supporting the decision.
   (D)   Upon revocation, a grantee shall have a period of 120 days subsequent
to the date of the formal adoption of a revocation of the franchise by the town
within which to file an appeal with a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (E)   During the appeal period, the franchise shall remain in full force and
effect.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.66 FORECLOSURE.
   Upon the foreclosure or other judicial sale of all or a part of a system, a
grantee shall notify grantor of such fact, and such notification shall be
treated as a notification that a change in control of the grantee has taken
place, and the provisions of this chapter governing the consent to transfer or
change in ownership shall apply without regard to how such transfer or change
in ownership occurred.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.67 RECEIVERSHIP.
   Apart from and supplemental to the right to revoke a franchise, grantor
shall have the right to cancel a franchise agreement 120 days after the
appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over and conduct the business of a
grantee, whether in receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy, or other action
or proceeding, unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated
prior to the expiration of said 120 days, or unless:
   (A)   Within 120 days after its election or appointment, the receiver or
trustee has fully complied with all the provisions of grantee’s franchise
agreement and this chapter and remedied all defaults thereunder; and
   (B)   Such receiver or trustee, within said 120 days, has executed an
agreement, duly approved by a court having jurisdiction, whereby such receiver
or trustee assumes and agrees to be bound by each and every provision of this
chapter and the applicable franchise agreement.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.68 PURCHASE BY GRANTOR UPON TERMINATION OR REVOCATION OF FRANCHISE.
   The grantor may, in accordance with and to the extent permitted by 47 U.S.C.
§547, upon the payment of a fair valuation, purchase, condemn, acquire, take
over, and hold the property and plant of a grantee, in whole or in part, on the
following conditions:
   (A)   Upon revocation of a franchise, a fair valuation shall be an equitable
value that shall not include any sum attributable to the value of the franchise
itself, and plant and property shall be valued according to its book value at
the time of revocation, or the system’s initial cost less depreciation and
salvage.
   (B)   At the expiration of a franchise agreement and following a denial of
renewal of the franchise agreement, a fair valuation shall be the fair market
value of the plant and property, exclusive of the value attributed to the
franchise itself.
   (C)   In the event grantor shall acquire a franchise pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter or a franchise agreement, and commenced operation of
the system, grantor shall reimburse the grantee for the fair market value of
the system.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
§ 117.69 SALE OR TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE.
   (A)   No grantee shall sell, transfer, lease, assign, sublet, or dispose of,
in whole or in part; an interest in or control of a franchise or cable system
or any of the rights or privileges granted by a franchise agreement, without
the prior consent of the grantor, which consent shall not be unreasonably
denied or delayed and may be denied only upon a good faith finding by the
grantor that the proposed transferee lacks the legal, technical, or financial
qualifications to consummate the transaction and operate the system so as to
perform its obligations under this chapter and the applicable franchise
agreement. This section shall not apply to sales of property or equipment in
the normal course of business. Consent from the grantor shall not be required
for a transfer in trust, mortgage, or other instrument of hypothecation, in
whole or in part, to secure indebtedness, or for a transfer to a person
controlling, controlled by, or under common control with a grantee.
   (B)   The following additional events shall be deemed to be a sale,
assignment, or other transfer of an interest in or control of a grantee or its
franchise or cable system requiring compliance with this section: (i) the sale,
assignment, or other transfer of all or a majority of a grantee’s assets; (ii)
the sale, assignment, or other transfer of capital stock or partnership,
membership, or other equity interests in a grantee by one or more of its
existing shareholders, partners, members, or other equity owners so as to
create a new controlling interest in a grantee; (iii) the issuance of
additional capital stock or partnership, membership or other equity interest by
a grantee so as to create a new controlling interest in a grantee; and (iv) a
grantee’s agreement to transfer management or operation of the grantee or the
system. The term “controlling interest” as used herein is not limited to major
stockholders but includes actual working control in whatever manner exercised.
   (C)   In the case of any sale or transfer of ownership of an interest in or
control of a grantee or its franchise or cable system, the town shall have 120
days to act upon any request for approval of such sale or transfer that
contains or is accompanied by such information as is required in accordance
with FCC regulations and the requirements of this chapter and the applicable
franchise agreement, including information related to the legal, technical, and
financial qualifications, and the proposed transferee’s ability to operate the
system in accord with this chapter and the franchise agreement. Failure to
provide all information reasonably requested by the town as part of its review
may be grounds for a denial of the proposed transfer. If the town fails to
render a final decision on the request within 120 days after receipt by the
town of all required information, such request shall be deemed granted unless
the grantee and the town agree to an extension of the 120-day period.
   (D)   The consent or approval of the town to any transfer of the grantee
shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the town in and to
the rights-of-way, and any transfer shall, by its terms, be expressly subject
to the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise agreement.
   (E)   In the absence of extraordinary circumstances, the town will not
approve any transfer or assignment of the franchise prior to completion of
construction of the proposed initial system.
   (F)   Any approval by the town of a transfer shall be contingent upon the
prospective new grantee becoming a signatory to the franchise agreement.
(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)
APPENDIX: CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS
   A.   Grantee will at all times comply with the town’s customer service
standards in addition to compliance with the FCC standards (Title 47 C.F.R.
Part 76.309 (Cable Television Service), Subpart H (General Operating
Requirements) as amended.
   B.   The town’s customer service standards are:
      (a)   The customer service standards as set forth below are the standards
set for all affected cable operators. This provision is the town’s notice of
its intent to enforce the standards.
      (b)   Effective with adoption of this chapter, a cable operator shall be
subject to the following customer service standards:
         (1)   Cable system office hours and telephone availability.
            (A)   The cable operator will maintain a local, toll-free or
collect call telephone access line which will be available to its subscribers
24 hours a day, seven days a week.
               (i)   Trained representatives will be available to respond to
customer telephone inquiries during normal business hours.
               (ii)   After normal business hours, the access line may be
answered by a service or an automated response system, including an answering
machine. Inquiries received after normal business hours must be responded to by
a trained representative on the next business day.
            (B)   Under normal operating conditions, telephone answer time by a
trained representative, including wait time, shall not exceed 30 seconds when
the connection is made. If the call needs to be transferred, transfer time
shall not exceed 30 seconds. These standards shall be met no less than 90% of
the time under normal operating conditions, measured on a quarterly basis.
            (C)   The cable operator will not be required to acquire equipment
or perform surveys to measure compliance with the telephone answering standards
above, unless an historical record of complaints indicates a clear failure to
comply.
            (D)   Under normal operating conditions, the customer will receive
a busy signal less than 3% of the time.
            (E)   Customer service center and bill payment locations will be
open at least during normal business hours and will be conveniently located.
         (2)   Installations, outages, and service calls. Under normal
operating conditions, each of the following four standards will be met no less
than 95% of the time measured on a quarterly basis:
            (A)   Standard installations will be performed within seven
business days after an order has been placed.
            (B)   Excluding conditions beyond the control of the cable
operator, the cable operator will begin working on “service interruptions”
promptly and in no event later than 24 hours after the interruption becomes
known. The cable operator must begin actions to correct other service problems
the next business day after notification f the service problem.
            (C)   The “appointment window” alternatives for installations,
service calls, and other installation activities will be either a specific time
or, at maximum, a four-hour time block during normal business hours. (The cable
operator may schedule service calls and other installation activities outside
of normal business hours for the express convenience of the customer.)
            (D)   A cable operator may not cancel an appointment with a
customer after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled
appointment.
            (E)   If a cable operator representative is running late for an
appointment with a customer and will not be able to keep the appointment as
scheduled, the customer will be contacted. The appointment will be rescheduled,
as necessary, at a time that is convenient for the customer.
         (3)   Communications between cable operators and cable subscribers.
            (A)   Notifications to subscribers.
               1.   The cable operator shall provide written information on
each of the following areas at the time of installation of service, at least
annually to all subscribers, and at any time upon request:
                  (i)   Products and services offered;
                  (ii)   Prices and options for programming services and
conditions of subscription to programming and other services;
                  (iii)   Installation and service maintenance policies;
                  (iv)   Instruction on how to use the cable service;
                  (v)   Channel positions of programming carried on the system;
and
                  (vi)   Billing and complaint procedures, including the
address and telephone number of the local franchise authority’s cable office.
               2.   Customers will be notified of any changes in rates,
programming service, or channel positions as soon as possible in writing.
Notice must be given to subscribers a minimum of 30 days in advance of such
changes if the change is within the control of the cable operator. In addition,
the cable operator shall notify subscribers 30 days in advance of any
significant changes in the other information required by paragraph (c)(3)(i)
(a). Notwithstanding any other provision of Part 76, a cable operator shall not
be required to provide prior notice of any rate change that is the result of a
regulatory fee, franchise fee, or any other fee, tax, assessment, or charge of
any kind imposed by any federal agency, state, or franchising authority on the
transaction between the operator and the subscriber.
            (B)   Billing.
               1.   Bills will be clear, concise, and understandable. Bills
must be fully itemized, with itemizations, including but not limited to basic
and premium service charges and equipment charges. Bills will also clearly
delineate all activity during the billing period, including optional charges,
rebates, and credits.
               2.   In case of a billing dispute, the cable operator must
respond to a written complaint from a subscriber within 30 days.
            (C)   Refunds. Refund checks will be issued promptly, but no later
than either:
               1.   The customer’s next billing cycle following resolution of
the request or 30 days, whichever is earlier; or
               2.   The return of the equipment supplied by the cable operator
if service is terminated.
            (D)   Credits. Credits for service will be issued no later than the
customer’s next billing cycle following the determination that a credit is
warranted.
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
Chapter
   
130.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY
   
131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
   
132.   OFFENSES AGAINST MORALS
CHAPTER 130: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY
Section
   
130.01   Aircraft operations
   
130.02   Discharge of firearms
   
130.03   Consumption and possession of malt beverages, unfortified wine and
alcoholic beverages
   
130.04   Disorderly houses
   
130.05   Exterior lighting
   
130.06   Posting of signs prohibiting carrying of concealed handguns on
municipal property
   
130.07   Hours of certain alcohol sales
 
   
130.99   Penalty
§ 130.01 AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS.
   (A)   No airplane, helicopter, dirigible, balloon, or similar vehicle
propelled through the air shall fly at a height of less than 500 feet above the
town, except for official government operations and activities directly
associated with public safety activities (example: aerial searches,
reconnaissance and damage assessment).
   (B)   Except for official government operations and flight activities
directly associated with public safety, no aircraft (airplane, helicopter,
dirigible, balloon, or similar vehicle) shall be permitted to operate from
public property within the town (exception will be the necessity to land an
aircraft as a last resort due to the occurrence of an in-flight emergency).
   (C)   Agencies planning to operate aircraft from town property shall contact
the Wrightsville Beach Police Department at least 24 hours in advance of
anticipated activities. Requesting agencies shall provide the Wrightsville
Beach Police Department with information pertaining to the reason for
operations, intended landing site, type of aircraft, planned time and date of
operation, and approximate duration of the activity.
   (D)   Upon notification of the intent to conduct aircraft operations from
municipal property, the Wrightsville Beach Police Department will advise the
Town Manager or his/her designated representative.
   (E)   Authority to waive the restrictions set forth in this section lies
exclusively with the Board of Aldermen.
(Ord. 1525, passed 10-26-06)
§ 130.02 DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS.
   (A) It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any kind of firearm
whatsoever within the city limits of the town. For the purpose of this section,
firearms shall include those guns known as "BB guns" and guns fired by the use
of compressed air. ('72 Code, § 14-2) (Ord., passed 5-26-83)
   (B) Any person who shall knowingly and willfully permit his minor child
under 18 years to discharge, fire, shoot, or operate, within the corporate
limits of the town any air rifle, BB gun, or pellet gun, shall be guilty of a
punishable violation.
Penalty, see § 130.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate firearms
      and pellet guns, see G.S. § 160A-189, 190
§ 130.03 CONSUMPTION AND POSSESSION OF MALT BEVERAGES, UNFORTIFIED WINE AND
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
     (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
   "ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE." Any beverage containing at least 0.5 alcohol by
volume, including malt beverages, unfortified wine, fortified wine, spirituous
liquor and mixed beverages. (G.S. 18B-101(4))
   "MALT BEVERAGES." Beer, lager, malt liquor, ale, porter and any other brewed
or fermented beverage containing at least 0.5% and not more than 6% alcohol by
volume. (G.S. 18B-101(9))
   "OPEN CONTAINER." A container for the transportation of any malt beverage or
unfortified wine other than the original manufacturer's container or a
container of malt beverage or unfortified wine on which the manufacturer's seal
has been broker.
   "PEDESTRIAN." A person traveling on or present in any public street, right-
of-way, alley, facility or other property owned or occupied by the town by
means other than in a motor vehicle as defined in G.S. Ch. 20.
   "PERSON." An individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
commercial establishment, other organization or group or other combination of
individuals acting as a unit.
   "UNFORTIFIED WINE." Wine that has an alcoholic content produced only by
natural fermentation or by the addition of pure cane, beer or dextrose sugar,
and that has an alcoholic content of not more than 17% alcohol by volume. (G.S.
18B-101(15))
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for:
      (1)   Any person to consume a malt beverage or unfortified wine on any
public street, road, highway, sidewalk, right-of-way, alley, facility or other
property owned or occupied by the town;
      (2)   Any pedestrian on any public street, road, highway, sidewalk,
right-of-way, alley, facility or other property owned or occupied by the town
to possess in an open container any malt beverage or unfortified wine;
      (3)   Any person to possess a malt beverage or unfortified wine on any
public street, road, highway, sidewalk, alley, parking lot or right-of-way
which is temporarily closed to regular traffic for special events.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverages
on any property or premises owned or occupied by the town.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to aid, abet, command, counsel,
induce or procure another to violate this section or in any manner to
facilitate a violation of this section.
   (E)   All premises licenses for the sale of any alcoholic beverages shall
post a conspicuous notice at each exit stating as follows: "NO ALCOHOLIC
BEVERAGE MAY BE CARRIED IN AN OPEN CONTAINER OUT OF THESE PREMISES."
(Ord. 1259, passed 9-21-95)
§ 130.04 DISORDERLY HOUSES.
   No occupant of any house, whether residence or business, shall permit the
same to be kept in an indecent, offensive, or disorderly manner or shall permit
loafers or idle persons to congregate therein or in front to the annoyance of
persons passing by or living in the vicinity.
('72 Code, § 14-4)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.05 EXTERIOR LIGHTING.
   No exterior electric, gas, neon, or other illuminated advertising sign,
whether by reflection or otherwise, shall remain burning between the hours of
1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
('72 Code, § 14-5)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.06 POSTING OF SIGNS PROHIBITING CARRYING OF CONCEALED HANDGUNS ON
MUNICIPAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   The Town Manager is hereby authorized and instructed to post
conspicuous signage at appropriate locations on or within each park and each
building or portion of a building owned, leased as lessee, operated, occupied,
managed or controlled by the town, as well as the appurtenant premises to such
buildings, indicating that carrying a concealed handgun is prohibited therein.
   (B)   Signs on buildings shall be visibly posted on the exterior of each
entrance by which the general public can access the building. The Town Manager
shall exercise discretion in determining the number and appropriate location of
signs to be placed on or within appurtenant premises and parks.
   (C)   The prohibition on carrying concealed handguns effectuated by the
signage as described in divisions (A) and (B) of this section shall not apply
to the following persons:
      (1)   Officers and enlisted personnel of the armed forces of the United
States when in discharge of their official duties as such and acting under
orders requiring them to carry arms and weapons;
      (2)   Civil officers of the United States while in the discharge of their
official duties;
      (3)   Officers and soldiers of the militia and the national guard when
called into actual service;
      (4)   Officers of the state, or of any country, city or town, charged
with the execution of the laws of the state when acting in the discharge of
their official duties; and
      (5)   Sworn law-enforcement officers, when off-duty, if so authorized in
accordance with G.S. 14-269.
   (D)   Any handgun possessed in violation of the signage described in
divisions (A) and (B) of this section is hereby declared to be contraband. The
Chief of Police or his designee shall seize and hold such handgun for disposal
pursuant to law.
(Ord. 1266, passed 12-11-96)
§ 130.07 HOURS OF CERTAIN ALCOHOL SALES.
   In accordance with the provisions of G.S. § 160A-205.3 the sale of malt
beverages, unfortified wine, fortified wine, and mixed beverages is permitted
beginning at 10:00 a.m. on Sunday pursuant to a licensed premises' permit
issued under the provisions of G.S. § 18B-1001.
(Ord. 1768, passed 7-10-17)
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating the provisions of §
130.03 shall be subject to a civil penalty in the amount of $100 to be
recovered by the town in a civil action in the nature of debt if the offender
does not pay the penalty within 15 days after having been cited for violation
of the ordinance. In accordance with G.S. § 160A-175(b), a violation of the
section enumerated herein shall not be subject to the penalty provisions of
G.S. § 14-4 and shall not be considered a breach of the penal laws of the
state.
   (B)   A violation of any remaining section of this chapter is a misdemeanor
punishable in accordance with the provisions of G.S. § 14-4. The fine for such
violation shall not exceed $500.
   (C)   A violation of any remaining section of this chapter shall subject the
offender to a civil penalty of $100. If any person fails to pay a civil penalty
within 15 days after being cited for a violation, the town may seek to recover
the penalty in a civil action in the nature of debt.
   (D)   The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by an appropriate
equitable remedy issuing from a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (E)   Each day’s continuing violation of any provisions of this chapter
shall be a separate and distinct offense.
   (F)   Any person issued a civil citation under the provisions of this
section may appeal the issuance of such citation to the Wrightsville Beach
Chief of Police (“Chief of Police”). An appeal shall be perfected in accordance
with the following:
      (1)   An appeal shall be taken by giving written notice of appeal to the
Chief of Police within 14 calendar days of the date of issuance of the civil
citation. In determining the 14 calendar days within which such appeal may be
taken, the date of the civil citation shall not be counted.
      (2)   Such written notice must be received by the Chief of Police no
later than 5:00 p.m. on the fourteenth day of the appeal period. If the
fourteenth day falls on a Saturday, Sunday or holiday recognized by the town,
the time for filing such appeal shall be extended to 5:00 p.m. on the next day
which is not a Saturday, Sunday or holiday.
      (3)   A copy of the citation issued to the appealing party shall be
attached to such written notice of appeal.
      (4)   The written notice of appeal shall set forth the grounds for the
appeal, include other information that the appealing party believes supports
its position and must include the name, email address, mailing address and
telephone number of the appealing party.
      (5)   Within 15 calendar days of receipt of the written notice of appeal,
the Chief of Police shall issue a written decision. The Chief of Police may
uphold the citation, dismiss the citation or reduce the citation to some lesser
offense. Provided, that the Chief of Police may not impose any penalty greater
than that set forth in the citation from which appeal was taken. The written
decision of the Chief of Police will be emailed or mailed by first class mail
to the appealing party within five days of issuance to the email address or
mailing address of the appealing party shown on the written notice of appeal.
      (6)   The decision of the Chief of Police shall be final.
      (7)   If the Chief of Police upholds the citation or takes other action
that requires the appealing party to make payment to the town, such payment
must be made within 30 days of the date of the written decision of the Chief of
Police. If the appealing party fails to make payment within that time, the town
shall undertake enforcement action as appropriate.
(Ord. 1341, passed 7-29-99; Am. Ord. 1359, passed 4-13-00; Am. Ord. 1423,
passed 8-22-02; Am. Ord. 1686, passed 7-12-12; Am. Ord. 1711, passed 6-13-13)
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Section
   
131.01   Injury to private property
   
131.02   Injuring property of town
   
131.03   Unlawful storage of vehicles and other personal property on town
property
   
131.04   Tents, camping and campsites; restricted
§ 131.01 INJURY TO PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful to injure any property belonging to another.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 131.02 INJURING PROPERTY OF TOWN.
   It shall be unlawful to injure, damage, deface, trespass upon, break, or
injure any property belonging to the town.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 131.03 UNLAWFUL STORAGE OF VEHICLES AND OTHER PERSONAL PROPERTY ON TOWN
PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful to park, store or place any vehicle (as defined in §
70.01 of the town code), bicycle, motorcycle or other personal property used as
a means of transportation on any public park that is owned, operated or
controlled by the town. Provided, that the terms of this section shall not
apply to parking lots or other authorized parking areas used in connection with
such public parks.
(Ord. 1235, passed 5-26-94) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 131.04 TENTS, CAMPING AND CAMPSITES; RESTRICTED.
   (A)   Definitions.
      "CAMP OR CAMPING." The use of town property for living accommodation
purposes such as sleeping, or making preparations to sleep (including but not
limited to laying down bedding for the purpose of sleeping), storing personal
belongings, placing any tents or temporary shelters on town property or beach
rights-of-way, using a vehicle parked on town property or beach rights-of-way
for sleeping or living accommodation purposes, or using public benches or other
town infrastructure for sleeping purposes.
      "TEMPORARY SHELTER." Tents, tarps, vehicles, or any type of structure or
cover that provides partial shelter from the elements.
   (B)   Restrictions.
      (1)   No persons shall set up camp or construct any temporary structure
or tent for the purpose of camping or sleeping overnight within the corporate
limits of the town. Including but not limited to the beach and sand dune areas,
or to otherwise use the beach and sand dune areas as a domicile. This
restriction is to include any type of camping or campsite within the corporate
limits of the town, including public benches or any public facility.
      (2)   Allowed recreational use. The use of tents or canopies for
recreational purposes, such as providing shade during daylight hours, is
permitted as long as they are not intended for overnight sleeping or camping.
      (3)   Time-based restriction. Camping or using temporary shelters for
overnight sleeping is prohibited between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
This restriction does not apply to activities related to early morning or late-
night fishing.
(Ord. 1256, passed 8-17-95; Am. Ord. 1863, passed 12-12-24)
CHAPTER 132: OFFENSES AGAINST MORALS
Section
   
132.01   Purpose and policy
   
132.02   Profane and boisterous language
   
132.03   Exposure of female breast
 
   
132.98   Remedies
   
132.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Obscene literature and exhibitions, see G.S. § 14-190.l
   Disseminating sexually oriented material to minors, see G.S. § 14-190.10
§ 132.01 PURPOSE AND POLICY.
   The Board of Aldermen finds that there exists an increasing trend in the
display of sexually explicit material in commercial establishments in a manner
that the material is within the open view of minors and is thereby easily
accessible to them. The Board further finds that the public display of this
material is adverse and detrimental to the health, safety, and welfare of its
citizens, particularly minors, and the peace and dignity of the town, and as a
matter of policy the display should be regulated under the police power of this
town, pursuant to G.S. § 153A-121
(Ord., passed 5-26-83)
§ 132.02 PROFANE AND BOISTEROUS LANGUAGE.
   No person shall use loud and boisterous language so as to become a nuisance
or use any form of profanity or indecent language on the street, in a
gathering, audience, assembly, or in any public place whatsoever.
('72 Code, § 14-ll)
Penalty, see § 132.99
§ 132.03 EXPOSURE OF FEMALE BREAST.
   No fully developed female shall willfully expose her breast in any public
beach, in any public street or in any public park and in the presence of any
other person or persons of the opposite sex. For purposes of this section, the
terms "expose here breast" shall mean the revealing of the female breast with
less than a fully opaque covering on any portion thereof lower than the top of
any part of the areola.
(Ord. 1103, passed 11-2-89)
§ 132.98 REMEDIES.
   In addition to the criminal penalties herein provided, violations of this
section may be enforced by the institution of proceedings in the form of a
civil action for equitable and injunctive relief to restrain or prohibit the
violation. The proceeding shall be brought in the Superior Court of New Hanover
County. The institution of any proceeding for equitable or injunctive relief
under this chapter shall not relieve any party to the proceedings for any
criminal penalty prescribed for violations of any part of this chapter.
(Ord., passed 5-26-83)
§ 132.99 PENALTY.
   Violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person
convicted of violating this chapter shall be punished by a fine not to exceed
$50 or by imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day during which a violation
continues shall be determined a separate and distinct offense.
(Ord., passed 5-26-83)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
Chapter
   
150.   BRIDGES, PIERS, AND THE LIKE
   
151.   BUILDING CODE
   
152.   MINIMUM HOUSING CODE
      
APPENDIX: FORMS
   
153.   [RESERVED]
   
154.   [RESERVED]
   
155.   UNIFORM DEVELOPMENT
      APPENDIX A: DEFINITIONS
      APPENDIX B: INSTALLATION DETAIL
CHAPTER 150: BRIDGES, PIERS, AND THE LIKE
Section
Piers, Docks, and Bridges
   
150.01   Definitions
   
150.02   Piers to be kept repaired and clean
   
150.03   Litter barrels and littering on piers
   
150.04   Injuring piers prohibited
   
150.05   Construction of piers
   
150.06   Building of piers and boat houses; restricted areas
   
150.07   Prohibition of breakwaters, groins and jetties
   
150.08   (Reserved)
   
150.09   Boat ramps
   
150.10   Construction permit for piers or docks required
   
150.11   Application for permit
   
150.12   General pier and dock construction requirements
   
150.13   Minimum dimensions
   
150.14   Structural specifications
   
150.15   Safety features
   
150.16   Maintenance of structures
   
150.17   Authority to remove hazardous structures
   
150.18   Renting of docks prohibited
   
150.19   Vacant lots not to be used for parking
   
150.20   Other governmental regulations; effect
   
150.21   Exceptions authorized
   
150.22   Appeals from stop order
Cross-reference:
   Beach and shore regulations, see
Ch. 92
PIERS, DOCKS, AND BRIDGES
§ 150.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   "BREAKWATER." A structure built to reduce wave energy on the shoreline by
trapping sand between the shore and the breakwater.
   "GROIN." An erosion-control structure built perpendicular to the shoreline
to protect individual properties.
   "JETTY." A structure designed to protect and/or stabilize a navigation
entrance.
   "PIER" or "DOCK." A mooring pile or piling, dolphin of any type, fender,
ramp, floating dock, or other structure occupying the area beyond the high
water line. The mean high water line is 2.05 feet above mean sea level.
   “POLYSTYRENE.” A thermoplastic polymer or copolymer comprised of at least 80
percent styrene or para-methyl styrene by weight. (Commonly known as Styrofoam)
   "UNENCAPSULATED POLYSTYRENE." A polystyrene that is not completely encased
within a polyethylene shell or within other comparable materials that protects
against cracking, peeling, sloughing, and deterioration from ultraviolet
exposure and physical trauma.
('72 Code, § 15-ll; Am. Ord. 1152, passed 8-22-91; Am. Ord. 1541, passed 8-9-
07; Am. Ord. 1842, passed 10-13-22)
§ 150.02 PIERS TO BE KEPT REPAIRED AND CLEAN.
   All piers shall be kept in good repair at all times, and shall be kept clean
and free from obnoxious uses.
('72 Code, § 15-l)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.03 LITTER BARRELS AND LITTERING ON PIERS.
   (A) It shall be unlawful for the owner or proprietor of any commercial
fishing pier within the corporate limits of the town to fail to provide a
litter barrel or basket every 50 feet on the piers for patrons to deposit trash
and garbage. The barrels shall begin, in location, 50 feet east of the pier
tackle shop. Litter barrels shall also be placed near the entrance to the pier
tackle shop and on the approach ramp thereto.
   (B) It shall be unlawful for the owner or proprietor of any commercial
fishing pier within the corporate limits of the town to fail to provide signs
every 50 feet along both sides of the pier notifying patrons of the penalty for
littering, including the depositing of litter in the water.
   (C) It shall be the duty of any commercial fishing pier owner, proprietor,
or employee to notify the police of any person who shall litter on the pier or
from the pier into the water or shoreline surrounding the pier.
   (D) It shall be the duty and responsibility of any commercial fishing pier
owner or proprietor to have all litter from the above mentioned barrels
deposited in the regular refuse receptacle from which refuse is collected by
the town's Sanitation Department.
('72 Code, § 15-l)
Penalty, see § 10.99
Cross-reference:
   Garbage, trash, rubbish, see
Ch. 95
§ 150.04 INJURING PIERS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall tamper with or damage any private or public pier in the
town.
('72 Code, § 15-2)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.05 CONSTRUCTION OF PIERS.
   (A)   No person shall build, place, erect, or cause to be built, placed, or
erected any piling, post, pier, stake, pipe or implement whatsoever, either
permanently or temporarily, at or beyond any street ends of street right-of-way
between the shore and the pierhead line within the town.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to set
pilings for the mooring of boats or vessels of any kind or to moor boats or
vessels of any kind, either permanently or temporarily, at or beyond any street
ends or street right-of-way between the shore and the pierhead line within the
town.
('72 Code, § 15-3)
(Ord., passed 7-26-79; Am. Ord. 1565, passed 1-10-08)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.06 BUILDING OF PIERS AND BOAT HOUSES; RESTRICTED AREAS.
   No structure of any kind shall be built upon the land lying west of Waynick
Boulevard from Stone Street southwardly to Sunset Avenue. However, piers and
bathhouses may be built within this area after application has been made and a
permit granted for the purposes in accordance with the specifications and
conditions the Board of Aldermen may prescribe.
('72 Code, § 15-4)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.07 PROHIBITION OF BREAKWATERS, GROINS AND JETTIES.
   No breakwater, groin, or jetty shall be constructed within the limits of the
town. This prohibition does not apply to “ocean beaches” as defined in G.S. §
77-20(e).
(Ord. 1624, passed 4-8-10)
§ 150.08 (RESERVED).
§ 150.09 BOAT RAMPS.
   (A) No boat ramp shall be built along the shores of the town, unless it is
constructed so as to lie on and conform to the natural contour of the bottom so
as not to impede the natural flow of the waters about the town.
   (B) This section shall not apply to any existing structure or to one for
which a permit has already been granted.
('72 Code, § 15-7)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.10 CONSTRUCTION PERMIT FOR PIERS OR DOCKS REQUIRED.
   No pier or dock shall be constructed within the limits of the town without
an approved permit issued by the Building Inspector in accordance with the
requirements of this subchapter.
('72 Code, § 15-9)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.11 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   (A) Any property owner fronting upon the inland waters of the sounds and
channels within the town who desires to construct a pier, dock, or similar
structure and who has riparian rights including the right of using the water
frontage for the construction of a pier or dock, shall apply in writing to the
Building Inspector requesting a permit to construct the pier or dock. All
requests for the construction, maintenance, or extension of the structures
shall be submitted in writing in accordance with the requirements of this
subchapter.
   (B) The Inspector shall require the applicant to submit as a part of the
written application information, plans, and other data necessary to determine
adequately the complete conformity of the construction to this and other
chapters and ordinances applicable to the structures.
   (C) An application shall include a drawing/survey to scale drawn by a
licensed registered professional surveyor and bearing his or her seal. The
survey shall show the mean high water line, the applicant’s property lines
projected on each side, and the pierhead line and all existing piers,
structures, bulkheads, or other construction within 15 feet of the applicant’s
property lines projected.
   (D) The Inspector shall have prepared forms which shall be available to
persons wishing to apply during normal office hours. All applicants shall
secure and submit to the Inspector the completed form, properly signed by the
property owner. The applicant shall attach thereto suitable plans satisfactory
to the Inspector which shall include existing facilities, if any, and which
shall reflect the dimensions of various components of the new and existing
structures. (See division (C) above, §§ 150.12, 150.13, 150.14 and 150.15.)
   (E) There shall be on display in the Town Building Inspector's office or
thereabouts the pierhead line map which provides dimension control for the
outward limits of pier extensions.
   (F) Plans shall include a complete floor plan of the pier, dock, or other
structure; detailed cross-sections through the access pier and pierhead or T at
its end; information as to the size, length, and treatment of piling to be used
and its penetration into hard ground; the methods of fastening and connecting
all members of the pier; sufficient detailing of superstructures to be
constructed on the pier, such as floats, stairs, hand-railings, all types of
boxes and lockers, or other facilities to be placed thereon.
('72 Code, § 15-10; Am. Ord. 1152, passed 8-22-91)
 § 150.12 GENERAL PIER AND DOCK CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All construction, repair, or modification of any pier or dock shall be
governed by the following regulations. No pier, dock, or other structure shall
be constructed which:
      (1)   Is not within the applicant's property lines projected. An
exception may be made in unusual cases where notarized written approval by
adjacent property owners allows the construction or where joint ownership of a
facility to be constructed exists.
      (2)   Is closer to the owner's property lines extended than 15 feet,
except as provided above. All pilings or dolphins, single or multiple, used in
any way for mooring, shall conform to this setback requirement.
      (3)   Extends beyond the pier line as shown on the official pier line
map, which map, duly adopted, after a public hearing, shall be kept in the Town
Hall.
      (4)   Is within 15 feet of any other pier other than one which is a part
of the same mooring system.
      (5)   Where there would be more than one pier or dock projection from the
shore for any single lot of 100 feet or less. A pier shall not be constructed
on a lot which does not provide for the clearances herein required from
adjacent lot lines. Owners having frontages greater than 100 feet shall be
allowed an additional projecting pier or dock for each additional 50 feet of
shore frontage in addition to the basic 100 feet.
      (6)   All construction, repair, or modification of any floating pier or
dock shall use encapsulated polystyrene material.
   (B)   No vessel may be moored at any pier, dock, pilings, or dolphins so
that it extends farther than its width beyond the pierhead line.
('72 Code, § 15-12) (Ord., passed 12-ll-75; Am. Ord. 1152, passed 8-22-91; Am.
Ord. 1842, passed 10-13-22) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.13 MINIMUM DIMENSIONS.
   All piers or docks constructed hereafter shall have dimensions which conform
to the following:
   (A) The length of all piers or docks extending from the shore line shall be
limited to the pier line as established and shown on the pier line map.
   (B) The height of the deck of all fixed piers shall be not less than the
mean high-water line, which for the purposes of this subchapter, shall be
established at 6.5 feet MLW, Beaufort Datum.
   (C) All walkway projections from the shore outward shall have a minimum
width of three feet and a handrail on at least one side of the projection.
   (D) The width of all T-heads, pierheads, or projections running parallel to
the shore line shall be not less than four feet and shall have a handrail on at
least one side of the pierhead. The pierhead shall be of an elevation no lower
than that stated for the access walkway; however, the use of multiple elevation
platforms or attached floating platforms shall not be denied.
   (E) No pier, dock, or structure shall have a diving board or other
projections supported by the main pier frame, which shall project within five
feet of the pierhead line, nor shall the projection be beyond three feet from
the face of the outermost portion of the pier. Boat hoists and davits shall be
allowed, provided they are movable and can be moved to a position in which they
do not overhang the pier when not in use.
('72 Code, § 15-13)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.14 STRUCTURAL SPECIFICATIONS.
   All structures shall conform to the following requirements:
   (A) Every pier or dock shall be designed to withstand a live load of 100
pounds per square foot applied on all flat areas of the structure.
   (B) The structural requirements for the coastal sea of the state building
code shall govern the general design and strength requirements of all piers and
docks; however; the additional requirements as set out herein shall take
precedence.
   (C) Piling having a diameter of less than six inches shall not be used on
any pier or dock. All piling shall penetrate the ground below hard bottom a
distance of not less than six feet. No concrete pile of less than eight inches
in its smallest cross-sectional dimension shall be used. The wood pile shall be
pressure treated with creosote to a retention of 18 pounds per square foot.
   (D) The deck of all piers shall be constructed of planks having a thickness
of not less than 5/4-inch of optional widths, and shall be supported by not
less than l-l/2 feet on centers. No stringer, joist, or rafter shall be used
having a dimension of less than nominal two by six inches. Concrete, metal, or
plastic materials may be used if in conformity with division (B) above.
   (E) All superstructure, roofs, or other construction above the deck of any
pier or dock shall be in conformity with the building code of the town and
shall be open on all sides. Dock and gear boxes not over four feet in total
height shall be allowed on docks, provided they are securely fastened to the
deck in a manner as to prevent their being removed by wind or water.
   (F) Floating docks, piers, and walkways shall meet the following additional
requirements:
      (1) All floating structures shall be no less than four feet in width. No
horizontal dimension shall be greater than two times the other horizontal
dimension. Access piers shall be an exception; however, a suitable method of
providing stability is used, such as finger projections or a minimum width of
five feet for all access piers longer than eight feet is maintained.
      (2) All floating piers shall have a freeboard (distance from water to top
of deck) of not less than 16 inches.
      (3) All fastenings shall be sufficient to withstand all movements
anticipated in storm periods of hurricane force winds. The Building Inspector
shall have the right to disapprove any fastenings which do not appear to be
sufficient. All metal fastenings shall be galvanized or of metals resistant to
corrosion.
      (4) All floating piers shall be secured with pilings. There shall be not
less than one pile for each 80 square feet of pier surface.
      (5) No houses or structures other than deck or gear boxes will be placed
on floating piers. All boxes shall be securely fastened to the pier. No box
shall be higher than four feet above the pier surface and occupy more than 2/
5 of the surface.
      (6)   The use of unencapsulated polystyrene or similar material on any
floating docks, piers, or walkways is prohibited.
('72 Code, § 15-14) (Am. Ord. 1842, passed 10-13-22) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.15 SAFETY FEATURES.
   (A) All docks constructed within the town, with the exception of floating
docks, shall have handrails on at least one side of access walkways, T's, or
L's. Handrails shall be not less than three feet above the deck and shall be
substantially constructed so as to assure a safe and permanent support for
persons using the facilities.
   (B) It is recommended that all piers have a ladder or stairway at their
outer end extending down sufficiently to allow persons in the water to gain
access to the pier. All stairways shall have handrails.
   (C) Owners of private piers may erect gates or barricades at the landward
end of access walkways denying the use of the pier to others than their guests.
The barricades or gates should be clearly marked to define the pier as a
private structures.
   (D) No cross-bracing or structural members beneath the pier shall be erected
in that zone between high and low waters so as to obstruct the use of this area
by the public.
('72 Code, § 15-15)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.16 MAINTENANCE OF STRUCTURES.
   (A) Each owner shall be responsible for the proper and satisfactory
maintenance of any pier, dock, or other structure which he erects within the
town. All structures shall be subject to inspection at any time by the Building
Inspector, and where faulty maintenance is found, the Inspector shall notify
the owner in writing as to the maintenance required. The owner shall promptly
apply for a permit to accomplish the maintenance and shall within 90 days of
the written notice proceed with the accomplishment of the maintenance.
   (B) Failure to maintain properly a pier, dock, or other structure in
accordance with this subchapter may result in its removal as provided for in §
150.17.
('72 Code, § 15-16)
§ 150.17 AUTHORITY TO REMOVE HAZARDOUS STRUCTURES.
   (A) In the event that an improperly maintained pier, dock, or other
structure now exists or will exist in the future, after the owner of the pier,
dock, or other structure has been notified by the Building Inspector and has
failed to repair and bring the structure into a safe condition, the town may
remove entirely this structure and its appurtenances and dispose of all
materials, refuse, and wreckage therefrom. The town may assess against the
property owner the cost of the removal which shall become a lien upon his
property payable immediately. After a period of 60 days there shall be assessed
an additional interest rate of 6% until the cost is paid.
   (B) Any structure, pier, dock, piling, dolphin, fender, or other structure
which now exists and is considered to be in bad condition may be removed by the
town after notification of the owner, in the manner described in this section,
by the Inspector, and the cost thereof assessed against the property.
('72 Code, § 15-17)
§ 150.18 RENTING OF DOCKS PROHIBITED.
   (A) The renting of docks, dock spaces, or moorings for any purpose
whatsoever is prohibited in residential zones, and is also prohibited in the
shore zone where the shore zone is opposite and between the water and
residential zones.
   (B) No services may be made available by owners of piers and docks to
persons using piers or docks who are not owners; however, water and electricity
may be supplied at no cost to the non-owner user by the consenting owner.
   (C) No commercial activity of any kind may be carried on incidental to the
ownership or use of any pier or dock in any residential zone or in the shore
zone where it is opposite and between the water and a residential zone.
   (D) This section does not apply to piers, docks, or other moorings in
existence on 12-ll-75, except that modifications or new construction shall
conform to the terms of this section.
(Ord., passed 12-ll-75)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.19 VACANT LOTS NOT TO BE USED FOR PARKING.
   Vacant lots in residential zones where there are piers or docks may not be
used as parking lots for those using the pier or dock since the principal
intended use of lots in residential zones is for residences. However, parking
space for up to four cars may be provided by the owner for the use of himself
and his guests, but no charge may be made for the parking.
(Ord., passed 12-11-75)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.20 OTHER GOVERNMENTAL REGULATIONS; EFFECT.
   (A) Nothing in this subchapter shall preclude or deny the requirements of
any other governmental agency relevant to the construction of pier facilities
within the town. All areas where piers are to be constructed beyond the high
water line are the property of the state, and where navigational jurisdiction
exists, the requirements of the federal government shall be met.
   (B) The acquisition of permits for construction from other governmental
agencies shall not be considered paramount for the construction of a pier under
the requirements of this subchapter. Pier construction not conforming to this
subchapter shall be denied and prevented under penalty of law.
('72 Code, § 15-18)
§ 150.21 EXCEPTIONS AUTHORIZED.
   The Board of Aldermen, at its discretion and as a result of careful study of
unusual and difficult situations which occur, may waive certain limitations as
to dimensions and location if it appears to be clearly in the best public
interest and safety. Provided that the Board of Alderman shall not be
authorized by this exception to permit a pier to be constructed beyond the pier
line as shown on the official pier line map. The construction of a pier or dock
by the town at the terminus of streets or public areas shall not be limited by
the requirements of this chapter.
('72 Code, § 15-l9) (Am. Ord. 1431, passed 10-24-02)
§ 150.22 APPEALS FROM STOP ORDER.
   Appeals from a stop order authorized by G.S. § 160A-421 and issued in
connection with a violation of any provisions of this chapter shall be taken to
the Town Manager. Such appeals shall be taken, heard and decided in the manner
prescribed in G.S. § 160A-421.
('72 Code, § 15-22) (Ord. 1100, passed 7-27-89)
CHAPTER 151: BUILDING CODE; FLOODLAN REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
151.001   General construction requirements; minimum standards
   
151.002   Structures of unusual design
   
151.003   Removal of refuse, debris from building construction
   
151.004   Condemnation and removal of dangerous structures
   
151.005   (Reserved)
   
151.006   Movement of buildings within town limits
   
151.007   Requirements for portable toilets to be tied down
   
151.008   Definition
   
151.009   Restrictions on use of household appliances
Numbering of Buildings
   
151.035   Display of property number
   
151.036   Duty of inspector as to numbering
   
151.037   Annexation
   
151.038   Change in block
   
151.039   Alternative street numbering provisions
Administration and Enforcement
   
151.110   Building Inspector
   
151.111   Building permit fees
   
151.112   Inspection boxes required
 
   
151.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.001 GENERAL CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS; MINIMUM STANDARDS.
   For provisions concerning minimum standards for general construction
requirements see §§ 152.021 through 152.026 of the minimum housing code of the
town and the most recent editions of Volumes 1 and 1B of the State Building
Code wind resistive construction sections.
(Ord. 1043, passed 3-26-87)
§ 151.002 STRUCTURES OF UNUSUAL DESIGN.
   When a structure of unusual design as to system or materials is certified,
by an architect or engineer registered in the state, to meet or exceed the
basic structural requirements and the fire resistant standards of the town
minimum housing code and does not otherwise violate any existing code or
ordinance, the Building Inspector may issue a permit for construction.
(Ord., passed 7-22-70; Am. Ord. 1043, passed 3-26-87)
§ 151.003 REMOVAL OF REFUSE, DEBRIS FROM BUILDING CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   All repairs or construction which exceed a cost of $10,000 shall be
required to provide on the construction site a bulk construction debris
dumpster or trailer constructed of a noncombustible material and suitable for
removing the debris so as to prevent litter and provide for fire safety;
however, construction debris shall not include neat and orderly stacks of
construction materials. Any container required under the provisions of this
section shall be emptied promptly when filled to capacity. In any case, where
more than two cubic yards of construction debris accumulate on a site, prompt
removal is required. No burning of construction debris shall be allowed within
the town limits.
   (B)   The Fire Official as described in Chapter 94 is hereby authorized to
enforce this § 151.003 in addition to enforcement of this section by the
Municipal Building Inspector as provided in §
151.110.
(Ord., passed 9-5-85; Am. Ord. 1043, passed 3-26-87; Am. Ord. 1163, passed 12-
19-91)
Penalty, see § 151.999
§ 151.004 CONDEMNATION AND REMOVAL OF DANGEROUS STRUCTURES.
   For provisions concerning condemnation and removal of dangerous structures
see § 152.150 through 152.159 of the minimum housing code of the town and North
Carolina General Statutes.
(Ord. 1043, passed 3-26-87)
§ 151.005 (RESERVED).
§ 151.006 MOVING OF BUILDINGS WITHIN TOWN LIMITS.
   No person, firm, or corporation shall move any building, or part of any
building, through or across any sidewalk, street, alley, highway or other
publicly owned property within the limits of the town without first obtaining a
permit from the Building Inspector.
   (A)   Prior to issuing such a permit, the Building Inspector shall require
the person, firm or corporation desiring to move a building or part of any
building to pay a fee of $50.
   (B)   Prior to issuing such a permit, the Building Inspector shall require
the person, firm or corporation desiring to move a building or part of any
building to submit a written application setting forth the following
information:
      (1)   The type of building to be moved;
      (2)   The maximum length, height and width of the building to be moved;
      (3)   The present location and proposed new location of the building to
be moved by lot, block, subdivision and street numbers;
      (4)   The date and approximate hours during which the building will be
moved;
      (5)   The planned route that will be taken from the present to the new
location of the building;
      (6)   Written approval, obtained by the applicant, from the Police Chief,
the Fire Chief, the Supervisors of the Street Department and the Municipal
Utilities Department, officials of the telephone company, the electric utility
company and cable television company;
      (7)   Owners of property of any side of the location from which the
building is to be moved and to which it is to be relocated, including those
owning property across the street from each location.
   (C)   The Building Inspector shall not issue the permit and the building
shall not be moved over the streets of the town if moving of any building will
cause serious injury to person or serious damage to private property, or to the
streets or other public improvements of the town, or moving the building will
violate any of the requirements of the town's zoning regulations or the North
Carolina State Building Code. Any building being moved for which a permit was
granted shall not be allowed to be moved or to remain in or on the streets of
the town except during daylight hours.
   (D)   The person, firm or corporation moving a building through or across
any sidewalk, street or ally shall employ, at their expense, two flagmen, one
at each street intersection beyond the building. Such flagmen shall remain at
theses intersections diverting or cautioning traffic during the moving of the
building.
   (E)   Upon the issuance of a moving permit, and no less than 48 hours before
the moving is to begin, the Building Inspector shall furnish a copy of the
permit to the Fire Chief, Police Chief, telephone, electric and cable
television companies and owners of property identified in § 151.005(B)(7). The
Building Inspector shall set forth in all such notices the route over which the
building will be moved, the date and time the moving will be started and the
approximate time of its completion.
   (F)   The person, firm or corporation requesting the permit shall be
responsible for:
      (1)   All damage caused to streets, curbs, sidewalks, trees, highways and
other public property by moving of such building;
      (2)   All extraordinary expenses incurred by the town in connection with
the moving of such building. Such expenses shall include, but not be limited
to, overtime for police, fire or other municipal employees directly caused by
the move, use of town equipment in connection with the move and costs of
preparing the route, such as removing street signs or fire hydrants. In the
event such expenses are incurred, the town will notify the person, firm or
corporation requesting type permit within 90 days of the date such expenses
were incurred and such person, firm or corporation shall pay the amount so due
within 30 days of the date of such notification.
   (G)   The Building Inspector, as a condition precedent to the issuance of a
building moving permit, may require a bond to be executed by the person, firm
or corporation desiring the permit, with corporate surety to the inspector's
satisfaction. Such bond shall be made payable to the town in such amount as
prescribed by the inspector and shall indemnify the town against any damage
caused to streets, curbs, sidewalks, trees, highways and any other public
property by moving of such building and extraordinary expenses as described
above. The surety bond shall be conditioned upon and liable for strict
compliance with the terms of the permit as to the route to be taken and the
limit of time in which the building will be moved and the time in which repair
or compensation for the repair of damages resulting from moving the building
will be made, and to pay the town as liquidated damages an amount not to exceed
$50 as may be prescribed by the Building Inspector for each day's delay in
completing the moving of the building or in repairing any damage resulting
therefrom to property of the town, or for clearing any sidewalk, street, alley,
highway or other publicly owned property of all debris resulting from moving
the building.
(Ord. 1110, passed 3-8-9)
§ 151.007 REQUIREMENTS FOR PORTABLE TOILETS TO BE TIED DOWN.
   All portable toilets placed in the town pursuant to the requirements of the
North Carolina State Building Code or otherwise shall be secured and tied down
in a manner to prevent them from turning over as a result of high winds,
malicious activities or other causes. The Town Building Inspector shall be
responsible for ensuring compliance with this section. Methods utilized by
property owners and/or contractors to tie down portable toilets shall be
subject to the approval of the Building Inspector.
(Ord. 1318, passed 9-24-98)
§ 151.008 DEFINITION.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   “HOUSEHOLD APPLIANCE.” White goods or large electrical appliances that are
typically, but not necessarily, finished in white enamel. “HOUSEHOLD APPLIANCE”
includes, but shall not be limited to, a stove, refrigerator, washing machine,
clothes dryer and dishwasher.
(Ord. 1587, passed 12-11-08)
§ 151.009 RESTRICTIONS ON USE OF HOUSEHOLD APPLIANCES.
   (A)   Household appliances prohibited in certain locations.
      (1)   This section is intended to regulate the outdoor location and
operation of household appliances in order to minimize noise impacts on
surrounding properties, to preserve the aesthetic value of properties within
the town and to protect and preserve property values within the town.
      (2)   Household appliances shall only be located and operated within the
fully enclosed walls of residential or commercial structures including but not
limited to principal and accessory buildings. Location of a household appliance
on a porch or deck or within a carport that is not fully enclosed shall not be
considered “within the fully enclosed walls of residential or commercial
structures” and as such, is prohibited.
   (B)   Nonconformities.
      (1)   This section shall be effective immediately upon adoption by the
Board of Aldermen of the town.
      (2)   Any outdoor appliance not in conformity with the requirements of
this section and lawfully in place prior to the effective date of this section
shall be removed or rendered in compliance with this section within one year of
its effective date.
      (3)   After the effective date of this section, any outdoor appliance
that replaces an outdoor appliance not in conformity, or any outdoor appliance
that is moved to a location other than that in which it was located on such
effective date, shall comply with the provisions of this section.
      (4)   Within 30 days of adoption of this section, all nonconforming
household appliances shall be fully screened to prevent such household
appliances from being visible from the ground level of adjacent properties and
from any public right-of-way.
   (C)   Enforcement; penalties.
      (1)   When the Code Enforcement Officer determines that outdoor
appliances are installed in a manner that is not in conformance with the
provisions of this section, the Code Enforcement Officer shall immediately
notify the property owner of the violation. The property owner shall have 90
calendar days from the date of the notification to make the changes required to
bring the outdoor appliance into compliance.
      (2)   A violation of the provisions of this section shall subject the
offender to a civil penalty in the amount of $50 per day to be recovered by the
town in a civil action in the nature of debt if the offender does not pay the
penalty within 15 days after having been cited for a violation of this chapter.
Each day’s continuing violation shall be a separate and distinct offense.
      (3)   The property owner may appeal the decision of the Code Enforcement
Officer to the Town Manager. The appeal must be in writing and filed with the
Town Clerk within ten days of the date of the notice of violation. The decision
of the Town Manager in such matters shall be final.
(Ord. 1587, passed 12-11-08)
NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS
§ 151.035 DISPLAY OF PROPERTY NUMBER.
   It shall be the duty of the owner, agent or occupant of any house or
building fronting on a street in the town to properly display a number which
has been assigned by the Building Inspector under the provisions of this
subchapter. The owner, agent or occupant of such house or building shall place
such number in a conspicuous place thereon so that it may be plainly seen and
observed from the street. Numbers shall be not less than six inches in height.
(Ord., passed 12-11-75; Am. Ord. 1043, passed 3-26-87; Am. Ord. 1263, passed
11-16-95)
Penalty, see § 151.999
§ 151.036 DUTY OF INSPECTOR AS TO NUMBERING.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to prepare and maintain
house numbering maps of the town and when a new building is built, or for any
reason a number is required, to issue such number.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector from time to time, and
upon request, to review house number assignments, resolve conflicts in numbers,
reassign house numbers or propose any changes which, in his or her opinion, are
necessary.
   (C)   If the Building Inspector determines that a building or structure is
not in compliance with the numbering requirements as set forth in this chapter,
the Inspector shall notify the property owner in writing of the requirement to
comply with the provisions of this chapter. The property owner shall have 60
days from the date of such notification to comply in all respects with the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord., passed 12-11-75; Am. Ord. 1043, passed 3-26-87; Am. Ord. 1263, passed
11-16-95)
§ 151.037 ANNEXATION.
   Upon annexation of any new areas to the town, it shall be the duty of the
Building Inspector, as soon as practical after such annexation, to prepare
house numbering maps for the new areas and to submit such maps to the Board of
Aldermen for their approval. Upon approval, it shall be the duty of the
Building Inspector to assign approved numbers to the owner and tenant of each
building within the new areas.
(Ord., passed 12-11-75; Am. Ord. 1043, passed 3-26-87)
§ 151.038 CHANGE IN BLOCK.
   When due to conflicts, change in character or amount of occupancy of any
block it becomes necessary to assign and reassign house or building numbers
within that block, the Building Inspector shall prepare a map for the proposed
renumbering of such area and submit this map to the Board of Aldermen for their
approval. Upon approval, it shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to
assign approved numbers to the owners and tenants of each building involved.
(Ord., passed 12-11-75; Am. Ord. 1043, passed 3-26-87)
§ 151.039 ALTERNATIVE STREET NUMBERING PROVISIONS.
   When the location of a building or structure is such that the size numbers
required under the provisions of this chapter cannot be easily read from the
street, the Building Inspector may require the use of large numbers or
placement of the numbers in an alternate location.
(Ord. 1263, passed 11-16-95)
GENERAL BUILDING REQUIREMENTS AND FEDERAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM
§ 151.065 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The Legislature of the State of North Carolina has in Part 6, Article 21 of
Chapter 143; Parts 3, 5 and 8 of Article 19 of Chapter 160A; and Article 8 of
Chapter 160A of the North Carolina General Statutes, delegated to local
governmental units the responsibility to adopt regulations designed to promote
the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry.
(Ord. 1503, passed 3-23-06; Am. Ord. 1515, passed 8-24-06)
§ 151.066 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   The flood prone areas within the jurisdiction of the town are subject
to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures of flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax
base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general
welfare.
   (B)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions
in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities and by the
occupancy in flood prone areas of uses vulnerable to floods or other hazards.
(Ord. 1503, passed 3-23-06)
§ 151.067 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this subchapter to promote public health, safety, and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions within flood prone areas by provisions designed to:
   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety, and
property due to water or erosion hazards or that result in damaging increases
in erosion, flood heights, or velocities;
   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities that
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of flood
waters;
   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging, and all other development that may
increase erosion or flood damage; and
   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers that will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands.
(Ord. 1503, passed 3-23-06)
§ 151.068 OBJECTIVES.
   The objectives of this subchapter are:
   (A)   To protect human life and health;
   (B)   To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (C)   To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (D)   To minimize prolonged business losses and interruptions;
   (E)   To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities (that is, water
and gas mains, electric, telephone, cable and sewer lines, streets, and
bridges) that are located in flood prone areas;
   (F)   To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood prone areas; and
   (G)   To ensure that potential buyers are aware that property is in a
special flood hazard area.
(Ord. 1503, passed 3-23-06)
§ 151.069 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this subchapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this subchapter its most reasonable application.
   "ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE)." A structure located on the
same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure. Garages, carports, and
storage sheds are common urban accessory structures. Pole barns, hay sheds, and
the like qualify as accessory structures on farms and may or may not be located
on the same parcel as the farm dwelling or shop building.
   “ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING BUILDING).” An extension or increase in the floor
area or height of a building or structure.
   “APPEAL.” A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of this subchapter.
   “AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING.” A designated Zone AO on a community’s flood
insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths determined to be from one to
three feet. These areas are located where a clearly defined channel does not
exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where
velocity flow may be evident.
   “AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.” See “SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA).”
   “BASEMENT.” Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   “BASE FLOOD.” The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in
any given year.
   "BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE)." A determination of the water surface
elevations of the base flood as published in the flood insurance study. When
the BFE has not been provided in a “SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA,” it may be
obtained from engineering studies available from a federal or state or other
source using FEMA approved engineering methodologies. This elevation, when
combined with the “FREEBOARD,” establishes the “REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION
ELEVATION.”
   "BREAKAWAY WALL." A wall that is not part of the structural support of the
building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under
specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion
of the building or the supporting foundation system.
   "BUILDING." See “STRUCTURE.”
   "BUILDING PERMIT." All land use, development, or building of any sort,
excluding agricultural uses, shall be required under this subchapter to make
application for, receive approval of, and obtain a permit for said land use,
development, or building. This shall include but not be limited to any land
disturbing activities other than that stated above.
   "CAMA." North Carolina’s Coastal Area Management Act. This act, along with
the dredge and fill law and the federal Coastal Zone Management Act, is managed
through the North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources
(NCDENR), Division of Coastal Management (DCM).
   "CBRS." Coastal Barrier Resources System.
   "CHEMICAL STORAGE FACILITY." A building, portion of a building, or exterior
area adjacent to a building used for the storage of any chemical or chemically
reactive products.
   "COASTAL BARRIER RESOURCES SYSTEM (CBRS)." Undeveloped portions of coastal
and adjoining areas established by the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (COBRA) of
1982, the Coastal Barrier Improvement Act (CBIA) of 1990, and subsequent
revisions, and includes areas owned by federal or state governments or private
conservation organizations identified as otherwise protected areas (OPA).
   "COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA." A special flood hazard area extending from
offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast and
any other area subject to high velocity wave action from storms or seismic
sources. The area is designated on a FIRM, or other adopted flood map as
determined in § 151.071 of this subchapter, as Zone VE.
   "DEVELOPMENT." Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of
equipment or materials.
   "DISPOSAL." As defined in G.S. § 130A-290(a)(6), the discharge, deposit,
injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing of any solid waste into or on
any land or water so that the solid waste or any constituent part of the solid
waste may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into
any waters, including groundwaters.
   "ELEVATED BUILDING." A non-basement building which has its lowest elevated
floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers,
pilings, or columns.
   "ENCROACHMENT." The advance or infringement of uses, fill, excavation,
buildings, permanent structures, or development into a floodplain, which may
impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
   “FLOOD” or “FLOODING.” A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   "FLOOD INSURANCE."    The insurance coverage provided under the National
Flood Insurance Program.
   "FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM)." An official map of a community, issued by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency, on which both the special flood hazard
areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community are delineated.
   "FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS)." An examination, evaluation, and determination
of flood hazards, corresponding water surface elevations (if appropriate),
flood hazard risk zones, and other flood data in a community issued by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency. The flood insurance study report includes
flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs).
   "FLOOD PRONE AREA." See “FLOODPLAIN.”
   "FLOODPLAIN." Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any
source.
   "FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR." The individual appointed to administer and
enforce the floodplain management regulations.
   "FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT." Any type of permit that is required in
conformance with the provisions of this subchapter prior to the commencement of
any development activity.
   "FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT." The operation of an overall program of corrective
and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing,
where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited
to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management
regulations, and open space plans.
   "FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS." This subchapter and other zoning
ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations,
special purpose ordinances, and other applications of police power which
control development in flood- prone areas. This term describes federal, state,
or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for
preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.
   "FLOOD PROOFING." Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water, and sanitation facilities,
structures, and their contents.
   "FLOODWAY." The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
   "FLOOD ZONE." A geographical area shown on a flood hazard boundary map or
flood insurance rate map that reflects the severity or type of flooding in the
area.
   "FREEBOARD." The height added to the base flood elevation (BFE) to account
for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater
that the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions,
such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of
urbanization on the watershed. The base flood elevation plus the freeboard
establishes the “REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION.”
   "FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT FACILITY." A facility which cannot be used for its
intended purpose unless it is located in close proximity to water, such as a
docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or
passengers, shipbuilding, or ship repair. The term does not include long-term
storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities.
   "GARAGE." An area used or capable of being used for normal automobile
storage with normal automobile access.
   "HABITABLE SPACE." Suitable for habitation and/or housing with a controlled
physical environment in which people can live under surrounding hospitable
conditions. Habitable space shall also include any space below the 100-year
base flood elevation which is finished and which enhances the structural
stability of the walls to exceed 20 pounds per square foot. Examples of
finished space shall include but not be limited to furniture in place, no
floodway openings, and used in the manner described in this definition.
   "HAZARDOUS WASTE FACILITY." As defined in G.S. § 130A, Art. 9, a facility
for the collection, storage, processing, treatment, recycling, recovery, or
disposal of hazardous waste.
   "HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE (HAG)." The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to construction, immediately next to the proposed walls of the
structure.
   "HISTORIC STRUCTURE." Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as
a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic landmarks in
communities with a “Certified Local Government (CLG) Program”; or
      (4)   Certified as contributing to the historical significance of a
historic district designated by a community with a “Certified Local Government
(CLG) Program.” Certified Local Government (CLG) Programs are approved by the
U.S. Department of the Interior in cooperation with the North Carolina
Department of Cultural Resources through the State Historic Preservation
Officer as having met the requirements of the National Historic Preservation
Act of 1966 as amended in 1980.
   "LEVEE." A man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control,
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
   "LEVEE SYSTEM." A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or
levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which
are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
   "LEVEL OF 100-YEAR FLOOD." The highest level of flooding that, on the
average, is likely to occur once every 100 years (or has a 1% chance of
occurring each year). In no case, however, shall any structure have habitable
space below a minimum of three feet above the base flood elevation as shown on
the federal flood insurance rate maps in both the A and V Zones and in both
residential and non-residential structures. Both new construction and/or
substantial improvement of existing structures shall comply with the
requirements of this subchapter at the lowest supporting structural member in
the V Zone and at the finished floor elevation in the Z Zone.
   "LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE (LAG)." The elevation of the ground, sidewalk, or
patio slab immediately next to the building, or deck support, after completion
of the building.
   "LOWEST FLOOR." The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage in an area other than
a basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor, provided that such
an enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of this subchapter.
   "MANUFACTURED HOME." A structure transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
“MANUFACTURED HOME” does not include a “RECREATIONAL VEHICLE”.
   “MANUFACTURED HOME PARK” or “SUBDIVISION.” A parcel (or contiguous parcels)
of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   "MARKET VALUE." The building value, not including the land value and that of
any accessory structures or other improvements on the lot. Market value may be
established by independent certified appraisal, replacement cost depreciated
for age of building and quality of construction (actual cash value), or
adjusted tax assessed values.
   "MEAN SEA LEVEL." For purposes of this subchapter, the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929, the North American Vertical Datum
(NAVD) as corrected in 1988, or other vertical control datum used as a
reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain, to which
base flood elevations (BFEs) shown on a FIRM are referenced. Refer to each FIRM
panel to determine datum used.
   "NEW CONSTRUCTION." Structures for which the “START OF CONSTRUCTION”
commenced on or after the effective date of the original version of the
community’s flood damage prevention ordinance and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
   "NON-ENCROACHMENT AREA." The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot
as designated in the flood insurance study report.
   "OPA." An Otherwise Protected Area.
   "POST-FIRM." Construction or other development for which the “START OF
CONSTRUCTION” occurred on or after the effective date of the initial flood
insurance rate map for the area.
   "PRE-FIRM." Construction or other development for which the “START OF
CONSTRUCTION” occurred before the effective date of the initial flood insurance
rate map for the area.
   "PRIMARY FRONTAL DUNE." A continuous or nearly continuous mound or ridge of
sand with relatively steep seaward and landward slopes immediately landward and
adjacent to the beach and subject to erosion and over- topping from high tides
and waves during major coastal storms. The inland limit of the primary frontal
dune occurs at the point where there is a distinct change from a relatively
steep slope to a relatively mild slope.
   "PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND." At least 51% of the actual cash value of the
structure is above ground.
   “PUBLIC SAFETY” and/or “NUISANCE.” Anything which is injurious to the safety
or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of
persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary
manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.
   "RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV)." A vehicle, which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projection;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   "REFERENCE LEVEL." The top of the lowest floor for structures within special
flood hazard areas designated as Zone A1—30, AE, A, A99, or AO. The reference
level is the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest
floor for structures within special flood hazard areas designated as Zone VE.
   "REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION." The “BASE FLOOD ELEVATION” plus the
“FREEBOARD.” In “SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS” where base flood elevations (BFEs)
have been determined, this elevation shall be the BFE plus two feet of
freeboard.
   "REMEDY A VIOLATION." To bring the structure or other development into
compliance with state and community floodplain management regulations or, if
this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that
impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected
development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of this
subchapter, or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing
federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.
   "SALVAGE YARD." Any non-residential property used for the storage,
collection, and/or recycling of any type of equipment, and including but not
limited to vehicles, appliances, and related machinery.
   "SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY." As defined in G.S. § 130A-290(a)(35), any
facility involved in the disposal of solid waste.
   "SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL SITE." As defined in G.S. § 130A-290(a)(36), any place
at which solid wastes are disposed of by incineration, sanitary landfill, or
any other method.
   "SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA)." The land in the floodplain subject to a
1% or greater chance of being flooded in any given year, as determined in §
151.071 of this subchapter.
   "START OF CONSTRUCTION." Includes substantial improvement, and means the
date the building permit was issued, provided that the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or
other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a
site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. For a substantial
improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   "STRUCTURE." Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires more
or less permanent location on the ground, or attached to something having more
or less permanent location on the ground.
   "SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE." Damage of any origin sustained by a structure during
any one-year period whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before
damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred. See definition of “SUBSTANTIAL
IMPROVEMENT.”
   "SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT."
      (1)   Any combination of repairs, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during any one-year
period for which the cost equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the
structure before the “START OF CONSTRUCTION” of the improvement. This term
includes structures which have incurred SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE,” regardless of the
actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
         (a)   Any correction of existing violations of state or community
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by
the community code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or,
         (b)   Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure.
      (2)   The cost of repair from damage or destruction resulting from a
natural disaster shall be determined by the Building Inspector. The Building
Inspector shall do so by comparing the insurance claim awarded for repairs to
the structure resulting from such damage or destruction with the estimated cost
of such repairs provided by the contractor or property owner. In such event,
the larger of the two amounts shall be deemed the cost of repair, subject to
the provisions of this subdivision. Insurance claims awarded for contents
coverage shall not be included in determining the cost of repair. In the event
no insurance award is made in connection with damage or destruction from a
natural disaster, any property owner wishing to make repairs to a damaged
structure shall be required to fill out the substantial improvement/substantial
damage application forms available in the office of the Building Inspector in
order to determine the cost of repair from damage or destruction. In both
circumstances (where there is or is not an insurance claim awarded), the
Building Inspector may also consider the prevailing cost within the town for
such repairs at the time the repairs are undertaken. In addition, the property
owner may be required to provide other information as required by the Building
Inspector to substantiate the cost of repair from damage or destruction.
      (3)   The cost of repairs, reconstruction, improvements, or additions to
a structure in situations other than those resulting from a natural disaster
will be determined by the Building Inspector. Such determination shall be based
on the estimated cost provided by the contractor or property owner, subject to
the provisions of this subdivision. The Building Inspector may also consider
the prevailing cost within the town for such repairs, reconstruction,
improvements, or additions at the time such work is undertaken. In addition,
the property owner may be required to provide other information as required by
the Building Inspector to substantiate the cost of such repairs,
reconstruction, improvements, or addition.
      (4)   Structures designated by the town as historic landmarks are
excluded from the provisions of this section, provided that the repairs,
reconstruction, improvements, or additions to such structure do not prevent the
structure’s continued designation as a historic landmark.
   "VARIANCE."    A grant of relief from the requirements of this subchapter.
   "VIOLATION." The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community’s flood plain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required under §
151.078 through §
151.088 of this subchapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as
that documentation is provided.
   "WATER SURFACE ELEVATION." The height, in relation to mean sea level of
floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or
riverine areas.
   "WATERCOURSE." A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel, or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.
(Ord. 1503, passed 3-23-06; Am. Ord. 1515, passed 8-24-06)
§ 151.070 LANDS TO WHICH THIS SUBCHAPTER APPLIES.
   This subchapter shall apply to all special flood hazard areas within the
jurisdiction, including extra-territorial jurisdictions (ETJs) of the town and
within the jurisdiction of any other community whose governing body agrees, by
resolution, to such applicability.
(Ord. 1503, passed 3-23-06)
§ 151.071 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.
   The special flood hazard areas are those identified under the cooperating
technical state (CTS) agreement between the state and FEMA in its flood
insurance study (FIS) and its accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) for
New Hanover County, dated April 3, 2006, which are adopted by reference and
declared to be a part of this subchapter.
(Ord. 1503, passed 3-23-06)
§ 151.072 ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   A floodplain development permit shall be required in conformance with the
provisions of this subchapter prior to the commencement of any development
activities within special flood hazard areas determined in accordance with §
151.071 of this subchapter.
(Ord. 1503, passed 3-23-06)
§ 151.073 COMPLIANCE.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted,
altered, or developed in any way without full compliance with the terms of this
subchapter and other applicable regulations.
(Ord. 1503, passed 3-23-06)
§ 151.074 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This subchapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this subchapter and
another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions
shall prevail.
(Ord. 1503, passed 3-23-06)
§ 151.075 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this subchapter, all provisions
shall be:
   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(Ord. 1503, passed 3-23-06)
§ 151.076 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this subchapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
consideration. Larger floods can and will occur. Actual flood heights may be
increased by man-made or natural causes. This subchapter does not imply that
land outside the special flood hazard areas or uses permitted within such areas
will be free from flooding or flood damages. This subchapter shall not create
liability on the part of the town or by any officer or employee thereof for any
flood damages that result from reliance on this subchapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
(Ord. 1503, passed 3-23-06)
§ 151.077 DESIGNATION OF FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Building Code Administrator, or his/her designee, hereinafter referred
to as the “Floodplain Administrator,” is hereby appointed to administer and
implement the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 1503, passed 3-23-06)
§ 151.078 FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION, PERMIT, AND CERTIFICATION
REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Application requirements. Application for a floodplain development
permit shall be made to the Floodplain Administrator prior to any development
activities located within special flood hazard areas. The following items shall
be presented to the Floodplain Administrator to apply for a floodplain
development permit:
      (1)   A plot plan drawn to scale which shall include but shall not be
limited to the following specific details of the proposed floodplain
development:
         (a)   The nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area of
development/disturbance, existing and proposed structures, utility systems,
grading/pavement areas, fill materials, storage areas, drainage facilities, and
other development;
         (b)   The boundary of the special flood hazard area as delineated on
the FIRM or other flood map as determined in § 151.071, or a statement that the
entire lot is within the special flood hazard area;
         (c)   Flood zone(s) designation of the proposed development area as
determined on the FIRM or other flood map as determined in § 151.071;
         (d)   The boundary of the floodway(s) or non-encroachment area(s) as
determined in § 151.071;
         (e)   The base flood elevation (BFE) where provided as set forth in §
151.071 or § 151.079(J) and (K);
         (f)   The old and new location of any watercourse that will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development;
         (g)   The boundary and designation date of the Coastal Barrier
Resource System (CBRS) area or Otherwise Protected Areas (OPA), if applicable;
and
         (h)   Certification of the plot plan by a registered land surveyor or
professional engineer.
      (2)   Proposed elevation, and method thereof, of all development within a
special flood hazard area, including but not limited to:
         (a)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed
reference level (including basement) of all structures;
         (b)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-
residential structure in Zone AE, A or AO will be floodproofed; and
         (c)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any proposed
utility systems will be elevated or floodproofed.
      (3)   If floodproofing, a floodproofing certificate (FEMA form 81-65)
with supporting data and an operational plan that includes but is not limited
to installation, exercise, and maintenance of floodproofing measures.
      (4)   A foundation plan, drawn to scale, which shall include details of
the proposed foundation system to ensure all provisions of this subchapter are
met. These details include but are not limited to:
         (a)   The proposed method of elevation, if applicable (that is, fill,
solid foundation perimeter wall, solid backfilled foundation, open foundation
on columns/posts/piers/piles/shear walls);
         (b)   Openings to facilitate equalization of hydrostatic flood forces
on walls in accordance with § 151.083(E), when solid foundation perimeter walls
are used in Zones A, AO, AE, and Al—30;
         (c)   The following, in coastal high hazard areas, in accordance with
§151.083(E)(4) and § 151.084:
            1. V-Zone certification with accompanying plans and specifications
verifying the engineered structure and any breakaway wall designs;
            2. Plans for open wood latticework or insect screening, if
applicable;
            3. Plans for non-structural fill, if applicable. If non-structural
fill is proposed, it must be demonstrated through coastal engineering analysis
that the proposed fill would not result in any increase in the base flood
elevation or otherwise cause adverse impacts by wave ramping and deflection on
to the subject structure or adjacent properties.
      (5)   Usage details of any enclosed areas below the regulatory flood
protection elevation.
      (6)   Plans and/or details for the protection of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems to be located and
constructed to minimize flood damage.
      (7)   Copies of all other local, state, and federal permits required
prior to floodplain development permit issuance (wetlands, endangered species,
erosion and sedimentation control, CAMA, riparian buffers, mining, etc.)
      (8)   Documentation for placement of recreational vehicles and/or
temporary structures, when applicable, to ensure § 151.083(G) and (H) of this
subchapter are met.
      (9)   A description of proposed watercourse alteration or relocation,
when applicable, including an engineering report on the effects of the proposed
project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the effects to
properties located both upstream and downstream; and a map (if not shown on
plot plan) showing the location of the proposed watercourse alteration or
relocation.
   (B)   Permit requirements. The floodplain development permit shall include
but not be limited to:
      (1)   A description of the development to be permitted under the
floodplain development permit.
      (2)   The special flood hazard area determination for the proposed
development per available data specified in § 151.071.
      (3)   The regulatory flood protection elevation required for the
reference level and all attendant utilities.
      (4)   The regulatory flood protection elevation required for the
protection of all public utilities.
      (5)   All certification submittal requirements with timelines.
      (6)   A statement that no fill material or other development shall
encroach into the floodway or non-encroachment area of any watercourse, as
applicable.
      (7)   The flood openings requirements, if in Zones A, AO, AE, or A1—30.
      (8)   Limitations of use of the enclosures below the lowest floor (if
applicable) (that is, parking, building access, and limited storage only).
   (C)   Certification requirements.
      (1)   Elevation certificates.
         (a)   An elevation certificate (FEMA form 81-31) is required prior to
the actual start of any new construction. It shall be the duty of the permit
holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the
elevation of the reference level, in relation to mean sea level. The Floodplain
Administrator shall review the certificate data submitted. Deficiencies
detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder prior to the
beginning of construction. Failure to submit the certification or failure to
make required corrections shall be cause to deny a floodplain development
permit.
         (b)   An elevation certificate (FEMA form 81-31) is required after the
reference level is established. Within 14 calendar days of establishment of the
reference level elevation, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit
to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the elevation of the
reference level, in relation to mean sea level. Any work done within the 14-day
calendar period and prior to submission of the certification shall be at the
permit holder’s risk. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate
data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the
permit holder immediately and prior to further work being permitted to proceed.
Failure to submit the certification or failure to make required corrections
shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project.
         (c)   A final as-built elevation certificate (FEMA form 81-31) is
required after construction is completed and prior to certificate of
compliance/occupancy issuance. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to
submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of final as- built
construction of the elevation of the reference level and all attendant
utilities. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data
submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the
permit holder immediately and prior to certificate of compliance/occupancy
issuance. In some instances, another certification may be required to certify
corrected as-built construction. Failure to submit the certification or failure
to make required corrections shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a
certificate of compliance/occupancy.
         (d)   All new or substantially improved structures shall be certified
by a registered engineer that the construction shall be securely anchored to
adequately anchored pilings or columns in order to withstand velocity waters
and hurricane wave wash as required. All engineering certification shall be in
writing and bear the engineer’s seal and signature. All engineering
certifications shall comply with standard ASTM D-698.
      (2)   Floodproofing certificate. If nonresidential floodproofing is used
to meet the regulatory flood protection elevation requirements, a floodproofing
certificate (FEMA form 81-65), with supporting data and an operational plan, is
required prior to the actual start of any new construction. It shall be the
duty of the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a
certification of the floodproofed design elevation of the reference level and
all attendant utilities, in relation to mean sea level. Floodproofing
certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a
professional engineer or architect and certified by same. The Floodplain
Administrator shall review the certificate data and plan. Deficiencies detected
by such review shall be corrected by the applicant prior to permit approval.
Failure to submit the certification or failure to make required corrections
shall be cause to deny a floodplain development permit. Failure to construct in
accordance with the certified design shall be cause to withhold the issuance of
a certificate of compliance/occupancy.
      (3)   If a manufactured home is placed within Zone A, AO, AE, or Al—30
and the elevation of the chassis is more than 36 inches in height above grade,
an engineered foundation certification is required per §151.083(D).
      (4)   If a watercourse is to be altered or relocated, a description of
the extent of watercourse alteration or relocation; a professional engineer’s
certified report on the effects of the proposed project on the flood-carrying
capacity of the watercourse and the effects to properties located both upstream
and downstream; and a map showing the location of the proposed watercourse
alteration or relocation shall all be submitted by the permit applicant prior
to issuance of a floodplain development permit.
      (5)   Certification exemptions. The following structures, if located
within Zone A, AO, AE, or A1—30, are exempt from the elevation/floodproofing
certification requirements specified in items (1) and (2) of this subsection:
         (a)   Recreational vehicles meeting requirements of §151.083(G)(1);
         (b)   Temporary structures meeting requirements of §151.083(H); and
         (c)   Accessory structures less than 150 square feet meeting
requirements of §151.083(I).
      (6)   A V-Zone certification with accompanying design plans and
specifications is required prior to issuance of a floodplain development permit
within coastal high hazard areas. It shall be the duty of the permit applicant
to submit to the Floodplain Administrator said certification to ensure the
design standards of this subchapter are met. A registered professional engineer
or architect shall develop or review the structural design, plans, and
specifications for construction and certify that the design and methods of
construction to be used are in accordance with accepted standards of practice
for meeting the provisions of this subchapter. This certification is not a
substitute for an elevation certificate.
(Ord. 1503, passed 3-23-06)
§ 151.079 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Floodplain Administrator shall perform but not be limited to the
following duties:
   (A)   Review all floodplain development applications and issue permits for
all proposed development within special flood hazard areas to assure that the
requirements of this subchapter have been satisfied.
   (B)   Advise permittee that additional federal or state permits (wetlands,
endangered species, erosion and sedimentation control, CAMA, riparian buffers,
mining, etc.) may be required and require that copies of such permits be
provided and maintained on file with the floodplain development permit.
   (C)   Notify adjacent communities and the North Carolina Department of Crime
Control and Public Safety, Division of Emergency Management, State Coordinator
for the National Flood Insurance Program, prior to any alteration or relocation
of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
   (D)   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not
diminished.
   (E)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the
reference level (including basement) and all attendant utilities of all new or
substantially improved structures, in accordance with § 151.078(C).
   (F)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which all
new and substantially improved structures and utilities have been floodproofed,
in accordance with § 151.078(C).
   (G)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of all public
utilities in accordance with § 151.078(C).
   (H)   When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, obtain
certifications from a registered professional engineer or architect in
accordance with § 151.078(C) and § 151.083(C).
   (I)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries
of the special flood hazard areas (for example, where there appears to be a
conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), make the
necessary interpretation. The person contesting the location of the boundary
shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as
provided in this article.
   (J)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data has not been provided in
accordance with § 151.071, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base
flood elevation (BFE) data, along with floodway data or non-encroachment area
data available from a federal, state, or other source.
   (K)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is provided but no floodway nor
non- encroachment area data has been provided in accordance with § 151.071,
obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any floodway data or non-encroachment
area data available from a federal, state, or other source in order to
administer the provisions of this subchapter.
   (L)   When the lowest ground elevation of a parcel or structure in a special
flood hazard area is above the base flood elevation, advise the property owner
of the option to apply for a letter of map amendment (LOMA) from FEMA. Maintain
a copy of the letter of map amendment (LOMA) issued by FEMA in the floodplain
development permit file.
   (M)   Permanently maintain all records that pertain to the administration of
this subchapter and make these records available for public inspection.
   (N)   Make on-site inspections of work in progress. As the work pursuant to
a floodplain development permit progresses, the Floodplain Administrator shall
make as many inspections of the work as may be necessary to ensure that the
work is being done according to the provisions of the local ordinance and the
terms of the permit. In exercising this power, the Floodplain Administrator has
a right, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises
within the jurisdiction of the community at any reasonable hour for the
purposes of inspection or other enforcement action.
   (O)   Issue stop-work orders as required. Whenever a building or part
thereof is being constructed, reconstructed, altered, or repaired in violation
of this subchapter, the Floodplain Administrator may order the work to be
immediately stopped. The stop- work order shall be in writing and directed to
the person doing the work. The stop-work order shall state the specific work to
be stopped, the specific reason(s) for the stoppage, and the condition(s) under
which the work may be resumed. Violation of a stop-work order constitutes a
misdemeanor.
   (P)   Revoke floodplain development permits as required. The Floodplain
Administrator may revoke and require the return of the floodplain development
permit by notifying the permit holder in writing stating the reason(s) for the
revocation. Permits shall be revoked for any substantial departure from the
approved application, plans, or specifications; for refusal or failure to
comply with the requirements of state or local laws; or for false statements or
misrepresentations made in securing the permit. Any floodplain development
permit mistakenly issued in violation of an applicable state or local law may
also be revoked.
   (Q)   Make periodic inspections throughout all special flood hazard areas
within the jurisdiction of the community. The Floodplain Administrator and each
member of his or her inspection department shall have a right, upon
presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the
territorial jurisdiction of the department at any reasonable hour for the
purposes of inspection or other enforcement action.
   (R)   Follow through with corrective procedures § 151.080.
   (S)   Review, provide input, and make recommendations for variance requests.
   (T)   Maintain a current map repository, to include but not be limited to
the FIS report, FIRM, and other official flood maps and studies adopted in
accordance with § 151.071 of this subchapter, including any revisions thereto,
including letters of map change, issued by FEMA. Notify state and FEMA of
mapping needs.
   (U)   Coordinate revisions to FIS reports and FIRMs, including letters of
map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) and letters of map revision (LOMR).
(Ord. 1503, passed 3-23-06)
§ 151.080 CORRECTIVE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Violations to be corrected. When the Floodplain Administrator finds
violations of applicable state and local laws, it shall be his or her duty to
notify the owner or occupant of the building of the violation. The owner or
occupant shall immediately remedy each of the violations of law cited in such
notification.
   (B)   Actions in event of failure to take corrective action. If the owner of
a building or property shall fail to take prompt corrective action, the
Floodplain Administrator shall give the owner written notice, by certified or
registered mail to the owner’s last known address or by personal service,
stating:
      (1)   That the building or property is in violation of the flood damage
prevention ordinance;
      (2)   That a hearing will be held before the Floodplain Administrator at
a designated place and time, not later than ten days after the date of the
notice, at which time the owner shall be entitled to be heard in person or by
counsel and to present arguments and evidence pertaining to the matter; and
      (3)   That following the hearing, the Floodplain Administrator may issue
an order to alter, vacate, or demolish the building; or to remove fill as
appears appropriate.
   (C)   Order to take corrective action. If, upon a hearing held pursuant to
the notice prescribed above, the Floodplain Administrator shall find that the
building or development is in violation of the flood damage prevention
ordinance, he or she shall issue an order in writing to the owner, requiring
the owner to remedy the violation within a specified time period, not less than
60 calendar days, nor more than 90 calendar days. Where the Floodplain
Administrator finds that there is imminent danger to life or other property, he
or she may order that corrective action be taken in such lesser period as may
be feasible.
   (D)   Appeal. Any owner who has received an order to take corrective action
may appeal the order to the local elected governing body by giving notice of
appeal in writing to the Floodplain Administrator and the clerk within ten days
following issuance of the final order. In the absence of an appeal, the order
of the Floodplain Administrator shall be final. The local governing body shall
hear an appeal within a reasonable time and may affirm, modify and affirm, or
revoke the order.
   (E)   Failure to comply with order. If the owner of a building or property
fails to comply with an order to take corrective action for which no appeal has
been made or fails to comply with an order of the governing body following an
appeal, the owner shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished at the
discretion of the court.
(Ord. 1503, passed 3-23-06)
§ 151.081 VARIANCE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The Board of Adjustment as established by the town, hereinafter
referred to as the “Appeal Board,” shall hear and decide requests for variances
from the requirements of this subchapter.
   (B)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board may appeal
such decision to the Court, as provided in G.S. Ch. 7A.
   (C)   Fees. A fee, as established from time to time by the Board of
Aldermen, shall be paid to the town for each application for a variance or
appeal to cover the necessary administration costs and advertising.
   (D)   Variances may be issued for:
      (1)   The repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon the
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure’s continued designation as a historic structure and that the variance
is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
      (2)   Functionally dependant facilities if determined to meet the
definition as stated in § 151.069 of this subchapter, provided that provisions
§ 151.081(M)(2), (3), and (5) have been satisfied, and such facilities are
protected by methods that minimize flood damages.
      (3)   Any other type of development, provided that it meets the
requirements stated in this section.
   (E)   In passing upon variances, the Appeal Board shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other
sections of this subchapter, and:
      (1)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      (2)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
      (5)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location as defined
in § 151.069 of this subchapter as a functionally dependant facility, where
applicable;
      (6)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
      (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (8)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
      (9)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      (10)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
      (11)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
   (F)   A written report addressing each of the above factors shall be
submitted with the application for a variance.
   (G)   Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of
this subchapter, the Appeal Board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this subchapter.
   (H)   Ruling. In exercising the above- mentioned powers, the Board may
reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement,
decision, or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement,
decision or, determination that in its opinion ought to be made, and to that
end shall have the power of the official from whom the appeal is taken.
   (I)   Voting. The concurring vote of four-fifths of the members of the Board
shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or
determination of the administrative official or to decide in favor of the
applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this
subchapter, or to effect any variation in the application of this subchapter.
   (J)   Oaths of witnesses. The Mayor, or any member temporarily acting as
Mayor, is authorized in his or her official capacity to administer oaths to
witnesses in any matter coming before the Board of Adjustment.
   (K)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation (BFE) and the
elevation to which the structure is to be built and that such construction
below the base flood elevation increases risks to life and property, and that
the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood
elevation will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to $25
per $100 of insurance coverage. Such notification shall be maintained with a
record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance.
   (L)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency and
the state upon request.
   (M)   Conditions for variances:
      (1)   Variances shall not be issued when the variance will make the
structure in violation of other federal, state, or local laws, regulations, or
ordinances.
      (2)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway or
non- encroachment area if the variance would result in any increase in flood
levels during the base flood discharge.
      (3)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      (4)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship; and
         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
   (N)   A variance may be issued for solid waste disposal facilities,
hazardous waste management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage
facilities that are located in special flood hazard areas, provided that all of
the following conditions are met.
      (1)   The use serves a critical need in the community.
      (2)   No feasible location exists for the use outside the special flood
hazard area.
      (3)   The reference level of any structure is elevated or floodproofed to
at least the regulatory flood protection elevation.
      (4)   The use complies with all other applicable federal, state, and
local laws.
      (5)   The town has notified the Secretary of the North Carolina
Department of Crime Control and Public Safety of its intention to grant a
variance at least 30 calendar days prior to granting the variance.
(Ord. 1503, passed 3-23-06; Am. Ord. 1605, passed 6-18-09)
§ 151.082 GENERAL STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION.
   In all special flood hazard areas the following provisions are required:
   (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be designed
(or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement of the structure.
   (B)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
   (C)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
by methods and practices that minimize flood damages.
      (1)   A maximum of 30% of the first floor square footage may be enclosed
for means of egress and storage facilities in the A Zones. In no case shall
this area be greater than 300 square feet, and no finished wall may be longer
in any direction than 20 feet. No plumbing fixtures, electrical outlets,
condensing units, etc. shall be allowed below the base flood elevation. All
construction of this nature which is located in V and A Zones shall be
breakaway type enclosures limited to insect screening, open wood latticework,
or breakaway walls that have a design safe loading resistance of not less than
ten and no more than 20 pounds per square foot.
      (2)   In addition, enclosed garages may be allowed in the A Zones
designated on the flood maps, provided that they have no interior finish that
enhances the structural stability of the wall to exceed 20 pounds per square
foot and have working garage doors on the enclosed area. Garages may not be
designed or constructed as habitable space.
   (D)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as
to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding. These include but are not limited to HVAC equipment,
water softener units, bath/kitchen fixtures, ductwork, electric/gas meter
panels/boxes, utility/cable boxes, appliances (washers, dryers, refrigerators,
freezers, etc.), hot water heaters, and electric outlets/switches.
   (E)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
   (F)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into flood waters.
   (G)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to
avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
   (H)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements to a
structure, which is in compliance with the provisions of this subchapter, shall
meet the requirements of “new construction” as contained in this subchapter.
   (I)   Nothing in this subchapter shall prevent the repair, reconstruction,
or replacement of a building or structure existing on the effective date of
this subchapter and located totally or partially within the floodway, non-
encroachment area, or stream setback, provided that there is no additional
encroachment below the regulatory flood protection elevation in the floodway,
non-encroachment area, or stream setback, and provided that such repair,
reconstruction, or replacement meets all of the other requirements of this
subchapter.
   (J)   New solid waste disposal facilities and sites, hazardous waste
management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage facilities shall not
be permitted, except by variance as specified in § 151.081(N). A structure or
tank for chemical or fuel storage incidental to an allowed use or to the
operation of a water treatment plant or wastewater treatment facility may be
located in a special flood hazard area only if the structure or tank is either
elevated or floodproofed to at least the regulatory flood protection elevation
and certified according to § 151.078(C) of this subchapter.
   (K)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall be
consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
   (L)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
   (M)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have
adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
   (N)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have
received all necessary permits from those governmental agencies for which
approval is required by federal or state law, including Section 404 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334.
(Ord. 1503, passed 3-23-06)
§ 151.083 SPECIFIC STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION.
   In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation (BFE) data has
been provided, as set forth in § 151.071, or § 151.079(J) and (K), the
following provisions, in addition to § 151.082, are required:
   (A)   Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement
of any residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall have the
reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the regulatory
flood protection elevation, as defined in § 151.069 of this subchapter.
   (B)   Coastal high hazard areas; nonconforming uses; development.
      (1)   Within those areas designated as coastal high hazard areas by the
flood maps, all nonconforming uses on land below the 100-year flood level shall
not be expanded.
      (2)   Within those areas designated as coastal high hazard areas by the
flood maps, no land below the level of the 100-year flood elevation shall be
developed unless the new construction or substantial improvement shall:
         (a)   Be located landward of the reach of the mean high tide. No man-
made alteration of sand dunes and mangrove stands shall be permitted within the
V Zones as shown on the town’s flood insurance rate map which would increase
potential flood damage.
         (b)   Be elevated on adequately anchored piles or columns and must be
protected from hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy. The bottom of the lowest supporting structural member, exclusive of
piles, is at or above the applicable 100-year flood level which shall be
adjusted for wave height in appropriate zones. The use of fill material for
structural support of buildings shall be prohibited within the V zones as shown
on the town’s flood insurance rate map.
         (c)   Have no basement and have the space below the lowest floor free
of obstructions so that the impact of abnormally high tides or wind driven
water is minimized except as described in §
151.083(A).
   (C)   Non-residential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other non- residential structure
shall have the reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the
regulatory flood protection elevation, as defined in §
151.069 of this subchapter. Structures located in A, AE and A1—30 Zones may be
floodproofed to the regulatory flood protection elevation in lieu of elevation,
provided that all areas of the structure, together with attendant utility and
sanitary facilities, below the regulatory flood protection elevation are
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, using
structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. For AO Zones, the floodproofing
elevation shall be in accordance with §
151.085(A). A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that
the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be
provided to the Floodplain Administrator as set forth in §
151.078(C), along with the operational and maintenance plans.
   (D)   Manufactured homes.
      (1)   New or replacement manufactured homes shall be elevated so that the
reference level of the manufactured home is no lower than the regulatory flood
protection elevation, as defined in §
151.069 of this subchapter.
      (2)   Manufactured homes shall be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, either
by engineer certification, or in accordance with the most current edition of
the State of North Carolina Regulations for Manufactured Homes, adopted by the
Commissioner of Insurance pursuant to G.S. § 143-143.15 or a certified
engineered foundation. Additionally, when the elevation would be met by an
elevation of the chassis 36 inches or less above the grade at the site, the
chassis shall be supported by reinforced piers or engineered foundation. When
the elevation of the chassis is above 36 inches in height, an engineering
certification is required.
      (3)   All enclosures or skirting below the lowest floor shall meet the
requirements of § 151.083(E)(1), (2), and (3).
      (4)   An evacuation plan must be developed for evacuation of all
residents of all new, substantially improved, or substantially damaged
manufactured home parks or subdivisions located within flood prone areas. This
plan shall be filed with and approved by the Floodplain Administrator and the
local emergency management coordinator.
   (E)   Elevated buildings. Fully enclosed areas of new construction and
substantially improved structures, which are below the lowest floor:
      (1)   Shall not be designed or used for human habitation, but shall only
be used for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage of
maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises. Access to the
enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles
(garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment (standard exterior
door), or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). The interior portion
of such enclosed area shall not be finished or partitioned into separate rooms,
except to enclose storage areas;
      (2)   Shall be constructed entirely of flood resistant materials, up to
the regulatory flood protection elevation;
      (3)   Shall include, in Zones A, AO, AE, and A1—30, flood openings to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on walls by allowing for the
entry and exit of floodwaters. To meet this requirement, the openings must
either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed
the following minimum design criteria:
         (a)   A minimum of two flood openings on different sides of each
enclosed area subject to flooding;
         (b)   The total net area of all flood openings must be at least one
square inch for each square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
         (c)   If a building has more than one enclosed area, each enclosed
area must have flood openings to allow floodwaters to enter and exit
automatically;
         (d)   The bottom of all required flood openings shall be no higher
than one foot above the adjacent grade;
         (e)   Flood openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic flow of
floodwaters in both directions; and
         (f)   Enclosures made of flexible skirting are not considered
enclosures for regulatory purposes and, therefore, do not require flood
openings. Masonry or wood underpinning, regardless of structural status, is
considered an enclosure and requires flood openings as outlined above.
      (4)   Shall allow, in coastal high hazard areas (Zones VE and V1—30),
breakaway walls, open wood latticework, or insect screening, provided that it
is not part of the structural support of the building and is designed so as to
breakaway, under abnormally high tides or wave action, without causing damage
to the structural integrity of the building, provided that the following design
specifications are met:
         (a)   Material shall consist of open wood latticework or insect
screening; or
         (b)   Breakaway walls shall meet the following design specifications:
            1.   Design safe loading resistance of each wall shall be not less
than ten nor more than 20 pounds per square foot; or
            2.   Breakaway walls that exceed a design safe loading resistance
of 20 pounds per square foot (either by design or when so required by state or
local codes) shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect that the breakaway wall will collapse from a water load less than
that which would occur during the base flood event, and the elevated portion of
the building and supporting foundation system shall not be subject to collapse,
displacement, or other structural damage due to the effects of wind and water
loads acting simultaneously on all building components (structural and non-
structural). The water loading values used shall be those associated with the
base flood. The wind loading values used shall be those required by the North
Carolina State Building Code.
   (F)   Additions/improvements.
      (1)   Additions and/or improvements to pre-FIRM structures when the
addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to
the existing structure are:
         (a)   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or improvements
must be designed to minimize flood damages and must not be any more
nonconforming than the existing structure.
         (b)   A substantial improvement, both the existing structure and the
addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new
construction.
      (2)   Additions to post-FIRM structures with no modifications to the
existing structure other than a standard door in the common wall shall require
only the addition to comply with the standards for new construction.
      (3)   Additions and/or improvements to post-FIRM structures when the
addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to
the existing structure are:
         (a)   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or improvements
only must comply with the standards for new construction.
         (b)   A substantial improvement, both the existing structure and the
addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new
construction.
      (4)   Where an independent perimeter load-bearing wall is provided
between the addition and the existing building, the addition(s) shall be
considered a separate building and only the addition must comply with the
standards for new construction.
   (G)   Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles shall either:
      (1)   Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully
licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway
use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by
quick disconnect type utilities, and has no permanently attached additions); or
      (2)   Meet all the requirements for new construction.
   (H)   Temporary non-residential structures. Prior to the issuance of a
floodplain development permit for a temporary structure, the applicant must
submit to the Floodplain Administrator a plan for the removal of such structure
(s) in the event of a hurricane, flash flood, or other type of flood warning
notification. The following information shall be submitted in writing to the
Floodplain Administrator for review and written approval:
      (1)   A specified time period for which the temporary use will be
permitted. Time specified should not exceed three months, renewable up to one
year;
      (2)   The name, address, and phone number of the individual responsible
for the removal of the temporary structure;
      (3)   The time frame prior to the event at which a structure will be
removed (that is, minimum of 72 hours before landfall of a hurricane or
immediately upon flood warning notification);
      (4)   A copy of the contract or other suitable instrument with the entity
responsible for physical removal of the structure; and
      (5)   Designation, accompanied by documentation, of a location outside
the special flood hazard area, to which the temporary structure will be moved.
   (I)   Accessory structures.
      (1)   When accessory structures (sheds, detached garages, etc.) are to be
placed within a special flood hazard area, the following criteria shall be met:
         (a)   Accessory structures shall not be used for human habitation
(including working, sleeping, living, cooking, or restroom areas);
         (b)   Accessory structures shall not be temperature-controlled;
         (c)   Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood damage
potential;
         (d)   Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the
building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters;
         (e)   Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with
§ 151.082(A);
         (f)   All service facilities such as electrical shall be installed in
accordance with § 151.082(D); and
         (g)   Flood openings to facilitate automatic equalization of
hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided below regulatory flood protection
elevation in conformance with § 151.083(E)(3).
      (2)   An accessory structure with a footprint less than 150 square feet
that satisfies the criteria outlined above does not require an elevation or
floodproofing certificate. Elevation or floodproofing certifications are
required for all other accessory structures in accordance with § 151.078(C).
   (J)   New or replacement water and sewer systems. Within those areas
designated as special flood hazard areas by the flood maps, all new or
replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary sewage systems, including on-
site systems shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the
systems into flood waters. If in the opinion of town officials the conditions
warrant such action, certification may be required from a professional engineer
who is registered in the state that the systems mentioned are so designed.
   (K)   Water to air heat pumps.
      (1)   Any property owner may make application for construction of wells,
not for the purpose of or to be used for human consumption, to supply water for
and dispose of water from water to air heat pumps. Such wells shall have a
maximum depth of 40 feet. The property owner shall acquire a building permit
before commencing construction of the wells and shall submit all supporting
documents required by the Building Inspector.
      (2)   The line supplying water to the heat pump shall be equipped with a
filter and be capable of supplying 125% of the rated capacity of the system. It
shall be the responsibility of the property owner to dispose of all water from
water to air heat pumps by means of a separate well of a depth not to exceed 40
feet. This disposal system shall consist of a disposal line the minimum size of
which shall be two inches in diameter. The disposal line shall contain a
strainer. In no case may water from the heat pump be disposed of in sewer
lines, storm drains, or estuarine waters.
(Ord. 1503, passed 3-23-06; Am. Ord. 1515, passed 8-24-06)
§ 151.084 COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREAS (ZONES VE).
   Coastal high hazard areas are special flood hazard areas established in §
151.071, and designated as Zones VE. These areas have special flood hazards
associated with high velocity waters from storm surges or seismic activity and,
therefore, in addition to meeting all requirements of this subchapter, the
following provisions shall apply:
   (A)   All development shall:
      (1)   Be located landward of the reach of mean high tide;
      (2)   Be located landward of the first line of stable natural vegetation;
and
      (3)   Comply with all applicable CAMA setback requirements.
   (B)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be elevated so
that the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor
(excluding pilings or columns) is no lower than the regulatory flood protection
elevation. Floodproofing shall not be utilized on any structures in coastal
high hazard areas to satisfy the regulatory flood protection elevation
requirements.
   (C)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall have the space
below the lowest floor free of obstruction so as not to impede the flow of
flood waters, with the following exceptions:
      (1)   Open wood latticework or insect screening may be permitted below
the regulatory flood protection elevation for aesthetic purposes only and must
be designed to wash away in the event of abnormal wave action and in accordance
with §
151.083(E)(4)(a). Design plans shall be submitted in accordance with §
151.078(A)(4)(C)(2); or
      (2)   Breakaway walls may be permitted, provided that they meet the
criteria set forth in §
151.083(E)(4). Design plans shall be submitted in accordance with §
151.078(A)(4)(c)(1).
   (D)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be securely
anchored to pile or column foundations. All pilings and columns and the
structures attached thereto shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse,
and lateral movement due to the effect of wind and water loads acting
simultaneously on all building components.
      (1)   Water loading values used shall be those associated with the base
flood.
      (2)   Wind loading values used shall be those required by the current
edition of the North Carolina State Building Code.
   (E)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the
design, specifications, and plans for construction are in compliance with the
provisions contained in §
151.083, §
151.084(C)(1) and (2), §
151.084(D) and §
151.084(F) of this subchapter on the current version of the North Carolina
“National Flood Insurance Program V-Zone Certification” form.
   (F)   Fill shall not be used for structural support. Limited non-compacted
and non-stabilized fill may be used around the perimeter of a building for
landscaping/aesthetic purposes, provided that it is demonstrated through
coastal engineering analysis that the proposed fill would not result in any
increase in the base flood elevation and not cause any adverse impacts by wave
ramping and deflection to the subject structure or adjacent properties.
   (G)   There shall be no alteration of sand dunes which would increase
potential flood damage.
   (H)   No manufactured homes shall be permitted except in an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision. A replacement manufactured home may be
placed on a lot in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, provided
that the anchoring and elevation standards of this section have been satisfied.
   (I)   Recreational vehicles may be permitted in coastal high hazard areas,
provided that they meet the recreational vehicle criteria of § 151.083(G)(1)
and the temporary structure provisions of § 151.083(H).
(Ord. 1503, passed 3-23-06; Am. Ord. 1515, passed 8-24-06)
§ 151.085 STANDARDS FOR AREAS OF SHALLOW FLOODING (ZONE AO).
   Located within the special flood hazard areas established in § 151.071 are
areas designated as shallow flooding areas. These areas have special flood
hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly
defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable
and indeterminate. In addition to § 151.082, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall meet the following requirements:
   (A)   The reference level shall be elevated at least as high as the depth
number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), in feet, plus a
freeboard of two feet, above the highest adjacent grade; or at least two feet
above the highest adjacent grade plus a freeboard of two feet if no depth
number is specified.
   (B)   Non-residential structures may, in lieu of elevation, be floodproofed
to the same level as required in § 151.085(A) so that the structure, together
with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, below that level shall be
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and
with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. Certification is required as per §
151.078(C) and § 151.083(C).
   (C)   Adequate drainage paths shall be provided around structures on slopes,
to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
(Ord. 1503, passed 3-23-06)
§ 151.086 EFFECT ON RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES UNDER THE EXISTING FLOOD DAMAGE
PREVENTION ORDINANCE.
   This subchapter in part comes forward by reenactment of some of the
provisions of the flood damage prevention ordinance enacted November 21, 1974
as amended, and it is not the intention to repeal but rather to re- enact and
continue to enforce without interruption of such existing provisions, so that
all rights and liabilities that have accrued thereunder are reserved and may be
enforced. The enactment of this subchapter shall not affect any action, suit,
or proceeding instituted or pending. All provisions of the flood damage
prevention ordinance of the town enacted on November 21, 1974 as amended, which
are not reenacted herein are repealed.
(Ord., passed 11-21-74; Am. Ord. 1043, passed 3-26-87; Am. Ord. 1152, passed 8-
22-91; Am. Ord. 1263, passed 11-16-95; Am. Ord. 1282, passed 10-23-96; Am. Ord.
1354, passed 2-24-00; Am. Ord. 1355, passed 3-9-00; Am. Ord. 1367, passed 8-24-
00; Am. Ord. 1368, passed 11-16-00; Am. Ord. 1503, passed 3-23-06)
§ 151.087 CONFLICTING LAWS; SUBCHAPTER TO PREVAIL.
   The provisions and requirements of this subchapter shall take precedence
over any conflicting ordinances, regulations, or codes or parts thereof as they
apply to the jurisdiction of the town.
(Ord. 1503, passed 3-23-06)
§ 151.088 EFFECT UPON OUTSTANDING FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMITS.
   Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans,
construction, size, or designated use of any development or any part thereof
for which a floodplain development permit has been granted by the Floodplain
Administrator or his or her authorized agents before the time of passage of
this ordinance, provided, however, that when construction is not begun under
such outstanding permit within a period of six months subsequent to the date of
issuance of the outstanding permit, construction or use shall be in conformity
with the provisions of this ordinance.
(Ord. 1503, passed 3-23-06)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 151.110 BUILDING INSPECTOR.
   (A)   This chapter shall be administered and enforced by the Municipal
Building Inspector. If the Building Inspector shall find that any of the
provisions of this chapter are being violated, he shall notify in writing the
person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the violation
and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He shall order discontinuance
of illegal use of land, buildings, or structures; removal of illegal buildings
or of additions, alterations, or structural changes thereto; discontinuance of
any illegal work being done; or shall take any other action authorized by this
chapter to insure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions.
   (B)   (1)   The Building Inspector and the Division of Land Use and Building
shall be a part of the Public Works Department.
      (2)   The Inspector shall possess all the powers conferred and shall
perform all the duties prescribed by G.S. § 160A-412 and other statutes
applicable thereto. He shall possess such further power and perform such
further duties as prescribed by the fire prevention regulations, zoning
ordinances, pier and dock ordinances, the Coastal Area Management Act, and the
minimum housing code of the town, and the like.
      (3)   The Building Inspector or his deputy shall have the right to enter,
at all reasonable times, any building or premises within the town, without
molestation, for the purpose of inspecting or in the performance of his duties.
He shall inspect or cause to be inspected frequently all chimneys, flues, steam
and fire openings within the town and may, when occasion requires, appoint
deputies to perform any part of his duties.
(Ord. 1043, passed 3-26-87)
Statutory reference:
   Authorizing the creation of Inspection Department, see G.S. § 160A-411
§ 151.111 BUILDING PERMIT FEES.
   At the time any person acquires a permit issued under the provisions of this
chapter or G.S. § 160A-417, the person shall pay a fee as set out in the
Official Building Permit Fee Schedule as approved by the Board of Aldermen and
amended from time to time, a copy of which shall be retained permanently in the
office of the Building Inspector.
(Ord. 1164, passed 1-9-92)
§ 151.112 INSPECTION BOXES REQUIRED.
   The owner of real property upon which new construction or substantial
improvement (as defined in § 151.066) is undertaken shall provide on the site
on which such construction or improvement is undertaken a weather tight
inspection box approved by the Building Inspector and containing all applicable
permits, stamped plans and inspection cards issued by the Building Inspector.
No inspections shall be made by the Building Inspector until the inspection box
has been erected on site and the permits, plans and cards as described
hereinabove are placed in the inspection box.
(Ord. 1299, passed 1-22-98)
§ 151.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   A violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor punishable in accordance
with the provisions of G.S. § 14-4.
   (B)   Except as provided otherwise herein, a violation of the provisions of
this chapter shall subject the offender to a civil penalty in the amount of $50
per day to be recovered by the town in a civil action in the nature of debt if
the offender does not pay the penalty within 15 days after having been cited
for a violation of this chapter. Each day's continuing violation shall be a
separate and distinct offense.
   (C)   A violation of §§ 151.035 through 151.039 of this chapter shall
subject the offender to a civil penalty in the amount of $10 per day to be
recovered by the town in a civil action in the nature of debt if the offender
does not pay the penalty within 15 days after having been cited for a violation
of this chapter. Each day's continuing violation shall be a separate and
distinct offense.
(Ord. 1263, passed 11-16-95)
CHAPTER 152: MINIMUM HOUSING CODE
Section
General Provisions
   
152.001   Findings and purpose
   
152.002   Scope
   
152.003   Definitions
   
152.004   Reports by employees of fire and police departments
   
152.005   Application of state building code
   
152.006   Approval of rules and regulations
   
152.007   Frame structures in fire district; restrictions
Minimum Standards for Dwellings or Dwelling Units
   
152.020   Compliance required
   
152.021   Structural conditions
   
152.022   Basic equipment and facilities
   
152.023   Light and ventilation
   
152.024   Electrical systems
   
152.025   Space and use
   
152.026   Sanitation
Residential Construction; Technical Guidelines
   
152.040   General requirements
   
152.041   Piles required
   
152.042   Floor system
   
152.043   Other exterior construction
   
152.044   Walls
   
152.045   Roofs
   
152.046   Wood to masonry
Technical Minimum Standards For All Buildings
   
152.060   Structural standards
   
152.061   Plumbing standards
   
152.062   Heating standards
   
152.063   Electrical standards
   
152.064   Commercial property
Rooming Houses and Units
   
152.075   Compliance required
   
152.076   Reserved
   
152.077   Reserved
   
152.078   Water closet, lavatory, and bath facilities
   
152.079   Water heater required
   
152.080   Minimum floor area for sleeping purposes
   
152.081   Exit requirement
   
152.082   Sanitary conditions
   
152.083   Smoke detectors
   
152.084   Violations
Access System and Structures
   
152.095   Permit required; application
   
152.096   Applications to be accompanied by agreement
   
152.097   Removable or permanent structures
   
152.098   Reserved
   
152.099   Reserved
   
152.100   Structures located eastwardly to be removed when owner notified by
town
   
152.101   Removable units and structures; specifications
   
152.102   Electrical circuits; water or sewer lines and fixtures
   
152.103   Display of name and address on rail of removable structure
   
152.104   Suggested sketches and structural systems to be provided for
construction by owner
Sand Dunes
   
152.115   Short title
   
152.116   Purpose
   
152.117   Exemptions
   
152.118   Damaging sand dunes prohibited
   
152.119   Shore line protection officers
   
152.120   Permits affecting sand dunes
   
152.121   Appeals procedure
   
152.122   Inspection and permit fees
Unsafe Buildings
   
152.135   Residential buildings unfit for human habitation
   
152.136   Unsafe dilapidated buildings
   
152.137   Periodic inspection
   
152.138   Defects in buildings to be corrected
   
152.139   Unsafe buildings condemned
   
152.140   Removing notice from condemned building
   
152.141   Action in event of failure to take corrective action
   
152.142   Order to take corrective action
   
152.143   Appeal; finality of order if not appealed
   
152.144   Failure to comply with order
Administration and Enforcement Procedure
   
152.150   Inspector powers and duties
   
152.151   Administrative procedure
   
152.152   Methods of service of complaints and orders
   
152.153   In rem action by inspector; placarding
   
152.154   Costs, a lien on premises
   
152.155   Alternative remedies
   
152.156   Lien on premises; contract for repairs
   
152.157   Alternative remedies; nuisances
   
152.158   Conflict with other provisions
 
   
152.999   Penalty
   
Appendix:    Forms
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.001 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   Pursuant to G.S. § 160D-1201, it is hereby found and declared that
there exists in the town dwellings which are unfit for human habitation due to
dilapidation, defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents and other
calamities, lack of ventilation, light and sanitary facilities, and other
conditions rendering such dwellings unsafe or unsanitary, dangerous and
detrimental to the health and otherwise inimical to the welfare of the
residents of the town. In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of
the residents of the town as authorized by G.S. 160D-1201 et seq. it is the
purpose of this article to establish minimum standards of fitness for the
initial and continued occupancy of all buildings used for human habitation, as
expressly authorized by G.S. 160D-1205.
   (B)   Furthermore, all projects concerning construction (erection,
alteration, and/or repair) are areas of environmental concern and shall be
treated as such. All of the concerns of the minimum housing code and technical
guidelines shall be considered as to their impact on the environment and every
effort shall be made by all concerned to preserve and maintain the environment
for our own protection, safety, and welfare, and for those generations yet
unborn.
(Ord., passed 1-22-77; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23)
§ 152.002 SCOPE.
   (A)   This code is hereby declared to be remedial, and shall be construed to
secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof through structural
strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to
life and property from fire and other hazards incidental to the construction,
alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of dwellings,
apartment houses, rooming houses or buildings, structures, or premises used as
such.
   (B)   The provisions of this code shall apply to all existing housing and to
all housing hereafter constructed within the town. Portable, mobile, or
demountable buildings or structures, including trailers, when used or intended
to be used for housing within the town shall be subject to the provisions of
this code.
   (C)   This chapter establishes minimum requirements for the initial and
continued occupancy of all buildings used for human habitation within the town.
   (D)   The construction or repair or alteration in any way of buildings
within the bounds and jurisdiction of the town comes under the codes and
standards of the following regulatory agencies: North Carolina State Building
Code (all volumes most recent edition and amendments), Fire Prevention Code
(most recent edition), Coastal Area Management Act, Federal Flood Insurance
Program, and the following additions or more stringent requirements adopted by
the town and approved as a part of the minimum housing code. No building may be
occupied without a proper occupancy permit.
   (E)   Plans and specifications for all structures not within the scope of
this code shall be submitted simultaneously to the North Carolina Department of
Insurance, Raleigh, N.C., to the Building Inspector of the town, and to any
other environmentally concerned agencies. Permits for these structures will not
be issued until approval has been received from all concerned agencies.
   (F)   Building permits for structures estimated to cost in excess of $30,000
will be issued only to contractors licensed by the state and only when plans
and specifications for such bear the seal of a registered architect or
engineer. The seal is not a requirement for plans for one- and two-family
dwellings regardless of their estimated cost. In all construction special
attention should be paid to the North Carolina Uniform Residential Building
Code Appendix D: "Windstorm Resistive Construction".
   (G)   A building permit is valid for a period of time stated on said permit
or according to the State Building Code. Renewals or extensions of this time
limit shall be at the discretion of the Building Inspector, not to alter or
change those standards set by the North Carolina State Building Code.
   (H)   A building permit is required to erect, alter, repair, or demolish any
structure within the town. No building permit will be issued without a proper
and complete application.
(Ord., passed 1-22-77; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23)
§ 152.003 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   "ALTERATION." As applied to a building, means any change or modification in
construction exit facilities, building equipment, or permanent fixtures which
does not include an addition to the building.
   "APPROVED." Approved by the Building Inspector.
   "BASEMENT." A portion of a building which is located partly underground,
having direct access to light and air from windows located above the level of
the adjoining ground.
   "BUILDING." Any structure built or used for the support, shelter, or
enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind. The term
"BUILDING" shall be construed as if followed by the words "or part thereof".
   "CELLAR." A portion of a building located partly or wholly underground
having an inadequate access to light and air from windows located partly or
wholly below the level of the adjoining ground.
   "DETERIORATED." That a dwelling is unfit for human habitation and can be
repaired, altered, or improved to comply with all the minimum standards
established by this chapter, at a cost not in excess of 50% of its value, as
determined by findings of the Inspector.
   "DILAPIDATED." That a dwelling is unfit for human habitation and cannot be
repaired, altered, or improved to comply with all the minimum standards
established by this chapter at a cost not in excess of 50% of its value, as
determined by findings of the Inspector.
   "DWELLING." Any building which is wholly used or intended to be used for
living or sleeping by human occupants whether or not such building is occupied
or vacant; provided that temporary housing as hereinafter defined shall not be
regarded as a dwelling.
   "DWELLING UNITS." Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and
forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to
be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating whether or not such unit is
occupied or vacant.
   "EXTERMINATION." The control and elimination of insects, rodents, or other
pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible
materials that may serve as their food, by poisoning, spraying, fumigating,
trapping or by other recognized and legal pest elimination methods approved by
the Inspector.
   "FAMILY." One or more persons living together, whether related to each other
by birth or not, and having common housekeeping facilities.
   "FLOOR AREA." The total area of all habitable rooms in a building/structure.
   "GARBAGE." The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
   "HABITABLE ROOM." A room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used
for living, sleeping, cooking, or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water
closet compartments, laundries, heater rooms, foyers or communicating
corridors, closets and storage spaces.
   "INFESTATION." The presence, within or around a dwelling, of any insects,
rodents, or other pests in such numbers as to constitute a menace to the
health, safety, or welfare of the occupants or to the public.
   "INSPECTOR." A Building Inspector of the town or other person charged with
the administration and enforcement of this chapter or his duly authorized
representative. An inspector shall be considered a "public officer" as defined
hereinafter.
   "MANUFACTURED HOME OR MOBILE HOME." A structure as defined in G.S. § 143-145
(7).
   "MULTIPLE DWELLING." Any dwelling containing more than two dwelling units.
   "OCCUPANT." Any person over one year of age, living, sleeping, cooking or
eating in, or having actual possession of a dwelling unit or rooming unit.
   "OCCUPANCY." The purpose for which a building is used or intended to be
used. Change of occupancy is not intended to include change of tenants or
proprietors.
   "OPENABLE AREA." That part of a window or door which is available for
unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors.
   "OPERATOR." Any person who has charge, care or control of a building, or
part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.
   "OWNER." The holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of
record.
   "PARTIES IN INTEREST." All individuals, associations, and corporations who
have interests of record in a dwelling or any who are in possession thereof; or
shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner
or agent of the owner, or as executor, executrix, administrator,
administratrix, trustee, or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such
person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the
provisions of this chapter, and of rules and regulations adopted pursuant
thereto, to the same extent as if he were the owner.
   "PERSON." Any individual, firm, corporation, association, or partnership.
   "PLUMBING." The labor, materials, and fixtures used in the installation,
maintenance, extension, and alteration of all piping, fixtures, appliances, and
appurtenances in connection with any of the following: sanitary drainage or
storm drainage facilities, the venting system and public or private water-
supply system, within or adjacent to any building, structure, or conveyance;
also the labor and material used in the installation, maintenance, extension,
or alteration of storm water, liquid waste, or sewage, and water supply systems
on any premises to their connection with any point of public disposal.
   "PREMISES." A lot, plot, or parcel of land including the buildings or
structures thereon.
   "PUBLIC EASEMENT." As used in this code, means an unoccupied open space
adjoining a building and on the same property, that is permanently maintained
accessible to the Fire Department and free of all incumbrances that might
interfere with its use by the Fire Department.
   "REPAIR." The replacement of existing work with the same kind of material
used in the existing work, not including additional work that would change the
structural safety of the building, or that would affect or change required exit
facilities, a vital element of an elevator, plumbing, gas piping, wiring or
heating installations, or that would be a violation of a provision of law or
ordinance. The term "REPAIR" or "REPAIRS" shall not apply to any change of
construction.
   "REQUIRED." Required by some provision of this code.
   "RESIDENTIAL OCCUPANCY." Buildings in which a person or persons live or in
which sleeping accommodations are provided. Such buildings include, among
others, the following: dwellings, multiple dwellings, and lodging houses, and
all dormitories.
   "ROOMING HOUSE." Any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling containing one
or more rooming unit, in which space is let by the owner or operator to three
or more persons who are not members of the family of the owner or operator.
   "ROOMING UNIT/RENTAL UNIT." Any room or group of rooms forming a single
habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for
cooking or eating purposes.
   "RUBBISH." Combustible and non-combustible waste materials except garbage,
and the term shall include ashes, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior,
rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral
matter, glass, crockery and dust.
   "STAIRWAY." One or more flights of stairs and the necessary landings and
platforms connecting them, to form a continuous and uninterrupted passage from
one story to another in a building or structure.
   "STORY." That portion of a building included between the upper surface of
any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the
topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper
surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above.
   "STRUCTURE." That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of
any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts
joined together in some definite manner. The term "STRUCTURE" shall be
construed as if followed by the words "or part thereof."
   "SUPPLIED." Paid for, furnished, or provided by, or under control of the
owner or operator.
   "TEMPORARY HOUSING." Any trailer or other structure used for construction or
display purposes.
   "VENTILATION." The process of supplying and removing air by natural or
mechanical means to or from any space.
   "YARD." An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a building extending
along the entire length of a street, or rear, or interior lot line.
   (B)   When the words "DWELLINGS", "DWELLING UNIT", "ROOMING HOUSE", "ROOMING
UNIT", or "PREMISES" are used in this chapter, they shall be construed as
though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof including land."
(Ord., passed 1-22-77; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23)
§ 152.004 REPORTS BY EMPLOYEES OF FIRE AND POLICE DEPARTMENTS.
   The employees of the Fire and Police Departments of the town shall make a
report to the Director of Public Works (who in turn shall provide such report
to the Building Inspector) of each building or structure which such employees
know or suspect may be unfit for human habitation or dangerous within the scope
of this chapter. Any such report shall be delivered to the Director of Public
Works within 72 hours of the discovery of the building or structure by said
employees of the Fire and Police Departments of the town.
(Ord., passed 1-22-77; Am. Ord. 1163, passed 12-19-91; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 6-
22-23)
§ 152.005 APPLICATION OF STATE BUILDING CODE.
   The North Carolina Building Code and Uniform Residential Building Code, most
recent edition and amendments, shall govern all repairs, alterations, and/or
additions to any existing structure in addition to those requirements set forth
in the minimum housing code and technical guidelines.
(Ord., passed 1-22-77; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23)
§ 152.006 APPROVAL OF RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   All rules and regulations pursuant to this code shall originate from the
Building Inspector's office and shall be subject to the approval of the Board
of Aldermen.
(Ord., passed 1-22-77; Am. Ord., passed 2-11-82; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23)
§ 152.007 FRAME STRUCTURES IN FIRE DISTRICT; RESTRICTIONS.
   A frame structure may be erected in a number two fire district if there is
provided a minimum of 15 feet of setbacks on the side yards, rear yard, and
front yard and a two-hour fire wall is provided for those walls of the
structure which may face the wall of another structure or adjoin a lot where
another structure may be built. In the case where a property owner can provide
a 30 foot setback from all property lines so that no structure may ever be
erected within 30 feet of the proposed or existing structure, then the two-hour
fire wall may not be required.
(Ord., passed 1-22-77; Am. Ord., passed 2-11-82; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23)
Penalty, see §
152.999
MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR DWELLINGS OR DWELLING UNITS
§ 152.020 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let or sublet to another for
occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit designed or intended to be used for the
purpose of living, sleeping, cooking, or eating therein, nor shall any vacant
dwelling be permitted to exist which does not comply with the requirements of
this subchapter.
(Ord., passed 1-22-77; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.021 STRUCTURAL CONDITIONS.
   No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let or sublet to another for
occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit designed or intended to be used for the
purpose of living, sleeping, cooking, or eating therein, nor shall any dwelling
building be permitted to exist which does not comply with the following
requirements.
   (A)   Foundation. The building foundation walls, piers, or other elements
shall be maintained in a safe manner and capable of supporting the load which
normal use may cause to be placed thereon. All pilings shall have adequate
ground penetration (100% below the ground penetration in relation to above
ground extension, the minimum depth shall be eight feet or equal as approved by
the Building Inspector) and shall be free from appreciable decay and shall be
properly braced.
   (B)   Exterior walls. The exterior walls shall be substantially weather-
tight, water-tight, and shall be made reasonably impervious to the adverse
effects of weather and be maintained in sound condition and good repair.
   (C)   Roofs. Roofs shall be maintained in a safe manner and have no defects
which might admit rain or cause dampness in the walls or interior portion of
the building. A double thickness of exterior roofing materials shall not be
allowed. The roof, flashings, exterior walls, basement walls, floors, and all
doors and windows exposed to the weather shall be constructed and maintained so
as to be weathertight and watertight.
   (D)   Means of egress. Every dwelling unit shall have two safe, unobstructed
means of egress remotely located with minimum ceiling height of seven feet and
minimum clear width of three feet leading to a safe and open space at ground
level.
   (E)   Stairs. Every inside and outside stair shall be safe to use and
capable of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon;
and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. (Minimum dimensions as
listed in division (D) of this section).
   (F)   Porches and appurtenances. Every outside porch and any appurtenance
thereto shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load that normal use
may cause to be placed thereon; and shall be kept in sound condition and good
repair.
   (G)   Windows and doors. Every window, exterior door and basement or cellar
door and hatchway shall be substantially weather-tight, water-tight, and rodent
proof; and shall be kept in sound working condition and good repair. No hollow
core uninsulated exterior doors will be allowed.
   (H)   Windows to be glazed. Window panes or an approved substitute shall be
maintained without cracks or holes which allow passage of air.
   (I)   Hardware. Every exterior door shall be provided with proper hardware
and maintained in good condition.
   (J)   Door frames. Every exterior door shall fit reasonably well within its
frame so as to substantially exclude rain and wind from entering the dwelling
building.
   (K)   Accessory structures. Garages, storage buildings, and other accessory
structures shall be maintained and kept in good repair and sound structural
condition, and shall conform to all other applicable standards.
   (L)   Interior floors, walls, and partitions. Every floor, wall, or
partition shall be substantially rodent proof; shall be kept in sound condition
and good repair; and shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load
which normal use may cause to be placed thereon.
   (M)   Ceilings. Every interior ceiling shall be substantially rodent proof;
shall be kept in sound condition and good repair; and shall be safe to use and
capable of supporting the load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon.
   (N)   Structural supports. Every structural element of the dwelling shall be
structurally sound and show no evidence of deterioration which would render it
incapable of carrying loads or preventing uplift.
   (O)   Protective railings. Protective railings shall be required on any
unenclosed structure over three inches above adjacent finished grade or on any
steps containing two risers or more. Interior stairs and stairwells more than
two risers high shall have handrails located in accordance with requirements of
the building code. Handrails or protective railings shall be capable of bearing
normally imposed loads and be maintained in good condition.
(Ord., passed 1-22-77; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.022 BASIC EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES.
   No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let or sublet to another for
occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit designed or intended to be used for the
purpose of living, sleeping, cooking, and eating therein, nor shall any vacant
dwelling be permitted to exist which does not comply with the following
requirements.
   (A)   Sanitary facilities required. Every dwelling unit shall contain not
less than a kitchen sink, lavatory, tub or shower, and a water closet, all in
good working condition and properly connected to an approved water and sewer
system. Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be correctly
installed and maintained in good sanitary working condition, free from defects,
leaks, and obstructions. All new water closets shall be of the three gallon
conservation type.
   (B)   Location of sanitary facilities. All required sanitary facilities
shall be located within the dwelling unit and be accessible to the occupants of
same. The water closet, tub, shower, and lavatory in at least one bathroom
shall be located in a room affording privacy to the user and such rooms shall
have minimum floor space of 30 square feet.
   (C)   Hot and cold water supply. Every dwelling unit shall have connected to
the kitchen sink, lavatory, and tub or shower an adequate supply of both cold
and hot water. All water shall be supplied through an approved pipe
distribution system connected to a potable water supply.
   (D)   Heating facilities. Dwellings that are closed completely during winter
(December 21 through March 21) shall not be required to comply with minimum
heating facilities in division (D)(1) and (2) of this section.
      (1)   Every dwelling unit shall have heating facilities which are
properly installed, maintained in safe and good working condition, and are
capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms and
water closet compartments in every dwelling unit therein to a temperature of at
least 68° F. measured at a distance of three feet above the floor during
ordinary winter conditions.
      (2)   Where a gas or electric central heating system is not provided,
each dwelling unit shall be provided with sufficient fireplaces, chimneys,
flues, or gas vents, whereby heating appliances may be connected so as to
furnish a minimum temperature of 68° F. measured at a point three feet above
the floor during ordinary winter conditions, and in safe and proper working
order.
      (3)   Any cooking or heating units suspected of being defective or
dangerous shall be checked by a qualified technician and certified is safe and
in good working order if deemed necessary by the Building Inspector. Such
certification shall be in writing.
   (E)   Cooking and heating equipment. All cooking and heating equipment and
facilities shall be installed in accordance with the appropriate building, gas,
or electrical code and shall be maintained in a safe and good working
condition.
   (F)   Garbage disposal facilities. Every dwelling shall be equipped with
means of adequate garbage disposal in accordance with the town code.
   (G)   Approved smoke detectors. Every building that contains a dwelling unit
shall install an approved smoke detector within ten feet of any bedroom door as
set forth in the North Carolina Building Code. This division shall be remedial
and all dwelling units shall comply within one year of the date of adoption or
by May 27, 1983.
(Ord., passed 1-22-77; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.023 LIGHT AND VENTILATION.
   No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let of sublet to another for
occupancy any dwelling unit designed or intended to be used for the purpose of
living, sleeping, cooking, and eating therein, nor shall any vacant dwelling be
permitted to exist therein, nor shall any vacant dwelling be permitted to exist
which does not comply with the following requirements:
   (A)   Light. Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight
facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum total window area, measured
between stops, for every habitable room shall be 10% of the floor area of such
room. Whenever the only light in a room is a skylight in the top of such room,
the total window area of the skylight shall be equal to at least 10% of the
total area of such room, minimum three inches by 30 inches.
   (B)   Ventilation and egress. Every habitable room shall have at least one
window which can safely be opened, or such other device as can be opened and
will adequately ventilate the room. The total of operable window area in every
habitable room shall be equal to at least 50% of the minimum window area size
as required. Emergency egress minimum size is considered to be 30 inches by 30
inches.
   (C)   Bathroom. Every bathroom shall comply with the light and ventilation-
requirements for habitable rooms except that no window or skylight shall be
required in adequately ventilated bathrooms equipped with an approved
ventilation system.
(Ord., passed 1-22-77; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.024 ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS.
   No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let or sublet to another for
occupancy any dwelling, or dwelling unit designed or intended to be used for
the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking, or eating therein, nor shall any
vacant dwelling be permitted to exist which does not comply with the following
requirements.
   (A)   All fixtures, receptacles, equipment, and wiring shall be maintained
in a state of good repair, safe, capable of being used and installed and
connected to the source of electric power in accordance with the National
Electrical Code and special requirements of the town.
   (B)   The minimum capacity of the service supply and main disconnect switch
shall be sufficient to adequately carry the total load required.
   (C)   Every dwelling shall be adequately and safely wired for electric
lights and convenience receptacles. Every habitable room and hallway shall have
provision for adequate lighting and other necessary electrical service.
   (D)   Every public hall and stairway in every multiple dwelling containing
five or more dwelling units shall be adequately lighted at all times. Every
public hall and stairway in structures devoted solely to dwelling occupancy and
containing not more than four dwelling units may be supplied with conveniently
located light switches, controlling an adequate lighting system which may be
turned on when needed, instead of full-time lighting.
(Ord., passed 1-22-77 ; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.025 SPACE AND USE.
   No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let or sublet to another for
occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit designed or intended to be used for the
purpose of living, sleeping, cooking, or eating therein, nor shall any vacant
dwelling building be permitted to exist which does not comply with the
following requirements.
   (A)   Required space in dwelling unit. Every dwelling unit shall contain at
least 250 square feet of floor space for the first two occupants thereof, and
at least 100 additional square feet of floor area per each additional occupant.
   (B)   Required space in sleeping rooms. In every dwelling unit of two or
more rooms, every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one or two occupants
shall contain at least 100 square feet of floor space, and every room occupied
for sleeping purposes by more than two occupants shall contain at least 70
square feet of floor space for each additional occupant.
   (C)   Minimum ceiling height. At least one-half of the floor area of every
habitable room, foyer, hall, or corridor shall have a ceiling height of at
least seven feet six inches; and the floor area of that part of any room where
the ceiling height is less than seven feet six inches shall not be considered
as part of the floor area in computing the total floor area of the room for the
purpose of determining the maximum permissible occupancy thereof.
   (D)   Occupancy of dwelling unit below grade. No basement or cellar space
shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit.
(Ord., passed 1-22-77; Am. Ord., passed 3-27-80; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23)
Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.026 SANITATION.
   No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let or sublet to another for
occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit designed or intended to be used for the
purpose of living, sleeping, cooking, or eating therein, nor shall any vacant
dwelling building be permitted to exist which does not comply with the
following requirements.
   (A)   Sanitation. Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more dwelling
units shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition
the shared or public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof.
   (B)   Cleanliness. Every owner or occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep in
a clean and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling, dwelling unit and
premises thereof which he occupies or controls or which is provided for his
particular use.
   (C)   Garbage disposal. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit sha11
dispose of all his garbage and any other organic waste which might provide food
for rodents and all rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in the
garbage disposal facilities or garbage or rubbish storage containers, as
required by town code.
   (D)   Extermination. Every occupant of a single dwelling and every owner of
a building containing two or more dwelling units shall be responsible for the
extermination of any insects, rodents, or other pests within the building or
premises.
   (E)   Use and operation of supplied plumbing fixtures. Every occupant of a
dwelling unit shall keep all plumbing fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary
condition and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in the
proper use and operation thereof.
(Ord., passed 1-22-77; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23) Penalty, see §
152.999
RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION; TECHNICAL GUIDELINES
§ 152.040 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All applications for a building permit must be accompanied by a plat
in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing accurate dimensions and elevations of the
lot to be built upon; accurate dimensions and elevation of the building to be
erected, its location on the lot, and such other information as may be
necessary to determine the requirements of the construction. Nothing in this
building code shall be interpreted as nullifying or invalidating the zoning
ordinances and regulations of the town.
   (B)   All structures within the limits of the municipality shall have a
minimum of one inch wood material covering the exterior walls of the building
and such material shall be nailed securely to the studs, plates, and sills if
material extends to such. In lieu of 1/2-inch of wood on the walls, a Class A
siding may be used. All roofs shall be covered with Class A (flame spread
rating of 25 or less) fire resistant material.
   (C)   No main dwelling or living unit shall be erected which shall contain
less than one thousand square feet (1,000 square feet). The maximum allowable
square footage for multi-family buildings shall be four thousand square feet
(4,000 square feet) per floor. A minimum of 20 feet of separation shall be
required between each allowable building located on the same building site.
   (D)   Where and when any structure is damaged or altered to the extent of
50% or more of its value, all repairs or alterations shall be made so as to
bring the structure into complete conformity with this code.
   (E)   No structure shall be erected which is of such unusual design as to
materially depreciate the value of other structures nearby. In the event of an
application for a building permit for a structure which, in the opinion of the
Building Inspector, does not conform with this chapter, the plans shall be
submitted to the Board of Aldermen for a ruling.
(Ord., passed 1-22-77; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.041 PILES REQUIRED.
   (A)   Height. All piles shall be placed so that 100% of the pile above
ground level shall be compensated by an equal amount below ground level. In no
case shall the pile be less than eight feet below ground level and a minimum of
two feet below mean sea level. All piles shall be placed so that the bottom of
the lowest supporting structural member, exclusive of piles, of the first
habitable floor level of the structure shall be 14.7 feet above mean sea level.
This determination being made by obtaining reference points from the bench mark
map in the Building Inspector's office. Longer piles may be required if the
Building Inspector deems such necessary.
   (B)   Type. Wood piles, reinforced concrete, or steel piles may be used. All
wood piles shall be of acceptable grade, a minimum of nine inches across on
round piles and eight inches by eight inches for square piles. They shall be
treated with a minimum of 18 pounds creosote per square foot or .6 cca per
cubic foot. Concrete and steel piles shall be certified as to stress and
bearing capacities.
   (C)   Spacing and bracing. The maximum center to center spacing of wood
piles shall not be more than eight feet on centers under load bearing sills.
However, on two story or larger structures the Building Inspector may require
the piles to be spaced closer. Variation on spacing may be allowed where plans
are prepared by a registered architect or engineer and said party will supply a
certificate stating that the design is based upon adequate stability under
storm conditions both in bearing and uplift. When bracing is required it shall
be a minimum of two-inch by six-inch bracing X'd and double bolted.
(Ord., passed 1-22-77; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.042 FLOOR SYSTEM.
   (A)   Sills. Sills shall be minimum two-inch by 12-inch double or equal and
double bolted to notched pilings with minimum two hot dipped galvanized bolts
not less than 1/2-inch diameter accompanied by washers of not less than 1-1/2-
inch of similar material at head and nut.
   (B)   Joists. Joists shall be a minimum of two-inch by eight-inch, 16 inches
on center with span not to exceed 13 feet. Joists shall be a minimum of two-
inch by ten-inch, 16 inches on center not to exceed 16 feet. When floor joists
are placed on ledger strips and nailed directly into sills at ends no
additional fasteners are required. If joists are placed on top of sills each
joist must be secured with a hot dipped galvanized hurricane clip and fastener.
Such systems may require additional fastening if such is deemed necessary by
the Building Inspector. All joists shall have adequate bridging. All lumber
shall be of a grade satisfactory to the Building Inspector. All floor systems
shall be properly insulated with not less than six inches of approved
insulation material and underneath shall be enclosed so as to contain
insulation.
   (C)   Nails and fasteners. All nails, bolts, clips, straps, staples, or
other fastening devices shall be of hot dipped galvanized of equally suitable
corrosion resistant material. This includes all fasteners except those on the
interior finish. No washer shall be less than 1-1/2-inch diameter.
(Ord., passed 1-22-77)
Penalty, see § 152.999
§ 152.043 OTHER EXTERIOR CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Porches and decks. Porches and decks shall be constructed of treated
material equal to piling material standards. However, pilings may be reduced to
six-inch by six-inch, eight feet on center. Sills reduced to two-inch by ten-
inch doubled or equal and joists may be placed on two feet centers as per the
state code. All decking material shall be of a minimum 1-1/2-inch thickness
pressure treated to .6 cca per cubic foot or equal. (Equal is considered to be
cedar, cypress, or redwood material of minimum grade cedar and redwood 85% or
better heartwood, cypress grade C or below.) Markings or certificates may be
required. No deck or porch or pier shall be constructed without adequate guard
rails, as specified in § 52.021(O).
   (B)   Stairways exterior. All stairways shall be of treated material equal
to balance of exterior construction and shall be at least three feet wide
clear, equipped with handrails on both sides no less than 30 inches high and
nothing greater than a seven-inch rise and nothing less than an 11-inch tread.
   (C)   Exterior foundation, walls, and roofs. Every foundation wall, exterior
wall, and exterior roof shall be substantially weather-tight and rodent-proof;
shall be kept in sound condition and good repair; shall be capable of affording
privacy; and shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load which
normal use mav cause to be placed thereon. Every exterior wall shall be
protected with paint or other protective covering to prevent the entrance or
penetration of moisture or the weather.
(Ord., passed 1-22-77; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.044 WALLS.
   Framing of wood walls shall be not less than two-inch by four-inch
construction 16 inches on center with single floor plate and double top plate
nailed securely with not less than 16 penny hot dipped galvanized nails. Walls
shall be plumb and secure before sheathing is attached. Sheathing shall be not
less than 1/2-inch thickness and shall be minimum exterior grade plywood.
Sheathing is to extend from bottom of the joist or sill to the top of the top
plate. A through bolt is required not less than 1/2-inch diameter with 1-1/2-
inch washer at heat and nut. Bolt is to extend through sill upward through top
plate. Bolts shall be installed not less than two feet from each corner and
middleway the structure or if deemed advisable by the Building Inspector eight
feet on center. Not less than 3-1/2-inch of approved insulation material shall
be installed properly in all walls. All exterior wall sheathing shall be
covered with minimum 15 pounds felt.
(Ord., passed 1-22-77; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.045 ROOFS.
   Rafters shall not be less than two-inch by six-inch grade marked material
placed 16 inches on center. Every rafter shall be securely anchored with
hurricane clips or in a manner suitable to the Building Inspector. All two-inch
by six-inch rafters shall be braced with not less than a two-inch by six-inch
board to the ceiling joists at the approximate mid-point or every ten feet. If
desired, ladder bracing may be used. When a truss roof is used the spacing
shall not be more than 16 inches on center. Every truss shall be anchored with
hurricane clips or in a manner suitable to the Building Inspector. Sheathing
shall be of not less than 5/8-inch exterior grade plywood or equal. Not less
than six inches of approved insulation material or equal shall be installed in
all roof systems. No ceiling joists shall be less than 1-1/2 inches by six
inches directly connected to rafter. Minimum 30 pound felt shall be placed on
all exterior roof sheathing as underlayment.
(Ord., passed 1-22-77; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.046 WOOD TO MASONRY.
   (A)   Roof trusses, girders, and plates shall be securely anchored to solid
masonry walls with not less than 1/2-inch bolts imbedded at least 18 inches in
the concrete every eight feet. Hollow masonry walls shall be solidly filled
with concrete in the two adjoining hollows under point of bearing. All hollow
masonry walls shall have a bar running through the wall (filled as above)
connecting the pile to the roof.
   (B)   Where wood partitions and masonry walls join, the stud abutting the
masonry walls shall be doubled and bolted to the masonry with three 1/2-inch
galvanized bolts, one to be imbedded in the tie beam, one in mid-section, and
one near the base. The end of the partition plate shall also be anchored to the
stud abutting the wall and to the wall plate in an approved manner. All wood
abutting masonry shall be treated with .6 cca treatment.
(Ord., passed 1-22-77; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23) Penalty, see §
152.999
TECHNICAL MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR ALL BUILDINGS
§ 152.060 STRUCTURAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   Foundation. The following standards shall apply:
      (1)   Beneath the building there shall be firm ground, reasonably dry, no
soggy ground, no water standing, or no water running under building.
      (2)   Sound footing, adequate bearing.
      (3)   Sound piers, no loose mortar or building materials.
      (4)   There shall be no piers in which plumb line from top center falls
outside middle one-third of pier base.
      (5)   There shall be no isolated solid masonry piers exceeding in height
ten times least dimension of pier.
      (6)   No wood stiff-knees or other improper piers.
      (7)   All pilings structurally sound and free of appreciable decay.
   (B)   Exterior walls. The following standards shall apply:
      (1)   There shall be no wall in which plumb line from top center of studs
falls outside base plate at any point along wall.
      (2)   There shall be no studs spaced excessively, minimum: two inches by
four inches, 16 inches on center, 1/2-inch solid sheathing of exterior grade
plywood or equal.
      (3)   No studs shall be rotted, fire-damaged, or termite damaged.
      (4)   No broken or cracked structural members.
      (5)   All siding weathertight with no holes, excessive cracks, or rotted
boards which permit air to penetrate rooms.
      (6)   No loose siding.
      (7)   Wood shingles shall not be used as wall covering unless three feet
separation between buildings is obtained.
   (C)   Roofs. The following standards shall apply:
      (1)   No rafters rotted, broken, sagging, or improperly supported ends.
All eaves shall be in proper structural condition.
      (2)   No rafters shall be seriously fire damaged.
      (3)   Rafters shall be properly braced and tied.
      (4)   Attic shall be properly ventilated.
      (5)   No rotted, loose, fire-damaged, or sagging sheating.
      (6)   No loose or missing roof covering, no holes, no leaks causing
damage to structure or rooms.
      (7)   The minimum weight of UL Class A fiberglass shingles shall be 240
pounds with a wind load resistance of 54 mph in accordance with Beaufort Scale
#9. The minimum weight of Class C asphalt shingles shall be 300 pounds and
there shall be a minimum separation of 30 feet between structures before its
use will be approved.
      (8)   Proper flashing at walls or chimneys.
      (9)   There shall be no roof with two coverings.
      (10)   There shall be no metal, plexiglass or similar material used as
roof covering on any building except when such building is certified properly
by a licensed registered architect or engineer. When this is the case the
Building Inspector may accept such roofing material.
      (11) Split wood shingles shall not be used on roofs where there is less
than 30 feet separation between buildings. No wood shingles shall be allowed on
multi-family dwellings. All wood shingles shall be flame treated and carry a
U.L. label.
   (D)   Means of egress. The following standards shall apply:
      (1)   Two main exits, each at least 36 inches wide and six feet, eight
inches high, easily accessible to the occupants of each dwelling unit. All
existing doors easily operable and remotely located.
      (2)   Platforms, steps, or handrails provided to serve exits and
maintained in safe condition.
      (3)   Safe, continuous, and unobstructed exit from interior of building
to the exterior at street or grade level.
      (4)   A smoke detector shall be required within ten feet of each bedroom
door on the exterior side. There shall be no baffles to obstruct the sound of
the smoke detector. Smoke detectors shall also be required in any assembly
occupancy.
   (E)   Stairs. The following standards shall apply:
      (1)   Free of holes, grooves, and cracks large enough to constitute
accident hazards.
      (2)   Stairwells and flights of stairs more than two risers high shall
have rails not less than 30 inches measured vertically from the nose of the
treads to the top of the rail.
      (3)   Every rail firmly fastened and maintained in good condition.
      (4)   No flight of stairs shall be more than one inch out of its intended
position or pulled away from supporting or adjacent structures.
      (5)   Every stair tread uniform in height, sound, and securely fastened
in position and strong enough to bear a concentrated load of at least 600
pounds without danger of breaking through. All stringers shall have a minimum
of four inches direct bearing.
   (F)   Porches and appurtenances. The following standards shall apply:
      (1)   Foundation, floor, ceiling, and roof equal to standards as set
forth except: sills and joists need not be level if providing drainage of
floor; floors need not be level if providing for drainage; floors need not be
weathertight; ceiling height may be seven feet and an attic need not be vented
if left open.
      (2)   Adequate posts and railings, not rotted, broken, or termite
damaged. Railings are required as set forth in § 152.021(O).
   (G)   Interior floors. The following standards shall apply:
      (1)   No rotted or termite damaged sills.
      (2)   No broken, overloaded or sagging sills.
      (3)   Sills reasonably level.
      (4)   Sills properly and sufficiently supported.
      (5)   No rotted, fire damaged, or termite damaged joists.
      (6)   No broken or sagging joists.
      (7)   Maximum spans floor joists, see State Code, Table no. 1705.3 - 16
inches on center portion only.
      (8)   Flooring shall be reasonably weathertight, solid, level, and there
shall be no loose flooring.
   (H)   Interior walls. The following standards shall apply:
      (1)   Interior finish free of holes and excessive cracks which permit air
to penetrate rooms.
      (2)   There shall be no walls in which plumb lines from top center of
studs fall outside base plate at any point along wall.
      (3)   No loose plaster, loose boards, or other loose wall materials.
      (4)   No cardboard, newspaper, or other highly combustible or unsafe wall
finish.
      (5)   There shall be no studs excessively spaced: spacing shall be two-
inch by four-inch, 16 inches on center or equal.
      (6)   No studs shall be rotted or termite damaged.
      (7)   No broken or cracked studs or other structural members.
   (I)   Ceilings. The following standards shall apply:
      (1)   No joists rotted, broken, sagging, or improperly supported ends.
      (2)   Maximum spacing for ceiling joists, provided they show signs of
sagging and being weak are as follows:
      16 inches o.c. where plaster, solid wood, 3/8 inch plywood or 1/2 inch
gypsum wallboard is used.
      (3)   Maximum span for ceiling joists, provided they show signs of being
weak or overloaded (only attic space above) are as follows:
      16'2" for 2" x 8" at 16" o.c.
      12'3" for 2" x 6" at 16" o.c.
      8'7" for 2" x 4" at 16" o.c.
      Proper grade markings are required.
      (4)   There shall be no holes or excessive cracks which permit air to
penetrate room.
      (5)   No loose plaster, boards, sheetrock, or other ceiling finish.
      (6)   There shall be no ceiling joists seriously damaged by fire.
      (7)   No cardboard or other highly combustible finishes.
(Ord., passed 1-22-77; Am. Ord., passed 3-27-80; Am. Ord., passed 6-26-80; Am.
Ord. 1104, passed 10-12-89; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.061 PLUMBING STANDARDS.
   The following shall be the minimum standards for plumbing:
   (A)   Connection to the town sanitary system.
   (B)   All fixtures operable.
   (C)   No broken water closet bowls.
   (D)   Water closet not loose or leaking.
   (E)   No leaks in shower stall floor.
   (F)   No hopper or vogel bowl toilets.
   (G)   Adequate facilities for furnishing hot water to each tub or shower,
lavatory, and kitchen sink.
   (H)   Installed water supply inside building for each dwelling unit.
   (I)   Installed water closet, tub or shower, lavatory and sink for each
dwelling unit. Kitchen sink at least 12 inches x 16 inches x 6 inches deep.
   (J)   Separate toilet facilities for each dwelling unit.
   (K)   Toilet and bathing facilities protected from the weather.
   (L)   All water piping protected from freezing by proper installation in
protected space.
   (M)    At least three-inch minimum size main vent properly installed for
each building.
   (N)   Soil and water lines properly supported with no broken or leaking
lines.
   (O)   Every water closet compartment, floor surface, bathroom floor surface
so constructed or finished as not to permit the entrance or passage of water.
   (P)   All new water closets shall be of the three gallon conservation type.
(Ord., passed 1-22-77 ; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.062 HEATING STANDARDS.
   The following shall be the minimum standards for heating:
   (A)   All gas and oil heating equipment listed by Underwriters Laboratories,
National Warm Air Heating Code, or American Gas Association and installed as
approved.
   (B)   As to multi-family housing, liquid fuel to be stored in outside tanks
and piped to heating units.
   (C)   No loose bricks in chimney.
   (D)   No hanging masonry chimneys.
   (E)   No holes in flue.
   (F)   Thimbles grouted in tight.
   (G)   Thimbles high enough for stovepipe to rise 1/4-inch per foot minimum.
   (H)   Combustible materials shall not be placed within six inches of the
edges of a fireplace opening. Combustible material above the face of the
fireplace opening shall have a minimum clearance of 12 inches above the
opening.
   (I)   Fireplace used only for supplemental heat and not for basic heating.
   (J)   Masonry closure, if fireplace opening closed.
   (K)   Stove within six feet of thimble serving it.
   (L)   No combustible materials within 18 inches of stovepipe, 12 inches from
lath and plaster surfaces.
   (M)   No stovepipe through combustible walls.
(Ord., passed 1-22-77 ; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.063 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   The following shall be the minimum standards for electrical fixtures,
wiring, and the like:
      (1)   No receptacles, ceiling fixtures, or other fixtures hanging loose.
      (2)   All switches and fixtures safely operable.
      (3)   No unsafe wiring.
      (4)   No extension cords shall be spliced.
      (5)   No circuits shall be overloaded.
      (6)   Fuses sized correctly and not bridged out.
      (7)   All wiring to be installed shall be in accordance with the National
Electrical Code and the Electrical Code of the County of New Hanover.
      (8)   All wiring shall be maintained in a safe condition.
      (9)   Sufficient outlets for existing usage shall be provided.
      (10)   No electrical connections below 14.7 feet mean sea level.
   (B)   Where the determination is made, upon examination of the existing
electrical service supply, that such electrical service supply is obsolete or
is a hazard to the occupants or would otherwise constitute a hazard to life and
property, the following shall be used for determining the adequacy of such
service supply and main disconnect switch:
 
Total Number of Lighting and Electrical Capacity of Main Service Supply and
Outlets Only                            Main Disconnect Switch
0 - 24                                  100 amp service at 230 volts
25 - 50                                 200 amp service at 230 volts
 
   (C)   The minimum capacity of the service supply and the main disconnect
switch shall be sufficient to adequately carry the total load required in
accordance with the Electrical Code of the County of New Hanover.
(Ord., passed 1-22-77; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.064 COMMERCIAL PROPERTY.
   All repairs, alterations, and the like to existing commercial property shall
be at least to the standards and specifications of the North Carolina Building
Code. However, in no case shall the standards be less than the requirements of
this code.
(Ord., passed 1-22-77; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23) Penalty, see §
152.999
ROOMING HOUSES AND UNITS
§ 152.075 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate a rooming house, or shall occupy or let to another
for occupancy any rooming unit in any rooming house, except in compliance with
the provisions of every section of this Code. For the purpose of this section
the terms "ROOMING UNITS" and "RENTAL UNITS" shall be construed as meaning the
same.
(Ord., passed 1-22-77; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.076 RESERVED.
§ 152.077 RESERVED.
§ 152.078 WATER CLOSET, LAVATORY, AND BATH FACILITIES.
   (A)   At least one flush water closet, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower
properly connected to a water and sewer system and in good working condition,
shall be supplied for each two rooms within a rooming house wherever said
facilities are to be shared.
   (B)   All such facilities shall be located on the floor they serve within
the dwelling so as to be reasonably accessible from a common hall or passageway
to all persons sharing such facilities.
(Ord., passed 1-22-77; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.079 WATER HEATER REQUIRED.
   Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with adequate
hot water at all times.
(Ord., passed 1-22-77; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.080 MINIMUM FLOOR AREA FOR SLEEPING PURPOSES.
   Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one or two persons shall
contain at least 100 square feet of floor space and every room occupied for
sleeping purposes by more than two persons shall contain at least 70 square
feet for each additional occupant thereof.
(Ord., passed 1-22-77; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.081 EXIT REQUIREMENT.
   Every rooming unit shall open into a corridor or passageway which shall have
two safe, unobstructed means of egress to safe and open space at ground level,
as required by all applicable building codes.
(Ord., passed 1-22-77; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.082 SANITARY CONDITIONS.
   The operator of every rooming house shall be responsible for the sanitary
maintenance of all walls, floors, and ceilings, and for maintenance of a
sanitary condition in every other part of the rooming house; and he shall be
further responsible for the sanitary maintenance of the entire premises where
the entire structure or building is leased or occupied by the operator.
(Ord., passed 1-22-77; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.083 SMOKE DETECTORS.
   Smoke detectors shall be required in all rental units, at least one detector
within 10 feet of each bedroom, and not to be separated by any baffle.
(Ord., passed 1-22-77 ; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.084 VIOLATIONS.
   Violations may result in closing or nonoperation of the rental units for the
entire structure, not just a particular single unit in a structure, as well as
being a misdemeanor.
(Ord., passed 1-22-77; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23)
ACCESS SYSTEM AND STRUCTURES
§ 152.095 PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION.
   Permission to construct and maintain an access structure, stair, ramp or
walkway which is located eastwardly of the established building line on the
oceanfront on the town shall be obtained by filing an application with the
Building Inspector of the town and obtaining a building permit for the
structure.
(Ord., passed 1-22-77) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.096 APPLICATIONS TO BE ACCOMPANIED BY AGREEMENT.
   (A)   Applications filed for permission to construct an access structure,
stair, ramp, or walkway as set out above shall be accompanied by a properly
executed agreement, which agreement form may be obtained from the Building
Inspector of the town.
   (B)   The form of agreement shall provide assurances by the applicant to
construct a temporary and removable access structure, stair, ramp, or walkway
eastward of the building line which shall be subject to removal by applicant or
owner upon proper notice and request by the authorities of the town as set out
in this subchapter.
(Ord., passed 1-22-77; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23)
§ 152.097 REMOVABLE OR PERMANENT STRUCTURES.
   (A)   All structures which are westward of the building line and which are a
part of an access system are not required to be removable; however, they may be
removable at the owner's option. All such structures which are a permanent
structural type shall be in conformity with all regulations of the building
code of the town and the North Carolina State Building Code as amended by
supplements and addenda for coastal exposure.
   (B)   Removable structures constructed eastwardly of the building line shall
conform to all regulations of the North Carolina State Building Code for such
structures as amended by supplements and addenda for coastal exposure and the
additional requirements as set out hereinafter and shall be designed to support
a uniform floor load of 100 pounds per square foot applied over all deck areas,
live load, and shall be capable of resisting in lateral stability loads applied
evenly along said structure in a horizontal direction of not less than one-
fourth of the total live load for particular increment.
(Ord., passed 1-22-77; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.098 RESERVED.
§ 152.099 RESERVED.
§ 152.100 STRUCTURES LOCATED EASTWARDLY TO BE REMOVED WHEN OWNER NOTIFIED BY
TOWN.
   Any structure located eastwardly of the building line shall be completely
removable and the owner shall, upon written notice served by mail or in person
by an official of the town, remove the structure within 48 hours of said notice
for the purpose of maintenance and repair on the dune or berm section. Further,
immediately upon notice in writing or in person by a police officer of the
town, the owner shall remove such structures eastward of the building line
during any emergency period or hurricane threat. Failure on the part of the
owner to respond reasonably to such notice in either condition shall result in
the town removing such structures where possible and assessing the cost thereof
to the property owners or the confiscation of said structures and their
disposal as the town may see fit.
(Ord., passed 1-22-77; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23)
§ 152.101 REMOVABLE UNITS AND STRUCTURES; SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Each removable unit of access structures shall be demountable and as a
self-contained unit shall weigh not more than 200 pounds and have no dimension
greater than ten feet.
   (B)   The height of the deck of any removable unit, or floor, walkway,
stair, or ramp shall not be greater than six feet from the surface of the
ground at any supporting bent.
   (C)   Supporting bents shall be constructed of treated timber with a top and
bottom wale and cross bracing. The bracing shall extend outside of the vertical
members at the bottom to meet and connect to the bottom wale at a point not
less than 30 inches beyond the vertical members. Where proper anchorage is not
provided by pile structure westwardly of the building line stability by cross
bracing between bents shall be required as set out in §
152.097(B). Vertical members of all bents shall be buried not less than 30
inches below the surface of the ground with the bottom wale being not less than
18 inches below the surface of the ground at its lowest part; no part of any
bent shall be buried greater than 48 inches below grade.
   (D)   The connections of all removable units shall be by pin-type
connections using a minimum diameter 1-1/2-inch galvanized pipe or a minimum
diameter one-inch galvanized bolt having large galvanized washers with suitable
bolts or pipe caps as the case may be. All other fasteners shall be hot dipped
galvanized nails, spikes, drifts, bolts, lags, or other acceptable fasteners as
may be suitable or required to properly connect members.
   (E)   All removable structures, stairs, ramps, or walkways shall have hand
railing in good condition in accordance with the building code on each side and
at all terminations where proper access is not provided. The width of all
stairs, ramps, or walkways and the number of risers in any flight of stairs
shall be in conformity with the requirements of the building code in §
152.097(A).
(Ord., passed 1-22-77; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.102 ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS; WATER OR SEWER LINES AND FIXTURES.
   There shall be no electric circuits connected to commercial power sources
and no water or sewer lines or fixtures located beyond the building line or on
any removable structure, stair, ramp, or walkway which may extend westwardly of
the building line.
(Ord., passed 1-22-77; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.103 DISPLAY OF NAME AND ADDRESS ON RAIL OF REMOVABLE STRUCTURE.
   Each owner shall display on the eastern limit of the rail of any removable
structure which extends eastwardly of the building line his full name and the
address of the structure to which the removable access is an appurtenance.
(Ord., passed 1-22-77; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.104 SUGGESTED SKETCHES AND STRUCTURAL SYSTEMS TO BE PROVIDED FOR
CONSTRUCTION BY OWNER.
   Suggested sketches and structural systems are provided for the guidance of
all applicants and owners desiring to construct such structures; however,
individual tastes and aesthetic appearance and finish shall be a matter of
choice to the applicant insofar as it is acceptable within the aforementioned
building codes and ordinances of the town.
(Ord., passed 1-22-77; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23)
SAND DUNES
§ 152.115 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be and is referred to and cited as "The Sand Dune
Protection Regulations of Wrightsville Beach and Environs."
(Ord., passed 2-22-73; Am. Ord., passed 1-11-78; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23)
§ 152.116 PURPOSE.
   This subchapter is adopted to preserve and promote the protection of the
shore line of the town and environs within one mile of the corporate limits of
the town by maintaining the existence of natural or constructed dunes which
provide a protective barrier from the actions of the Atlantic Ocean and other
surrounding waters and storms for adjacent lands against the actions of sand,
wind, water, and people. The past practice of destroying the dunes constitutes
a serious threat to the safety of adjacent properties and people. This
subchapter is therefore adopted for the health, safety, and welfare of persons
living, visiting, or sojourning in the town and its environs within one mile of
the corporate limits of the town, and for the protection of public and private
property in those areas.
(Ord., passed 2-22-73; Am. Ord., passed 1-11-78; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23)
§ 152.117 EXEMPTIONS.
   Exempted from this subchapter is the removal of sand, sea shells, or similar
materials for souvenir value in amounts as may be carried upon the person.
(Ord., passed 2-22-73; Am. Ord., passed 1-11-78; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23)
§ 152.118 DAMAGING SAND DUNES PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation in any manner to
damage, destroy, or remove any sand dune or part thereof lying within the area
defined by §
152.116 of this subchapter, or to kill, destroy, or remove any trees,
shrubbery, or other vegetation growing on the dunes without having first
obtained a permit from the Building Inspector as specified in this subchapter
proposing the proposed damage, destruction, or removal.
(Ord., passed 2-22-73; Am. Ord., passed 1-11-78; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23)
Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.119 SHORE LINE PROTECTION OFFICERS.
   (A) The Director of Public Works, the Building Inspector, the Chief of
Police, various police officers, and others as determinned by the Town Manager
are designated to perform the functions of shoreline protection officers under
the provisions of this subchapter in addition to their other duties.
   (B) It is the intent of the Board of Aldermen in adopting this subchapter
that the function of the shore line protection officer shall ordinarily be
allocated among the officials designated in division (A) of this section as
follows:
      (1) To the Building Inspector shall be allocated all functions relating
to the issuing of permits and making inspections incidental thereto.
      (2) The Director of Public Works shall assist the Inspector as required
in determining whether any proposed use shall be detrimental to the dunes
herein thought to be protected.
      (3) The Chief of Police and the various policemen shall be allocated all
law enforcement functions as may be necessary to enforce provisions of this
subchapter.
   (C) All fees collected by a shore line protection officer shall be paid to
the Town Clerk within 48 hours of the receipt of the fees.
   (D) Every shore line protection officer shall report quarterly to the Board
of Aldermen concerning his activities, together with is recommendations, if
any.
(Ord., passed 2-22-73; Am. Ord., passed 1-11-78; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23)
§ 152.120 PERMITS AFFECTING SAND DUNES.
   (A) No permit to damage, destroy, or to remove any sand dune (or any part
thereof or vegetation thereon) shall be granted by a shore line protection
officer unless the action will not materially weaken the dune or reduce its
effectiveness as a means of protection from the effects of high wind and water,
taking into consideration the height, width, and slope of the dune and the type
of vegetation thereon.
   (B) Every application for a permit under this subchapter shall be made upon
a standard form as set forth in the appendix following this chapter. Compliance
with the requirements prescribed in the appendix shall be a condition to the
issuance of a permit.
   (C) With respect to every application for a permit under this section the
shore line protection officer shall take the following steps:
      (1) He shall make a prompt inspection of the affected area.
      (2) He shall post a notice of the application on the premises that are
the subject of the application and also at the Town Hall.
      (3) He shall notify the applicant (in person or by certified mail) of the
proposed findings concerning the application. In the notification the applicant
shall be informed that his objections, if any, to the proposed findings will be
heard by the shore line protection officer at a time and place to be set by the
shore line protection officer, if the applicant requests a hearing within seven
days of the mailing or giving of the notification.
   (D) If upon the basis of his original inspection, the shore line protection
officer believes that a proposed project may materially weaken a protective
dune or reduce its effectiveness as a means of protection from the effects of
high wind and water, he shall publish notice of the application and of his
tentative findings for two successive calendar weeks, by posting a copy of the
notice of application and findings at the Town Hall and three other public
places in the town. Together with the notice shall be published a statement
that the application and attachments will be available at his office every
weekday until at least five days following the second publication, and
preceding final action upon the application.
   (E) The shore line protection officer shall inspect every project approved
under this section at least one time after completion of the work and
completion of any restoration of protection or vegetation which he may
prescribe.
   (F) The shore line protection officer shall notify the applicant (in person
or by certified mail) of the final action upon the application for a permit,
and shall post a notice of the final action upon the premises that are the
subject of the application. The shore line protection officer shall also give
notification to any other person who has asked to be notified or who appeared
at a hearing upon the permit application.
(Ord., passed 2-22-73; Am. Ord., passed 1-11-78; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23)
§ 152.121 APPEALS PROCEDURE.
   (A) In the event that the shore line protection officer denies a permit
under this subchapter or prescribes conditions to which a permit applicant
objects, the permit applicant may within 30 days of the denial or issuance of
the permit (as the case may be) file an appeal with the Board of Aldermen. In
the event that a shore line protection officer grants a permit under this
subchapter any property owner whose property is damaged by action taken under
this permit, or any other aggrieved person, may within 30 days from the
issuance of the permit file an appeal with the Board. On receipt of any appeal
the Board shall be entitled to consider the matter ab initio and may take any
action which a shore line protection officer could have taken under this
subchapter.
   (B) Upon an appeal to the Board, the Board may provide for oral or written
presentations, or both, as it may deem appropriate. The Board may reverse or
affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the action appealed from, and shall
make an order, requirement, decision, or determination as in its opinion ought
to be made in the premises.
   (C) The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, and
shall notify all parties to the appeal (in person or by certified mail):
      (1) Of the date of the appeal hearing, at least seven days in advance
thereof, and
      (2) Of the final disposition of the appeal.
   (D) The Board may issue subpoena to compel the attendance before the Board
of persons, and the production of books and paper, for the purpose of
examination in connection with any appeal to the Board under this subchapter.
   (E) Following the hearing of any appeal, the Board shall afford the parties
thereto a reasonable opportunity to submit within the time as prescribed by the
Board proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law. The record in the
proceeding shall show the Board's ruling with respect to each requested finding
and conclusion. All orders and decisions of the Board shall set forth
separately the Board's findings of fact and conclusions of law.
   (F) As provided by general law every decision of the Board on an appeal
shall be subject to review by the Superior Court of New Hanover County by
proceedings in the nature of certiorari. However, the appeal or petition for
certiorari shall be made within 30 days after the Board's findings of fact and
conclusions of law are made and signed by the Mayor, or Mayor pro tem as the
case may be. Pending the final disposition of the appeal, no action shall be
taken which would be unlawful in the absence of a permit issued under this
subchapter.
(Ord., passed 2-22-73; Am. Ord., passed 1-11-78; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23)
§ 152.122 INSPECTION AND PERMIT FEES.
   The following fees shall be charged under the provisions of this subchapter:
   (A) For the filing of a permit and initial inspection in connection with a
permit application, a fee of $5 shall be charged.
   (B) For every and all inspections subsequent to the initial inspection in
connection with a permit application, a fee of $2.50 shall be charged.
   (C) Total inspection fee will in no case exceed $10.
(Ord., passed 2-22-73; Am. Ord., passed 1-11-78; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23)
UNSAFE BUILDINGS
§ 152.135 RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION.
   (A)   The Inspector shall determine that a residential building is unfit for
human habitation if he finds that any of the following conditions exist in such
building:
      (1)   Interior walls or vertical studs which seriously list, lean, or
buckle to such an extent as to render the building unsafe.
      (2)   Supporting members or members which show 33% or more damage or
deterioration, or nonsupporting, enclosing or outside walls or covering which
show 50% or more damage or deterioration.
      (3)   Floors or roofs which have improperly distributed loads, which are
overloaded, or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the
purpose used.
      (4)   Such damage by fire, wind, or other causes as to render the
building unsafe.
      (5)   Dilapidation, decay, unsanitary conditions, or disrepair which is
dangerous to the health, safety, or welfare of the occupants or other people in
the town.
      (6)   Inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic.
      (7)   Defects significantly increasing the hazards of fire, accident, or
other calamities.
      (8)   Lack of adequate ventilation, light, heating, or sanitary
facilities to such extent as to endanger the health, safety, or general welfare
of the occupants or other residents of the town.
      (9)   Lack of proper electrical, heating or plumbing facilities required
by this chapter which constitutes a health or a definite safety hazard.
      (10)   Pilings that are decayed or improperly located or are not properly
fastened to sills and/or joists.
   (B)   Irrespective of the above, a residential dwelling unit shall be
construed by the Inspector to be unfit for human habitation, and he shall so
find if such dwelling unit contains more than seven separate types of
violations of any of the minimum standards set forth in this chapter.
(Ord., passed 1-22-77; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.136 UNSAFE DILAPIDATED BUILDINGS.
   Unsafe dilapidated buildings as defined in the code of the town shall be
repaired, removed, renovated, or demolished as provided in this chapter.
(Ord., passed 1-22-77; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23)
§ 152.137 PERIODIC INSPECTION.
   The Inspection Department may make periodic inspections, subject to the
governing board's directions, for unsafe, unsanitary, or otherwise hazardous
and unlawful conditions in buildings or structures within its planning and
development regulation jurisdiction. In exercising this power, members of the
Department shall have a right to enter on anv premises within the jurisdiction
of the Department at all reasonable hours for the purposes of inspection or
other enforcement action, upon presentation of proper credentials. Inspections
of dwellings shall follow the provisions of G.S. § 160D-1207.
(Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23)
§ 152.138 DEFECTS IN BUILDINGS TO BE CORRECTED.
   When a local Inspector finds any defects in a building, or finds that the
building has not been constructed in accordance with the applicable State and
local laws, or that a building because of its condition is dangerous or
contains fire hazardous conditions, it shall be the Inspector's duty to notify
the owner or occupant of the building of its defects, hazardous conditions, or
failure to comply with law. The owner or occupant shall each immediately remedy
the defects, hazardous conditions, or violations of law in the property.
(Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23)
§ 152.139 UNSAFE BUILDINGS CONDEMNED.
   Designation of Unsafe Buildings. Every building that shall appear to the
Inspector to be especially dangerous to life because of its liability to fire
or because of bad condition of walls, overloaded floors, defective
construction, decay, unsafe wiring or heating systems, inadequate means of
egress, or other causes shall be held to be unsafe, and the Inspector shall
affix a notice of the dangerous character of the structure to a conspicuous
place on the exterior wall of the building.
(Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23)
§ 152.140 REMOVING NOTICE FROM CONDEMNED BUILDING.
   If any person shall remove any notice that has been affixed to any building
or structure by a local Inspector of anv local government and that states the
dangerous character of the building or structure, that person shall be guilty
of a Class 1 misdemeanor.
(Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23)
§ 152.141 ACTION IN EVENT OF FAILURE TO TAKE CORRECTIVE ACTION.
   (A)   If the owner of a building or structure that has been condemned as
unsafe pursuant to G.S. § 160D-1119 fails to take prompt corrective action, the
local Inspector shall give written notice, by certified mail to the owner's
last known address or by personal service, of all of the following:
      (1)   That the building or structure is in a condition that appears to
meet one or more of the following conditions:
         (a)   Constitutes a fire or safety hazard.
         (b)   Is dangerous to life, health, or other property.
         (c)   Is likely to cause or contribute to blight, disease, vagrancy,
or danger to children.
         (d)   Has a tendency to attract persons intent on criminal activities
or other activities that would constitute a public nuisance.
      (2)   That an administrative hearing will be held before the Inspector at
a designated place and time, not later than 10 days after the date of the
notice, at which time the owner will be entitled to be heard in person or by
counsel and to present arguments and evidence pertaining to the matter.
      (3)   That following the hearing, the Inspector may issue such order to
repair, close, vacate, or demolish the building or structure as appears
appropriate.
   (B)   If the name or whereabouts of the owner cannot, after due diligence,
be discovered, the notice shall be considered properly and adequately served if
a copy is posted on the outside of the building or structure in question at
least ten days prior to the hearing and a notice of the hearing is published in
a newspaper having general circulation in the local government's area of
jurisdiction at least once not later than one week prior to the hearing.
(Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23)
§ 152.142 ORDER TO TAKE CORRECTIVE ACTION.
   If, upon a hearing held pursuant to the notice prescribed in G.S. § 160D-
1119, the Inspector shall find that the building or structure is in a condition
that constitutes a fire or safety hazard or renders it dangerous to life,
health, or other property, the Inspector shall make an order in writing,
directed to the owner of such building or structure, requiring the owner to
remedy the defective conditions by repairing, closing, vacating, or demolishing
the building or structure or taking other necessary steps, within such period,
not less than 60 days, as the Inspector may prescribe, provided that where the
Inspector finds that there is imminent danger to life or other property, the
Inspector may order that corrective action be taken in such lesser period as
may be feasible.
(Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23)
§ 152.143 APPEAL; FINALITY OF ORDER IF NOT APPEALED.
   Any owner who has received an order under G.S. § 160D-1122 may appeal from
the order to the governing board by giving notice of appeal in writing to the
Inspector and to the local government clerk within ten days following issuance
of the order. In the absence of an appeal, the order of the Inspector is final.
The governing board shall hear an appeal in accordance with G.S. § 160D-406 and
render a decision within a reasonable time. The governing board may affirm,
modify and affirm, or revoke the order.
(Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23)
§ 152.144 FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH ORDER.
   If the owner of a building or structure fails to comply with an order issued
pursuant to G.S. § 160D-1122 from which no appeal has been taken or fails to
comply with an order of the governing board following an appeal, the owner is
guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor.
(Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE
§ 152.150 INSPECTOR POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Inspector or his designee is hereby designated as the officer to enforce
the provisions of this subchapter and to exercise the duties and powers
prescribed. It shall be the duty of this officer of his designee:
   (A)   To investigate the dwelling conditions, and to inspect dwellings and
dwelling units located in the town, in order to determine which dwellings and
dwelling units are unfit for human habitation, and for the purpose of carrying
out the objectives of this subchapter with respect to such dwellings or
dwelling units;
   (B)   To take such action, together with other appropriate departments and
agencies, public and private, as may be necessary to effect rehabilitation of
housing which is deteriorated;
   (C)   To keep a record of the results of inspections made under this
subchapter and an inventory of those dwellings that do not meet the minimum
standards of fitness herein prescribed; and
   (D)   To perform such other duties as may be herein prescribed.
(Ord., passed 1-22-77; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23)
§ 152.151 ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Preliminary investigation; notice; hearing; notice of lis pendens.
Whenever a petition is filed with the inspector by a public authority or by at
least five residents of the town charging that any dwelling or dwelling unit is
unfit for human habitation, or whenever it appears to the inspector (on his own
motion) that any dwelling or dwelling unit is unfit for human habitation, he
shall, if his preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges,
issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and parties in interest in such
dwelling or dwelling unit a complaint stating the charges in that respect and
containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the inspector (or his
designated agent) at a place within the county in which the property is located
not less than ten days nor more than 30 days after the serving of said
complaint; and that the owner and any party in interest shall have the right to
file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give
testimony at the time and place fixed in the complaint. The rules of evidence
prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings
before the inspector. Notice of such hearing shall also be given to at least
one of the persons signing a petition relating to such dwelling. Upon the
issuance of a complaint and notice of hearing, the Town Manager or his/her
designee mav cause a notice of lis pendens to be filed with the office of the
Clerk of Superior Court of New Hanover Countv: affixed thereto shall be a copy
of the complaint and notice of hearing. At that time, the code enforcement
officer shall serve the property owners, and any other interested parties, with
a copy of the notice of lis pendens, along with the attached complaint and
notice of hearing. Upon compliance with any order issued based on the findings
of the complaint and formal hearing, the Town Manager or his/her designee mv
cause a notice of cancelation of the lis pendens to be filed with the office of
the Clerk of Superior Court of New Hanover County.
   (B)   Procedure after hearing. After such notice and hearing, the Inspector
shall state in writing his determination whether such dwelling or dwelling unit
is unfit for human habitation, and, if so, whether it is deteriorated or
dilapidated.
      (1)   If the inspector determines that the dwelling or dwelling unit is
deteriorated, he shall state in writing his findings of fact in support of such
determination, and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an
order directing and requiring the owner within the time specified in the order
to repair, alter or improve the dwelling or dwelling unit to comply with the
minimum standards established by this subchapter. The order may require that
the property be vacated and closed only if continued occupancy during the time
allowed for repair will present a significant threat of bodily harm, taking
into account:
         (a)   The nature of the necessary repairs, alterations, or
improvements;
         (b)   The current state of the property; and
         (c)   Any additional risks due to the presence and capacity of minors
under the age of 18 or occupants with physical or mental disabilities.
   The order shall state that the failure to make timely repairs as directed in
the order shall make the dwelling subject to the issuance of an unfit order
under subsection (D) of this section.
      (2)   If the inspector determines that the dwelling or dwelling unit is
dilapidated, he shall state in writing his findings of fact in support of such
determination, and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an
order requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to remove or
demolish such dwelling. However, notwithstanding anv other provision of law, if
the dwelling is located in a historic district of the town and the historic
district commission determines, after a public hearing as provided by
ordinance, that the dwelling is of particular significance or value toward
maintaining the character of the district, and the dwelling has not been
condemned as unsafe, the order mav require that the dwelling be vacated and
closed consistent with G.S. 160D-949. Upon completion of required improvements,
a new certificate of occupancy must be issued prior to the subsequent leasing
or sale of the dwelling to a third party.
   (C)   Failure to comply with order. If the owner fails to comply with an
order to repair, alter or improve or to vacate and close the dwelling, the
inspector may:
      (1)   Cause to be posted on the main entrance of any dwelling so closed,
a placard with the following words: "This building is unfit for human
habitation; the use or occupation of this building for human habitation is
prohibited and unlawful." Occupation of a building so posted shall constitute a
Class I misdemeanor. The duties of the inspector set forth in this subsection
shall not be exercised until the Town Council shall have by ordinance ordered
the inspector to proceed to effectuate the purpose of this subchapter with
respect to the particular property or properties which the inspector shall have
found to be unfit for human habitation and which property or properties shall
be described in the ordinance. Such ordinance shall be recorded in the office
of the register of deeds of the county and shall be indexed in the name of the
propertv owner in the grantor index. If the owner fails to comply with an order
to remove or demolish the dwelling, the inspector may cause such dwelling to be
removed or demolished.
      (2)   The duties of the inspector set forth in this subsection shall not
be exercised until the town council shall have by ordinance ordered the
inspector to proceed to effectuate the purpose of this subchapter with respect
to the particular property or properties which the inspector shall have found
to be unfit for human habitation and which property or properties shall be
described in the ordinance. No such ordinance shall be adopted to require
demolition of a dwelling until the owner has first been given a reasonable
opportunity to bring it into conformity with the housing code. Such ordinance
shall be recorded in the office of the register of deeds of the county and
shall be indexed in the name of the property owner in the grantor index.
   (D)   Failure to repair, alter or improve. If the town council shall have
adopted an ordinance as provided in subsection (C) of this section, or the
inspector shall have issued an order, ordering a dwelling to be repaired or
vacated and closed, as provided in subdivision (C)(1) of this section, and if
the dwelling has been vacated and closed for a period of one vear pursuant to
the ordinance or order, then if the town council shall find that the owner has
abandoned the intent and purpose to repair, alter or improve the dwelling in
order to render it fit for human habitation and that the continuation of the
dwelling in its vacated and closed status would be inimical to the health,
safety, morals and welfare of the municipality in that the dwelling would
continue to deteriorate, would create a fire and safety hazard, would be a
threat to children and vagrants, would attract persons intent on criminal
activities, would cause or contribute to blight and the deterioration of
property values in the area, and would render unavailable property and a
dwelling which might otherwise have been made available to ease the persistent
shortage of decent and affordable housing in this state, then in such
circumstances, the town council may, after the expiration of such one-year
period, enact an ordinance and serve such ordinance on the owner, setting forth
the following:
      (1)   If it is determined that the repair of the dwelling to render it
fit for human habitation can be made at a cost not exceeding 50% of the then
current value of the dwelling, the ordinance shall require that the owner
either repair or demolish and remove the dwelling within 90 days; or
      (2)   If it is determined that the repair of the dwelling to render it
fit for human habitation cannot be made at a cost not exceeding 50% of the then
current value of the dwelling, the ordinance shall require the owner to
demolish and remove the dwelling within 90 days. Such ordinance shall be
recorded in the office of the register of deeds of the county and shall be
indexed in the name of the property owner in the grantor index. If the owner
fails to comply with this article, the inspector shall effectuate the purpose
of the ordinance.
      (3)   Appeals from orders of inspector. An appeal from any decision or
order of the inspector may be taken by any person aggrieved thereby or by any
officer, board or commission of the town. Any appeal from the inspector shall
be taken within ten days from the rendering of the decision or service ofthe
order, and shall be taken by filing with the inspector and with the town board
of adjustment, hereinafter referred to as "board," a written notice of appeal
which shall specify in detail the grounds upon which the appeal is based. Upon
the filing of any notice of appeal, the inspector shall forthwith transmit to
the board all the paper constituting the record upon which the decision
appealed from was made. When appeal is from a decision of the inspector
refusing to allow the person aggrieved thereby to do any act, his decision
shall remain in force until modified or reversed. When any appeal is from a
decision of the inspector requiring the person aggrieved to do any act, the
appeal shall have the effect of suspending the requirement until the hearing by
the board, unless the inspector certifies to the board, after the notice of
appeal is filed with him, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate
(a copy of which shall be furnished the appellant), a suspension of his
requirement would cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case the
requirement shall not be suspended except by a restraining order, which may be
granted for due cause shown upon not less than one day's written notice to the
inspector, by the board, or by a court of record upon petition made pursuant to
G.S. § 160D-1208 and subsection (F) of this section.
   (E)   The board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of all appeals,
shall give due notice to all the parties, and shall render its decision within
a reasonable time. Any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. The
board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the decision or order
appealed from, and may make any decision and order as in its opinion ought to
be made in the matter, and to that end it shall have the powers of the
inspector, but the concurring vote of four-fifths of the members of the board
shall be necessary to reverse or modify any decision or order of the inspector.
The board shall have power also in passing upon appeals, in any case where
there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the way of
carrying out the strict letter of this subchapter, to adapt the application of
this subchapter to the necessities of the case to the end that the spirit of
this subchapter shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and
substantial justice done.
   (F)   Decision subject to review. Every decision of the board shall be
subject to review by proceedings in the nature of certiorari instituted within
15 days of the decision of the board, but not otherwise, as provided in G.S. §
160D-1208. In addition, any person aggrieved bv an order issued by the
inspector or a decision rendered by the board shall also have the right, within
30 days after issuance of the order or rendering ofthe decision, to petition
the superior court for a temporary injunction restraining the inspector pending
a final disposition ofthe cause, as provided bv G.S. 160D-1208.
(Ord., passed 1-22-77 ; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23)
§ 152.152 METHODS OF SERVICE OF COMPLAINTS AND ORDERS.
   Complaints or orders issued bv the inspector shall be served in accordance
with the provisions of G.S. § 160D-1206.
(Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23)
§ 152.153 IN REM ACTION BY INSPECTOR; PLACARDING.
   After failure of an owner of a dwelling or dwelling unit to comply with an
order of the inspector issued pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter,
and upon adoption by the town council of the town of an ordinance authorizing
and directing him to do so, as provided by G.S. § 160D-1203 and section 14-70
(c), the inspector shall proceed to cause such dwelling or dwelling unit to be
repaired, altered, or improved to comply with the minimum standards of fitness
established by this article, or to be vacated and closed and removed or
demolished, as directed by the ordinance of the town council and shall cause to
be posted on the main entrance of such dwelling or dwelling unit a placard with
the following words: "This building is unfit for human habitation: the use or
occupation of this building for human habitation is prohibited and unlawful."
Occupation of a building so posted shall constitute a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23)
§ 152.154 COSTS, A LIEN ON PREMISES.
   As provided bv G.S. § 160D-1203, the amount of the cost of any repairs,
alterations, or improvements, or vacating and closing, or removal or
demolition, caused to be made or done by the inspector pursuant to section 14-
72 shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred.
Such lien shall be filed, have the same priority and be enforced and the costs
collected as provided by G.S. § 160D-1203.
(Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23)
§ 152.155 ALTERNATIVE REMEDIES.
   Neither this subchapter nor any of its provisions shall be construed to
impair or limit in any wav the power of the town to define and declare
nuisances and to cause their abatement bv summary action or otherwise, or to
enforce this article bv criminal process as authorized by G.S. § 14-4 and
Section 14-77, and the enforcement of any remedy provided herein shall not
prevent the enforcement of any other remedy or remedies provided herein or in
other ordinances or laws.
(Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23)
§ 152.156 LIEN ON PREMISES; CONTRACT FOR REPAIRS.
   As provided by G.S. § 160D-1203, the amount of the cost of any repairs,
alterations, or improvements, or vacatingand closing, or removal or demolition,
caused to be made or done by the Inspector pursuant to this subchapter shall be
a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. Such lien
shall be filed, having the same priority and be enforced and the costs
collected as provided by G.S. § 160D- 1203.
(Ord., passed 1-22-77; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23)
§ 152.157 ALTERNATIVE REMEDIES.
   Nothing herein contained shall be construed to impair or limit in any way
the power of the town to define and declare nuisances and to cause their
abatement by summary action or otherwise nor shall enforcement of one remedy
provided herein prevent the enforcement of the other remedies provided.
(Ord., passed 1-22-77; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23)
§ 152.158 CONFLICT WITH OTHER PROVISIONS..
   In any case where a provision of this subchapter is found to be in conflict
with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health provisions of
this code or ordinances or codes of the town, the provision which establishes
the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety
of the people shall prevail.
(Ord., passed 1-22-77; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23)
§ 152.999 PENALTY.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner of anydwelling or dwelling unit to fail,
neglect, or refuse to repair, alter or improve the same, or to vacate and close
and remove or demolish the same, upon order of the Inspector duly made and
served as herein provided, within the time specified in such order, and each
day that any such failure, neglect, or refusal to comply with such order
continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. It shall be
unlawful for the owner of any dwelling or dwelling unit, with respect to which
an order has been issued pursuant to section 14-70, to occupy or permit the
occupancy of the same after the time prescribed in such order for its repair,
alteration or improvement or its vacation and closing, and each day that such
occupancy continues after such prescribed time shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense. The violation of any provision of this chapter shall
constitute a misdemeanor, as provided by G.S. § 14-4. In addition to the remedy
specified in this and in other sections of this chapter, the provisions of this
chapter may also be enforced by the town by injunction and order or abatement
or by any other equitable remedy issuing from a court of competent
jurisdiction, as specified in G.S. § 160D-1201 et seq. and 160D-404(c).
(Ord., passed 1-22-77; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 6-22-23)
APPENDIX: FORMS
Section
   
1.   Form for application for permit affecting sand dunes
§ 1. FORM FOR APPLICATION FOR PERMIT AFFECTING SAND DUNES.
FORM FOR APPLICATION FOR PERMIT AFFECTING SAND DUNES
NAME OF APPLICANT:
                                                                          
LOCAL ADDRESS:
                                                                      
LOCAL PHONE NUMBER:
                                                                          
DESCRIPTION OF WORK TO BE PERFORMED AFFECTING SAND DUNES:
                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                    
LOCATION OF PROPOSED WORK:
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                       
      I agree that, as a condition to the issuance of this permit for which
application is herein made: (a) all restoration requirements specified in the
permit or directed by the shore line protection officer will be complied with;
(b) the work proposed, and all restoration required will be completed on or
before                          ; and I will pay any damages to sand dunes or
vegetation thereon, as assessed by the Board of Aldermen of the Town of
Wrightsville Beach.
                        Signed                                    
          (Applicant)
NOTE: There must accompany this application, a map or sketch of the tract of
land involved (showing boundaries, approximate present elevations, proposed
changes in elevations, and vegetation)
(Ord., passed 2-22-73; Am. Ord., passed 1-11-78)
CHAPTER 153: [RESERVED]
CHAPTER 154: [RESERVED]
CHAPTER 155: UNIFORM DEVELOPMENT
Section
   
155.01   Unified Development Ordinance adopted by reference
   
Appendix A:   Unified Development Ordinance
§ 155.01 UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The Unified Development Ordinance, as set out as Appendix A attached to Ord.
1838, passed 3-10-22, is adopted by reference as if fully set forth herein.
Such Unified Development Ordinance is set forth as Appendix A following this
chapter.
(Ord. 1695, 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
ARTICLE 155.1 PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY
   Section
155.1.1   Title
   Section
155.1.2   Authority
   Section
155.1.3   Purpose
   Section
155.1.4   Applicability
      
155.1.4.1   Jurisdiction
      
155.1.4.2   Exemptions
   Section
155.1.5   Conflicts with Other Regulations
   Section
155.1.6   Deed Restrictions
   Section
155.1.7   Severability
   Section
155.1.8   Interpretation and Administration
      
155.1.8.1   Generally
      
155.1.8.2   Responsibility
      
155.1.8.3   Delegation of Authority
      
155.1.8.4   Computation of Time
   Section
155.1.9   Identification of Official Zoning Map
   Section
155.1.10   Zoning Map Interpretation
   Section
155.1.11   Interpreting Permitting Uses
   Section
155.1.12   Enforcement
      
155.1.12.1   Development Approvals
      
155.1.12.2   Building Permits
      
155.1.12.3   Certificate of Zoning Compliance
      
155.1.12.4   Application for Certificate of Zoning Compliance
      
155.1.12.5   Certificate of Occupancy Required
      
155.1.12.6   Inspections and Investigating Violations
      
155.1.12.7   Persons Liable
      
155.1.12.8   Procedures Upon Discovery of Violations
      
155.1.12.9   Penalties and Remedies for Violations
      
155.1.12.10   Permit or Development Approval Revocation
      
155.1.12.11   Judicial Review
   Section
155.1.13   Effective Date
ARTICLE 155.2 GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Section
155.2.1   Applicability of General Regulations
   Section
155.2.2   Reduction of Lot and Yard Areas Prohibited
   Section
155.2.3   Public Access to Property
   Section
155.2.4   One Principal Building or Use
   Section
155.2.5   Projections into Public Streets and Street Right-of-Way
   Section
155.2.6   Site Visibility Triangle
   Section
155.2.7   No Use or Sale of Land or Buildings Except in Conformity with
Ordinance Provisions
   Section
155.2.8   Height Limitation Exceptions
   Section
155.2.9   Fees
   Section
155.2.10   Open Space Requirements
   Section
155.2.11   Fire Districts
   Section
155.2.12   Property Owners’ Association
   Section
155.2.13   Temporary Buildings
   Section
155.2.14   Permit to Construct Driveway Required
   Section
155.2.15   Building Design
ARTICLE 155.3 ADMINISTRATIVE/LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY
   PART I.   UDO ADMINISTRATOR
   Section
155.3.1   Powers and Duties
   PART II.   TECHNICAL REVIEW PROCEDURE
   Section
155.3.2   Purpose
   Section
155.3.3   Procedures; Composition
   PART III.   CONFLICTS OF INTEREST AND OATHS OF OFFICE
   Section
155.3.4   Conflicts of Interest and Oaths of Office
   PART IV.   BOARD OF ALDERMEN
   Section
155.3.5   Powers and Duties
   PART V.   PLANNING BOARD
   Section
155.3.6   Creation
   Section
155.3.7   Composition; Filling Vacancies
   Section
155.3.8   Organization, Meetings, Records
   Section
155.3.9   Powers and Duties
   PART VI.   BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
   Section
155.3.10   Establishment of Board of Adjustment
   Section
155.3.11   Powers of the Board of Adjustment
   Section
155.3.12   Organization; Meetings
   Section
155.3.13   Quorum and Voting
ARTICLE 155.4 LEGISLATIVE/QUASI-JUDICIAL PROCEDURES
   Section
155.4.1   Legislative Procedures
      
155.4.1.1   Procedure
      
155.4.1.2   Action by Applicant
      
155.4.1.3   Action by the Planning Board
      
155.4.1.4   Action by the Board of Aldermen
      
155.4.1.5   Withdrawal of Application
   Section
155.4.2   Establishment of Vested Rights
      
155.4.2.1   Purpose
      
155.4.2.2   Duration of a Vested Right
      
155.4.2.3   Multiple Permits
      
155.4.2.4   Multi-Phased Development
      
155.4.2.5   Continuing Review
      
155.4.2.6   Process to Claim a Vested Right
      
155.4.2.7   Runs with the Land
      
155.4.2.8   Site Specific Vesting Plans
      
155.4.2.9   Annexation Declaration
      
155.4.2.10 Permit Choice
   Section
155.4.3   Moratorium
      
155.4.3.1   Temporary Moratorium
      
155.4.3.2   Ordinance Establishing a Development Moratorium
      
155.4.3.3   Renewal or Extension of Moratorium
      
155.4.3.4   Persons Aggrieved by Imposition of Moratorium
   Section
155.4.4   Administrative Appeals, Variances, and Interpretations
      
155.4.4.1   Administrative Appeals
      
155.4.4.2   Variances
      
155.4.4.3   Interpretations
      
155.4.4.4   Requests to Be Heard Expeditiously
      
155.4.4.5   Evidentiary Hearings for Quasi-Judicial Decisions
      
155.4.4.6   Notice of Hearing
      
155.4.4.7   Evidence/Presentation of Evidence
      
155.4.4.8   Voting
      
155.4.4.9   Reserved
      
155.4.4.10   Modification of Application at Hearing
      
155.4.4.11   Record
      
155.4.4.12   Written Decision
   Section
155.4.5   Special Use Permits
      
155.4.5.1   Purpose and Applicability
      
155.4.5.2   Application Process/Completeness
      
155.4.5.3   Technical Review Procedure/Planning Board Review and Comment
      
155.4.5.4   Board of Aldermen Action
      
155.4.5.5   Effect of Approval
      
155.4.5.6   Binding Effect
      
155.4.5.7   Record
      
155.4.5.8   Certificate of Occupancy
      
155.4.5.9   Change in Special Use Permit
      
155.4.5.10   Implementation of Special Use Permit
   Section
155.4.6   Rehearings
   Section
155.4.7   Appeals of Quasi-Judicial Decisions
   Section
155.4.8   Conditional Zoning Procedure
      
155.4.8.1   Application and Conditional Zoning Review Procedure
      
155.4.8.2   Public Input Meeting
      
155.4.8.3   Conditions to Approval of Petition
      
155.4.8.4   Effect of Approval
      
155.4.8.5   Review of Approval of a Conditional Zoning District
ARTICLE 155.5 SITE PLAN DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCESS
   Section
155.5.1   Purpose and Applicability
   Section
155.5.2   Site Plan Procedures
      
155.5.2.1   Engineering Drawing Review and Approval Procedures
      
155.5.2.2   Minor Site Plans
      
155.5.2.3   Major Site Plans
   Section
155.5.3   Site Plan Requirements
      
155.5.3.1   Information to be Shown on Site Plan
      
155.5.3.2   Performance Standards
   Section
155.5.4   Administrative Decisions
      
155.5.4.1   Administrative Decisions Flowchart
      
155.5.4.2   Application for Review
      
155.5.4.3   Planning Staff and Technical Review Procedure
      
155.5.4.4   Permit Issued or Final Plat Approved
      
155.5.4.5   Zoning Inspections and Certificates of Occupancy
   Section
155.5.5   Planning Board Review and Board of Aldermen Approval
      
155.5.5.1   Planning Board Review and Board of Aldermen Approval Flowchart
      
155.5.5.2   Application for Review
      
155.5.5.3   Planning Staff and Technical Review Procedure
      
155.5.5.4   Review and Recommendation by the Planning Board
      
155.5.5.5   Consideration by the Board of Aldermen
      
155.5.5.6   Permit Issued
      
155.5.5.7   Zoning Inspections and Certificates of Occupancy
ARTICLE 155.6 ZONING DISTRICTS
   Section
155.6.1   Purpose Statement
   Section
155.6.2   Interpretation
   Section
155.6.3   Primary Zoning Districts
   Section
155.6.4   Table of Permitted/Special Uses
   Section
155.6.5   Zoning District Development Standards
      
155.6.5.1   R-1 Residential District
      
155.6.5.2   R-2 Residential District
      
155.6.5.3   C-1 Commercial District I
      
155.6.5.4   C-2 Commercial District II
      
155.6.5.5   C-3 Commercial District III
      
155.6.5.6   C-4 Commercial District IV
      
155.6.5.7   C-5 Commercial District V
      
155.6.5.8   G-1 Public and Semipublic District
      
155.6.5.9   PC Private Club District
      
155.6.5.10   P-1 Conservation Zone
      
155.6.5.11   S-1 Shore Zone
ARTICLE 155.7 SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
   Section
155.7.1   Introduction
   Section
155.7.2   Accessory Buildings/Structures
   Section
155.7.3   Activities Operated Exclusively for Pleasure, Recreation, Etc.
   Section
155.7.4   Health Care Facilities
   Section
155.7.5   Assembly Halls, Gymnasiums, and Other Similar Structures
   Section
155.7.6   Mixed Use Commercial-Residential
   Section
155.7.7   Car Wash
   Section
155.7.8   Child Care Centers
   Section
155.7.9   Detached Garages
   Section
155.7.10   Fences and Walls
   Section
155.7.11   Financial Institutions/Banks
   Section
155.7.12   Reserved
   Section
155.7.13   Home Occupations
   Section
155.7.14   Nursing Home
   Section
155.7.15   Ocean-Related Business Activities
   Section
155.7.16   Private Club
   Section
155.7.17   Floor Area Ratio
   Section
155.7.18   Wireless Facilities and Wireless Support Structures
      
155.7.18.1   Purpose and Intent
      
155.7.18.2   General Requirements
      
155.7.18.3   Wireless Facility and Substantial Modifications Scope
      
155.7.18.4   Small Wireless Facility
      
155.7.18.5   Collocation and Stealth Communications Facility
      
155.7.18.6   Telecommunications Facilities and Support Structures in Existence
on the Date of Adoption of this Ordinance
   Section
155.7.19   Temporary Storage Containers
   Section
155.7.20   Coffee Shops, No Food Prepared On Site
   Section
155.7.21   Private Access Easement
   Section
155.7.22   Boat Rental Facilities
   Section
155.7.23   Massage and Bodywork Therapy
   Section
155.7.24   ABC Package and Retail
   Section
155.7.25   Group Housing Development
      
155.7.25.1   Commonly Owned Areas
      
155.7.25.2   Zoning, Density and Exemptions from Requirements
      
155.7.25.3   Permitted Uses and Applicable Setbacks
      
155.7.25.4   Unit Ownership and Condominiums
      
155.7.25.5   Site Plans
      
155.7.25.6   Public Access, Easements, and Private Party Walls
      
155.7.25.7   Utilities and Improvements Required
   Section
155.7.26   Marina Residential
   Section
155.7.27   Reserved
   Section
155.7.28   Marina Restaurant
   Section
155.7.29   Reserved
   Section
155.7.30   Sidewalk Café
ARTICLE 155.8 NONCONFORMING SITUATIONS
   PART I.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Section
155.8.1   Minimum Single Lot Requirements
   Section
155.8.2   Minimum Multi-Lot Requirements
   Section
155.8.3   Extension or Enlargement of Nonconforming Situations Prohibited
   Section
155.8.4   Elevation of Nonconforming Structures in Order to Comply with Flood
Ordinances
   Section
155.8.5   Change in Nonconforming Situation
   Section
155.8.6   Discontinuance or Abandonment
   Section
155.8.7   Compliance with Flood Ordinance
   PART II.   NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES
   Section
155.8.8   Repairs and Maintenance
   PART III.   SINGLE-FAMILY AND DUPLEX STRUCTURES
   Section
155.8.9   Expansion or Enlargement
   PART IV.   MULTI-FAMILY STRUCTURES
   Section
155.8.10   Expansion or Enlargement
   PART V.   OCEANFRONT PIERS
   Section
155.8.11   Expansion or Enlargement
   PART VI.   COMMERCIAL STRUCTURES IN THE C-2 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT II, C-
3 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT III AND C-5 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT V ZONING DISTRICTS
   Section
155.8.12   Expansion or Enlargement
   PART VII.   NON-CONFORMING USES
   Section
155.8.13   Expansion or Enlargement
   Section
155.8.13.1   Enlargement or Expansion of a Dry Stack Boat Storage Facility
   Section
155.8.14   Relocation of Nonconforming Use
   Section
155.8.15   Change in Use
   PART VIII.   DAMAGE OR DESTRUCTION
   Section
155.8.16   Reconstruction Damage Less Than 50%
   Section
155.8.17   Reconstruction Damage More Than 50%
   Section
155.8.18   Increase in Extent of Nonconformity
   Section
155.8.19   Time for Carrying Out Reconstruction
ARTICLE 155.9 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
   PART I.   OFF-STREET PARKING AND OFF-STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS
   Section
155.9.1   Off-Street Parking Requirements
      
155.9.1.1   Certification of Minimum Parking Requirements
      
155.9.1.2   Combination of Required Parking Space
      
155.9.1.3   Bicycle Rack Requirements
      
155.9.1.4   Parking Standards
      
155.9.1.5   Off-Street Parking Requirements Per Land Use
      
155.9.1.6   Exception in Parking Requirements
      
155.9.1.7   Off-Street Parking Access to Paved Street
      
155.9.1.8   Parking Space Arrangements and Dimensions
   Section
155.9.2   Off-Street Loading for Commercial and Industrial Uses
      
155.9.2.1   Use of Church Parking Lots as Commercial Parking Lots
   PART II.   DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION
   Section
155.9.3   Permit to Construct Driveway Required
   Section
155.9.4   Conformity of Surrounding Areas of Abutting Property Owners; Refusal
to Make Improvements
   Section
155.9.5   Costs Assessed Against Property Abutting Sidewalk
   Section
155.9.6   Specifications for Driveway Construction
   PART III.   OUTDOOR LIGHTING
   Section
155.9.7   Purpose
   Section
155.9.8   Commercial Exterior Lighting
   Section
155.9.9   Residential Exterior Lighting
   Section
155.9.10   Private Piers and Docks Including Residential
   Section
155.9.11   Signs
   Section
155.9.12   Other Requirements
   Section
155.9.13   Nonconformities
   Section
155.9.14   Maximum Illumination Standards
   PART IV.   LANDSCAPE, BUFFERING, AND SCREENING
   Section
155.9.15   Purpose
   Section
155.9.16   Applicability
   Section
155.9.17   Landscaping Requirements
   Section
155.9.18   Bufferyards
   Section
155.9.19   Additional Requirements for Buffers and for Yards in Which Buffers
are Required
   Section
155.9.20   Installation
   Section
155.9.21   Maintenance
   Section
155.9.22   Landscape Plan
   Section
155.9.23   Tree Preservation
   Section
155.9.24   Recommended Plant List
ARTICLE 155.10 SIGN REGULATIONS
   Section
155.10.1   Prohibited Signs
   Section
155.10.2   Exempt Signs
   Section
155.10.3   Marquee Signs
   Section
155.10.4   Shore Zone and Conservation Zone Signs Permitted
   Section
155.10.5   Signs Permitted in All Districts Except the S-1 Shore Zone and P-
1 Conservation Zone
   Section
155.10.6   Business and Name Signs
   Section
155.10.7   Permits
   Section
155.10.8   Unsafe Signs
   Section
155.10.9   Maintenance
   Section
155.10.10   Removal of Unlawful Signs
   Section
155.10.11   Location Restriction
   Section
155.10.12   Structural Requirements
   Section
155.10.13   Construction of Freestanding Signs
   Section
155.10.14   Exterior Lights and Signs
   Section
155.10.15   Nonconforming Signs
ARTICLE 155.11 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS
   PART I.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION ORDINANCE
   Section
155.11.1   Statutory Authorization
   Section
155.11.2   Findings of Fact
   Section
155.11.3   Statement of Purpose
   Section
155.11.4   Objectives
   Section
155.11.4.1   Definitions
   Section
155.11.5   Lands to Which this Section Applies
   Section
155.11.6   Basis for Establishing the Special Flood Hazard Areas
   Section
155.11.7   Establishment of Floodplain Development Permit
   Section
155.11.8   Compliance
   Section
155.11.9   Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
   Section
155.11.10   Interpretation
   Section
155.11.11   Warning and Disclaimer of Liability
   Section
155.11.11.1   Penalties for violation
   Section
155.11.12   Designation of Floodplain Administrator
   Section
155.11.13   Floodplain Development Application/Permit/Certification
Requirements
   Section
155.11.14   Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
   Section
155.11.15   Corrective Procedures
   Section
155.11.16   Variance Procedures
   Section
155.11.17   General Standards for Flood Hazard Reduction
   Section
155.11.18   Specific Standards for Flood Hazard Reduction
   Section
155.11.19   Coastal High Hazard Areas (Zones VE)
   Section
155.11.20   Standards for Coastal A Zones (Zone CAZ) LiMWA
   Section
155.11.21   Effect on Rights and Liabilities under the Existing Flood Damage
Prevention Ordinance
   Section
155.11.22   Effect Upon Outstanding Floodplain Development Permits
   Section
155.11.23   Reserved
   Section
155.11.24   Reserved
   PART II. SEDIMENTATION AND SOIL EROSION CONTROL
   Section
155.11.25   General Regulations
   PART III. OCEANFRONT PROPERTY
   Section
155.11.26   Oceanfront Policies
   Section
155.11.27   Shoreline Development Boundary Prohibition
   Section
155.11.28   Maintenance of Oceanfront Systems and Structures
   Section
155.11.29   Authority to Remove Structures
   Section
155.11.30   Reserved
   Section
155.11.31   Reserved
   Section
155.11.32   Reserved
   Section
155.11.33   Damaging Dunes or Vegetation
   Section
155.11.34   Compliance, Non-Conformities, Exceptions, and Exemptions
   Section
155.11.35   Enforcement Provisions
ARTICLE 155.12 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
   PART I.   SUBDIVISION PLATS
   Section
155.12.1   Plat Required for Land Subdivision
   Section
155.12.2   Approval of Subdivision Plats Required
   Section
155.12.3   Plat Approval Required for Building Permit
   Section
155.12.4   Plat Approval Not to Constitute Acceptance of Dedication
   Section
155.12.5   Expedited Review
   Section
155.12.6   Transfer of Lots in Unapproved Subdivision Plats
   Section
155.12.7   Plat Approval Required Before Extension of Service
   Section
155.12.8   Coordination of Street System
   Section
155.12.9   Parcels of Land to Consist of Multiples of Normal Blocks
   Section
155.12.10   Preliminary Plats
   Section
155.12.11   Contents of Preliminary Plats
   Section
155.12.12   Conformity of Plat to Requirements
   Section
155.12.13   Approved Plats to be Kept on File
   Section
155.12.14   Service Facilities Required Prior to Final Approval
   Section
155.12.15   Final Plat
   Section
155.12.16   Contents of Final Plat
   PART II.   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
   Section
155.12.17   Minimum Requirements
   Section
155.12.18   Street Plans, Rights-of-Way, and Blocks
   Section
155.12.19   Requirements for Streets
   Section
155.12.20   Lot Sizes and Side Lines
   Section
155.12.21   Setback Lines, Unusable Lots, and Land Elevation
   Section
155.12.22   Modification of Certain Requirements
EXHIBITS
   
EXHIBIT A.   DEFINITIONS
   
EXHIBIT B.   INSTALLATION DETAIL
ARTICLE 155.1
PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY
Section 155.1.1 Title.
   This Ordinance is officially titled as Unified Development Ordinance of
Wrightsville Beach, North Carolina, and shall be known as the Unified
Development Ordinance (UDO). The official map designating the various zoning
districts shall be titled, Town of Wrightsville Beach Zoning Map, and shall be
known as the Zoning Map.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.1.2 Authority.
   The Legislature of the State of North Carolina has in Part 6, Article 21 of
Chapter 143; Article 6 of Chapter 153A; Article 8 of Chapter 160A; and Article
7, 9, and 11 of Chapter 160D (Effective July 1, 2021) of the North Carolina
General Statutes, delegated to local governmental units the authority to adopt
regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare.
   (A)   Zoning. Zoning provisions enacted herein are under the authority of
North Carolina General Statutes N.C.G.S. § 160D-702, which extends to local
jurisdictions, the authority to enact regulations which promote the health,
safety, morals, or the general welfare of the community. It is further
authorized under N.C.G.S. § 160D-703, which authorizes local jurisdictions to
regulate and restrict the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration,
repair or use of buildings, structures, or land. This section further
authorizes the establishment of overlay districts in which additional
regulations may be imposed upon properties that lie within the boundary of the
district. The statutes also require that all such regulations shall be uniform
for each class or type of building throughout each district, but that the
regulations in one district may differ from those in other districts.
   (B)   Subdivision. Subdivision provisions enacted herein are under the
authority of N.C.G.S. § 160D-801, which provide for the coordination of streets
within proposed subdivisions with existing or planned streets and with other
public facilities, the dedication or reservation or recreation areas serving
residents of the immediate neighborhood within the subdivision, or
alternatively, for the provision of funds to be used to acquire recreation
areas serving residents of more than one neighborhood in the immediate area,
and for the distribution of population and traffic in a manner that will avoid
congestion and overcrowding.
   (C)   Unified Development Ordinance. This UDO, which combines zoning and
subdivision authority, is further enacted under N.C.G.S. § 160D-103.
   (D)   Comprehensive or Land Use Plan Required. In accordance with N.C.G.S. §
160D-501(a), as a condition of adopting and applying zoning regulations,
Wrightsville Beach shall adopt and reasonably maintain a comprehensive or land
use plan. Such plans may be completed in conjunction with land use plans
required by the Coastal Area Management Act in N.C.G.S. § 113A-110. Further the
adoptions and update of these plans shall be in accordance with the procedures
required for a legislative decision, as outlined in Section
155.4.1.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.1.3 Purpose.
   This Unified Development Ordinance and Zoning Map are made in accordance
with a comprehensive and land use plan and is designed to lessen congestion in
the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; to promote
health and the general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent
the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to
facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, parks and
other public requirements; to control development of flood prone areas and
regulate stormwater runoff/discharge; to regulate signs; and to establish
proceedings for the subdivision of land. The regulations have been made with
reasonable consideration, among other things, as to the character of the
jurisdiction and its peculiar suitability for particular uses, and with a view
to conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use
of land throughout the jurisdiction. Furthermore, the UDO will aim to:
   •   Continue utilization of the established mixed-use pattern of certain
portions of the community;
   •   Acknowledge and protect a character that is unique to Wrightsville
Beach;
   •   Protect existing housing and lodging opportunities;
   •   Protect the existing uses, densities, and intensities;
   •   Provide new investment and reinvestment opportunities;
   •   Ensure new development and redevelopment compliments and enhances
community character; and
   •   Implement thoughtful controlled growth.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.1.4 Applicability.
   155.1.4.1 Jurisdiction.
   (A)   The regulations set forth in this Ordinance shall apply to all
property within the town limits, extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ), and
within the various zoning districts as designated on the official zoning map,
as established in
Article 155.6, Zoning Districts.
   (B)   Except as hereinafter provided, no building or structure shall be
erected, moved, altered, or extended, and no land, building, or structure or
part thereof shall be occupied or used unless in conformity with the
regulations specified for the district in which it is located.
   (C)   If the town exercises extraterritorial jurisdiction it shall notify
the owners of all parcels of land proposed for addition to the area of
extraterritorial jurisdiction. The notice shall be sent by first-class mail at
least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing. The notice shall inform the
landowner of their right to participate in a legislative hearing prior to
adoption of any ordinance extending the area of extraterritorial jurisdiction
and of the right of all residents of the area to apply to the Board of County
Commissioners to serve as a representative on the Planning Board and the Board
of Adjustment, as provided in N.C.G.S. § 160D-303.
   155.1.4.2 Exemptions.
   (A)   These regulations shall not apply to any land or structure for which,
prior to the effective date hereof, there is a properly approved site specific
plan as required by the requirements previously adopted or previously approved
vested rights (Article 155.4, Section
155.4.2). Any preliminary or final subdivision plat approvals required for such
approved or exempted site specific plans shall be conducted in accordance with
the requirements of the previous Zoning Ordinance or Subdivision Ordinance.
   (B)   In accordance with N.C.G.S. § 160D-913, the Town of Wrightsville Beach
UDO applies to state-owned lands only when a building is involved.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)
   (C)   Property that is located in the extraterritorial planning and
development regulation jurisdiction (ETJ) and that is used for bona fide farm
purposes is exempt from the town's zoning regulation in accordance with
N.C.G.S. § 160D-903.
(Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.1.5 Conflicts with Other Regulations.
   It is not intended by this Ordinance to interfere with, abrogate, or annul
any easements, covenants, or other agreements between parties. However, where
this Ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or
premises or upon the height of buildings or requires larger open spaces than
are imposed or required by other ordinances, rules, regulations, or by
easements, covenants, or agreements, the provisions of this Ordinance shall
govern.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.1.6 Deed Restrictions.
   The enforcement and interpretation of the UDO shall not be affected by deed
restrictions, covenants, or easements, other than those made as a condition of
approval of a development application under the UDO or any predecessor
ordinance.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.1.7 Severability.
   If any section or specific provision or standard of this Ordinance or any
regulating district boundary arising from it is found by a court to be invalid
for any reason, the decision of the court shall not affect the validity of any
other section, provision, standard, or district boundary of these regulations
except the provision in question. The other portions of these regulations not
affected by the decision of the court shall remain in full force and effect.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.1.8 Interpretation and Administration.
   155.1.8.1 Generally. Regulations of this Ordinance shall be enforced and
interpreted according to the following rules:
   (A)   Permitted Uses. Uses not designated as permitted or special uses shall
be prohibited.
   (B)   Building Restrictions. Every building hereafter erected or
structurally altered shall be located on a lot.
   (C)   Minimum Requirements. The provisions of this Ordinance shall be held
to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health,
convenience, prosperity, or the general welfare.
   155.1.8.2 Responsibility. In the event that any question arises concerning
the application of regulations, performance standards, definitions, development
criteria, or any other provision of the UDO, the UDO Administrator shall be
responsible for interpretation and shall look to the Ordinance for guidance.
Responsibility for interpretation by the UDO Administrator shall be limited to
standards, regulations and requirements of the UDO, but shall not be construed
to include interpretation of any technical codes adopted by reference in the
UDO, and shall not be construed as overriding the responsibilities given to any
commission, board, or official names in other sections or articles of the UDO.
   155.1.8.3 Delegation of Authority. Unless otherwise specified in the UDO,
the identification of certain officials, including the Town Manager, Planning &
Parks Director, City Attorney, or any other Department Director or Town
Official to perform a task or carry out a specific responsibility, shall also
include the designee of such official. Unless otherwise specified in the UDO,
the term "Director" shall mean the Planning & Parks Director and the term
"Department" shall mean the Planning Department.
   155.1.8.4 Computation of Time.
   (A)   Unless otherwise specifically provided, the time within which an act
is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last
day. If the last day is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, that day shall be
excluded. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days,
intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays shall be excluded.
   (B)   Unless otherwise specifically provided, whenever a person has the
right or is required to do some act within a prescribed period after the
service of a notice and the notice or paper is served by mail (Certified Mail/
Return Receipt Requested), three days shall be added to the prescribed period.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.1.9 Identification of Official Zoning Map.
   (A)   The Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor
attested by the Town Clerk and bearing the seal of the town under the following
words: "This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map of the Unified
Development Ordinance, Wrightsville Beach, North Carolina," together with the
date of the adoption of this Ordinance.
   (B)   If, in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance, changes are
made in district boundaries or other items portrayed on the Zoning Map, such
changes shall be entered on the official zoning map promptly after the
amendment has been approved by the Board of Aldermen, with an entry on the
official zoning map denoting the date of amendment, description of amendment,
and signed by the Town Clerk. No amendment to this Ordinance which involves
matter portrayed on the official zoning map shall become effective until after
such change and entry has been made on said map.
   (C)   No changes of any nature shall be made in the official zoning map or
matter shown thereon except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this
Ordinance and state law. Any unauthorized change of whatever kind by any person
shall be considered a violation of this Ordinance and punishable as provided
under Section
155.1.12.
   (D)   Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the official zoning
map which may from time to time be made or published, the official zoning map,
which shall be located in the office of the Town Clerk, shall be the final
authority as to the zoning status of land and water areas, buildings, and other
structures in the town.
   (E)   In the event the official zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost,
or difficult to interpret, the Board of Aldermen may by resolution adopt a new
official zoning map which shall supersede the prior zoning map. The new
official zoning map may correct drafting errors or other errors or omissions in
the prior official zoning map, but no correction shall have the effect of
amending the original official zoning map, or any subsequent amendment thereof.
The new official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor
attested by the Town Clerk, and bearing the seal of the town under the
following words: "This is to certify that this Official Zoning Map supersedes
and replaces the Official Zoning Map adopted (date of adoption of map being
replaced), as part of the Unified Development Ordinance, Wrightsville Beach,
North Carolina."
   (F)   Unless the prior official zoning map has been lost, or has been
totally destroyed, the prior map or any significant parts thereof remaining,
shall be preserved together with all other previous versions and available
records pertaining to its adoption or amendment.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.1.10 Zoning Map Interpretation.
   Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any district shown on the
Official Zoning Map, the UDO Administrator shall employ the following rules of
interpretation.
   (A)   Centerline. Where a boundary line lies within and follows a street or
alley right-of-way or utility easement, the boundary shall be construed to be
in the center of such street or alley right-of-way or utility easement. If the
boundary between two separate zoning districts is abandoned or removed from
dedication, the district boundaries shall be construed as following the
centerline of the abandoned or vacated road bed or utility easement.
   (B)   Edge Line. Where a boundary line follows the edge of a street or alley
right-of-way, a railroad right-of-way, or utility easement, the boundary shall
be construed to be on the edge of such street or alley right-of-way, railroad
right-of-way, or utility easement. If such a street or alley right-of-way,
railroad right-of-way, or utility easement forming the boundary between two
separate zoning districts is abandoned or removed from dedication, the district
boundaries shall be construed as following the edge of the abandoned or vacated
road bed or utility easement.
   (C)   Lot Line. Boundaries indicated as approximately following lot lines
shall be construed as following such lot lines. In the event that a district
boundary line divides a lot or tract, each part of the lot or tract so divided
shall be used in conformity with the regulations established by this Ordinance
for the district in which said part is located.
   (D)   Town Limits. Boundaries indicated as approximately following town
limits shall be construed as following the town limits.
   (E)   Watercourses. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the
centerlines of streams, estuarine shorelines, oceanfront shorelines, canals,
lakes, or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines.
   (F)   Extensions. Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of
street or alley rights- of-way, utility easements, lot lines, city limits,
county lines, or extraterritorial boundaries shall be so construed.
   (G)   Scaling. In the case where a district boundary does not coincide with
any boundary lines as above and no distances are described by specific
ordinance; the boundary shall be determined by the use of the scale appearing
on the map.
   (H)   Where the UDO Administrator determines that physical features existing
on the ground or actual property lines or other man-made boundary lines used to
depict zoning district boundaries, are at variance with those shown on the
Official Zoning Map, the Board of Adjustment shall have the authority to
interpret zoning district boundaries.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.1.11 Interpreting Permitted Uses.
   (A)   If a use is not specifically listed in any of the districts listed in
this Ordinance, then the UDO Administrator shall have the authority to
interpret in which district the use, if any, should be permitted.
   (B)   If the UDO Administrator rejects a proposal for a use that is not
clearly disallowed in a particular district, then the UDO Administrator shall:
      (1)   Ensure that the citizen is provided with a copy of the
interpretation in writing.
      (2)   Inform the citizen of the right to appeal the decision to the Board
of Adjustment.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.1.12 Enforcement.
   155.1.12.1 Development Approvals. No person shall commence or proceed with
development without first securing any required development approval from the
town. A development approval shall be in writing and may contain a provision
requiring that the development comply with all applicable state and local laws.
The town may issue development approvals in print or electronic form. Any
development approval issued exclusively in electronic form shall be protected
from further editing once issued. Applications for development approvals may be
made by the landowner, a lessee or person holding an option or contract to
purchase or lease land, or an authorized agent of the landowner. An easement
holder may also apply for development approval for such development as is
authorized by the easement. Unless provided otherwise by law, all rights,
privileges, benefits, burdens, and obligations created by development approvals
made pursuant to this chapter attach to and run with the land.
   155.1.12.2 Building Permits.
   (A)   No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to,
demolished, or structurally altered without building and zoning permits
therefor issued by the Planning and Inspections Department. No building permit
shall be issued by the Department except in conformity with the provisions of
this Ordinance and the North Carolina State Building Code unless he or she
receives a written order from the Board of Aldermen in the form of a variance
as provided by this Ordinance.
   (B)   All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by plans in
duplicate drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions and shape of the lot to
be built upon, the exact sizes and locations on the lot of buildings already
existing (if any), and the location and dimensions of the proposed buildings or
alteration. The application shall include other information as lawfully may be
required by the UDO Administrator, including existing or proposed building or
alteration; existing or proposed uses of the building and land; the number of
families, housekeeping units or rental units the building is designed to
accommodate; conditions existing on the lot; floodplain development permit; and
any other matters as may be necessary to determine conformance with, and
provide for the enforcement of this Ordinance.
   (C)   One copy of the plans shall be returned to the applicant by the UDO
Administrator, after he shall have marked the copy either as approved or
disapproved and attested to same by his signature on the copy. One copy of the
plans, similarly marked, shall be retained by the UDO Administrator.
   155.1.12.3 Certificate of Zoning Compliance.
   (A)   No land shall be used or occupied and no building hereafter
structurally altered, erected, or moved, shall be used, or its use changed
until a certificate of zoning compliance shall have been issued by the UDO
Administrator stating that the building or the proposed use thereof complies
with the provisions of this Ordinance. For purposes of this Section
155.1.12.3, a "use change" shall include a change in ownership of the land or
business operated upon the land. All applications for a certificate of zoning
compliance shall be in accordance with Section 155.1.124 of the Town Code of
Ordinances.
   (B)   A certificate of zoning compliance, either for the whole or a part of
a building, shall be applied for coincident with the application for a building
permit and shall be issued together with the building permit.
   (C)   A record of all preliminary and final certificates shall be kept on
file in the office of the UDO Administrator.
   (D)   No preliminary certificate of zoning compliance shall be issued until
the applicant has filed a written statement with the UDO Administrator
describing the intended use of the property.
   155.1.12.4 Application for Certificate of Zoning Compliance.
   (A)   Each application for a preliminary certificate of zoning compliance
shall be accompanied by a plan in duplicate, drawn to scale, one copy of which
shall be returned to the owner upon approval. The plan shall show the
following:
      (1)   The shape and dimensions of the lot on which the proposed building
or use is to be erected or conducted.
      (2)   The location of the lot with respect to adjacent rights-of-way.
      (3)   The shape, dimensions, and location of all buildings, existing and
proposed, on the lot.
      (4)   The nature of the proposed use of the building or land, including
the extent and location of the use on the lot.
      (5)   The location and dimensions of off-street parking and the means of
ingress and egress to the space.
      (6)   Any other information which the UDO Administrator may deem
necessary for consideration in enforcing the provisions of this Ordinance.
   (B)   Upon completion of all final inspections of work for which a building
permit was issued and prior to the issuance of a certificate of compliance as
required by N.C.G.S. § 160D-403(g), the UDO Administrator shall issue a final
certificate of zoning compliance indicating that the completed repairs or
construction comply with the provisions of this Ordinance. All new structures,
substantially improved structures (as defined in Exhibit A), all structures
that have been elevated and all structures which have been added to shall be
required to provide verification of building height and setbacks before a final
certificate of zoning compliance is issued. Such verification shall be in the
form of a survey or other documentation acceptable to the UDO Administrator and
prepared by a registered land surveyor. The height and elevation of the
structure may be provided on the "Elevation Certificate" under "Comments".
   155.1.12.5 Certificate of Occupancy Required. A certificate of occupancy
issued by the UDO Administrator is required in advance of
   • Occupancy or use of a building, structure, or land for which a building
permit is required
   • Change of use of any building or land.
   A certificate of occupancy, either for the whole or a part of a building,
shall be applied for coincident with or subsequent to the application for a
certificate of zoning compliance and shall be issued within ten business days
after the erection or structural alteration of such building or part shall have
been completed in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance.
Additionally, a certificate of occupancy shall be applied for and must be
granted before any person occupies a building for which a change in use is
proposed. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued unless the proposed
use of a building or land conforms to the applicable provisions of this
Ordinance. If the certificate of occupancy is denied, the UDO Administrator
shall state in writing the reasons for refusal and the applicant shall be
notified of the refusal. A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in
the office of the UDO Administrator for a period of five years and copies shall
be furnished on request to any persons having a proprietary or tenancy interest
in the building or land involved.
   A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion or portions
of a building which may safely be occupied prior to final completion and
occupancy of the entire building or for other temporary uses.
   An as-built survey and elevation certificate for any project involving
development, redevelopment, expansion, or renovation which results in an
expansion of the existing structure footprint must be submitted to the UDO
Administrator prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. The as-built
survey must be prepared by a registered land surveyor licensed in the State of
North Carolina.
   155.1.12.6 Inspections and Investigating Violations.
   (A)   Complaints Regarding Violations. Whenever the UDO Administrator
receives a written, signed complaint alleging a violation of the Ordinance, he/
she shall investigate the complaint, take whatever action is warranted, and
inform the complainant in writing what actions will be taken.
   (B)   Inspections. Administrative staff may inspect work undertaken pursuant
to a development approval to assure that the work is being done in accordance
with applicable laws and of the terms of the approval. In accordance with
N.C.G.S. § 160D-1113, as the work pursuant to a building permit progresses,
local inspectors shall make as many inspections thereof as necessary to satisfy
them that the work is being done according to any applicable laws and of the
terms of the permit. In exercising these powers, staff and inspectors are
authorized to enter any premises within the jurisdiction of Wrightsville Beach
at all reasonable hours for the purposes of inspection or other enforcement
action, upon presentation of proper credentials; provided, however, that the
appropriate consent has been given for inspection of areas not open to the
public or that an appropriate inspection warrant has been secured.
   155.1.12.7 Persons Liable. The owner, tenant, or occupant of any building or
land or part thereof and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, or other
person who participates in, assists, directs, creates, or maintains any
situation that is contrary to the requirements of this Ordinance may jointly
and/or independently be held responsible for the violation and suffer the
penalties and be subject to the remedies herein provided.
   155.1.12.8 Procedures Upon Discovery of Violations.
   (A)   If the UDO Administrator finds that any provision of this Ordinance or
provision of a development approval is being violated, they must issue notice
of violations in conformance with the statutory procedures outlined here and in
accordance with N.C.G.S. § 160D-404.
      (1)   A written notice of violation may be issued. The notice of
violation shall be delivered to the holder of the development approval and to
the landowner of the property involved, by personal delivery, electronic
delivery, or first-class mail and may be provided to the occupant of the
property or the person undertaking the work or activity. The notice may also be
posted on the property.
      (2)   The person providing the notice of violation shall certify to the
local government that the notice was provided, and the certificate shall be
deemed conclusive in the absence of fraud.
   (B)   If the UDO Administrator sends a written notice, such notice shall
indicate the nature of the violation and describe the action required to
correct it. The notice shall also indicate what action the UDO Administrator
intends to take if the violation is not corrected and advise the person
responsible for such violation that the UDO Administrator's decision or order
may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment in accordance with subsection
155.4.4.1. and N.C.G.S. § 160D-405.
   (C)   Any enforcement action undertaken by the UDO Administrator shall be in
accordance with the provisions of subsection
155.1.12.9.
   155.1.12.9 Penalties and Remedies for Violations.
   (A)   A violation of any provision of this Ordinance is a misdemeanor or
infraction as provided by N.C.G.S. § 14-4 and punishable upon conviction by a
fine not exceeding $500.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided herein and except as provided in Section
155.9.23, Tree Preservation, a violation of any provision of this Ordinance
shall subject the offender to a civil penalty in the amount of $50 to be
recovered by the town in a civil action and the nature of debt if the offender
does not pay the penalty within ten days after being cited for a violation of
the Ordinance.
   (B1)   A violation of any provision of this chapter prohibiting the use of
private property as a public parking lot shall subject the offender to a civil
penalty in the amount of $250 to be recovered by the town in a civil action in
the nature of debt if the offender does not pay the penalty within ten days
after being cited for a violation of the Ordinance.
   (C)   The provisions of this Ordinance may be enforced by an appropriate
equitable remedy issuing from a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (D)   Each day's continuing violation of any provisions of this Ordinance
shall be a separate and distinct offense.
   (E)   The provisions of this Ordinance may be enforced by any one, all, or a
combination of the remedies authorized and prescribed by N.C.G.S. § 160A-175
and this section.
   155.1.12.10 Permit or Development Approval Revocation.
   (A)   Any permit or development approval issued under this Ordinance may be
revoked by the permit-issuing authority of the local government (in accordance
with the provisions of this subsection) for (1) any substantial departure from
the approved application, plans, or specifications; (2) refusal or failure to
comply with the requirements of this Ordinance or any other local development
regulation, (3) false statements or misrepresentation made in securing the
approval; or because (4) a development approval was mistakenly issued.
   (B)   Development approvals may be revoked by notifying the holder in
writing stating the reason for the revocation. The local government shall
follow the same development review and approval process required for issuance
of the development approval, including any required notice or hearing, in the
review and approval of any revocation of that approval.
   (C)   Appeals of the revocation of a development approval may be made to the
Board of Adjustment as provided for in subsection
155.4.4.1. and pursuant to the requirements of N.C.G.S. § 160D-405.
   (D)   No person may continue to make use of land or building in the manner
authorized by any permit issued under this Ordinance after such permit has been
revoked in accordance with this Ordinance.
   155.1.12.11 Judicial Review.
   (A)   Every decision of the Board of Aldermen granting or denying a special
use permit and every final decision of the Board of Adjustment shall be subject
to review by the Superior Court of New Hanover County by proceedings in the
nature of certiorari.
   (B)   The petition for the writ of certiorari must be filed with the New
Hanover County Clerk of Court within 30 days after the later of the following
occurrences:
      (1)   A written copy of the Board's decision has been filed in the Office
of the Planning Department, and
      (2)   A written copy of the Board's decision has been delivered by
personal service or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the applicant
or appellant and every other aggrieved party who has filed a written request
for such copy at the hearing of the case.
   (C)   A copy of the writ of certiorari shall be served upon the Town of
Wrightsville Beach.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1747, passed 10-13-15; Am. Ord. 1813,
passed 10-8-20; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.1.13 Effective Date.
   These regulations shall become effective on November 8, 2012. Upon such
date, these regulations shall supersede, repeal, and replace:
Chapters 151,
153,
154, and
155 of the Town Code of Ordinances. The statutory requirements of N.C.G.S. Ch.
160D, provided as amendments to this Ordinance, are effective as of March 10,
2022.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
ARTICLE 155.2
GENERAL REGULATIONS
Section 155.2.1 Applicability of General Regulations.
   The following general regulations of this Article shall apply in all
situations unless otherwise indicated.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.2.2 Reduction of Lot and Yard Areas Prohibited.
   No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this Ordinance shall be
reduced in size or area below the minimum requirements set forth in this
Ordinance. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this Ordinance
shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this Ordinance.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.2.3 Public Access to Property.
   Every building or structure hereafter erected shall be located on a lot and
the lot shall:
   (A)   Abut a public street; or
   (B)   Abut an approved private street; or
   (C)   Abut a common area properly restricted through deed restrictions and/
or a property owners' association and which is at least partly owned by the
owner of the building, structure, or portion thereof; or
   (D)   Abut a private access easement as defined herein and subject to the
restrictions set forth in Section
155.7.21.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1728, passed 5-13-14; Am. Ord. 1838,
passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.2.4 One Principal Building or Use.
   (A)   Only one principal building and one use shall be permitted on lots
located in the R-1 and R-2 Residential Zoning Districts except as otherwise
permitted by this section.
   (B)   Two principal buildings and only one use shall be permitted on lots
located in the R-2 Residential Zoning District subject to the following
requirements:
      (1)   The lot on which such buildings are located shall be no less than
100 feet wide at the lot frontage and no less than 100 feet wide at the rear
property line of the lot where the rear yard exists.
      (2)   The lot on which such buildings are located shall be no less than
16,000 square feet in size.
      (3)   There shall be a minimum separation of 30 feet between the two
principal buildings. No part of either principal building of any kind
whatsoever shall be permitted to encroach into this required 30-foot
separation.
   (C)   Two principal buildings and one use shall be permitted on through lots
located in the R-2 Residential Zoning District subject to the following
requirements:
      (1)   The through lot on which such buildings are located shall be no
less than 50 feet wide at each street frontage.
      (2)   The through lot on which such buildings are located shall be no
less than 10,000 square feet in size and no less than 200 feet in depth.
      (3)   There shall be a minimum separation of 20 feet between the two
principal buildings. No part of either principal building of any kind
whatsoever shall be permitted to encroach into this required 20-foot
separation.
   (D)   Only one principal building and one or more uses shall be permitted on
lots located in the C-1 Commercial District I, C-2 Commercial District II, C-
3 Commercial District III and C-4 Commercial District IV Zoning Districts.
   (E)   Multiple buildings and one or more uses shall be permitted on lots
located in the C-5 Commercial District V Zoning District.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1724, passed 3-19-14; Am. Ord. 1737,
passed 1-8-15; Am. Ord. 1817, passed 12-10-20; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.2.5 Projections into Public Streets and Street Right-of-Way.
   (A)   No signs, canopies, wooden or metal marquees, or other similar
structures shall project beyond any street right-of-way line, except where
accessory to and on the same premises as used within the five business
districts designated by this Ordinance. Billboards are prohibited in all
districts. Any of the above structures within the five designated business
districts must be positioned so that the farthest extended part of such
structures shall be at least seven and one-half feet from the existing right-
of-way line measured from the building side of the right-of-way line. All
signs, canopies, wooden or metal marquees, or other similar structures shall be
placed so that the lowest part is no closer to the sidewalk or ground than
eight feet. A flexible valance may extend one additional foot toward the
sidewalk or ground for a clear height of seven feet above the sidewalk. No
sign, canopy, wooden or metal marquee or similar structure shall be higher than
20 feet, nor allowed to project above any roof line.
   (B)   Canopies, awnings, and other similar type structures may be used only
if:
      (1)   The canopies and awning provide nothing other than identification
and street numbers.
      (2)   They will not obstruct the view with support and enclosing walls.
      (3)   They can be removed or secured during time of foul weather.
      (4)   They conform to the structural and construction standards of the NC
state building code.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.2.6 Sight Visibility Triangle.
   The land adjoining a street intersection or egress to a street from off-
street parking areas shall be kept clear of obstructions to protect the
visibility and safety of motorists and pedestrians.
   (A)   Corner Lot Intersections. On a corner lot, nothing shall be erected,
placed, or allowed to grow in a manner so as materially to impede vision
between a height of three feet and ten feet in a triangular area formed by a
diagonal line between two points on the right-of-way lines, 20 feet from where
they intersect. A clear view shall be maintained on corner lots from three to
ten feet in vertical distance.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6722.jpg]
 
   (B)   Driveways. At all points of egress from off-street parking areas to a
road, unobstructed visibility shall be maintained at an elevation of between
three and ten feet of the centerline pavement level, within the two areas
formed by two right angle triangles, on the sides of the driveway. Each
triangle shall have a base measuring five feet along the edge of the driveway
and a height measuring 30 feet along the edge of the road right-of-way.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6724.jpg]
 
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.2.7 No Use or Sale of Land or Buildings Except in Conformity with
Ordinance Provisions.
   (A)   Subject to
Article 155.8 of this Ordinance (Nonconforming Situations), no person may use,
occupy, or sell any land or buildings or authorize or permit the use,
occupancy, or sale of land or buildings under his control except in accordance
with all of the applicable provisions of this Ordinance.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, the "use" or "occupancy" of a building
or land relates to anything and everything that is done to, on, or in that
building or land.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.2.8 Height Limitation Exceptions.
   The height limitations of this Ordinance shall not apply to church spires,
antennas, elevators, HVAC equipment, and similar accessories to buildings.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.2.9 Fees.
   (A)   Reasonable fees sufficient to cover the costs of administration,
inspection, publication of notice and similar matters may be charged to
applicants for zoning permits, sign permits, special use permits, subdivision
plat approval, site plan approval, zoning amendments, variances, changes to
Ordinance text and map, and other administrative actions. The amount of the
fees charged shall be as set forth in the town's budget or as established by
resolution of the Board of Aldermen filed in the office of the Town Clerk.
   (B)   Fees established in accordance with subsection
155.2.9(A) shall be paid upon submission of a signed application or notice of
appeal.
   (C)   Fees charged for such purposes as outlined in division (A) above, must
be used for the purposes as described and no other purposes as outlined in
N.C.G.S. § 160D-402(d).
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.2.10 Open Space Requirements.
   (A)   Purpose. Building setbacks are regulated for a variety of reasons. The
reasons include creating open space and light between structures, reducing fire
danger by separating structures, eliminating some of the noise associated with
adjacent structures, enhancing the community's quality of life and providing
access to the structure by fire and emergency personnel. The restrictions found
in this ordinance are intended to address these goals. There are no
restrictions on landscaping in this ordinance, but homeowners are encouraged to
avoid placing landscaping in setback areas that will adversely affect the
ability to achieve these goals, especially the goal of providing access for
fire and emergency personnel.
   (B)   No structure or portion of a structure of any kind shall be permitted
in any part of a required yard, either below, at, or above ground level, except
as set forth in this section or elsewhere in this Ordinance.
   (C)   The following may encroach into the required yard so long as such use
complies with all other applicable provisions of this Ordinance:
      (1)   Roofs and gutters may encroach two feet into the required yard.
      (2)   Utility/service equipment stands defined as elevated decks required
to raise electrical and mechanical equipment, including but not limited to HVAC
units, electrical meters, and generators above the regulatory flood protection
elevation as defined in
Article 155.11, may encroach four feet into the required rear and side-yard
setback area. Utility/service equipment stands shall be located adjacent to
single family and duplex structures as set forth in the following table.
 
                                 New and Existing Building
Single Family Structure (1 unit)  Maximum length: 30 feet, which can be split
                                  between one side and rear yard
Duplex Family Structure (2 units) Maximum length: 30 feet can be split between
                                  one side and rear yard for each unit.
 
      (3)   Utility/service equipment stands which encroach into the required
setback may be accessible by stairs if the following conditions are met:
         (a)   Utility/service equipment stands stairs shall extend no further
than four feet into the required setback.
         (b)   Utility/service equipment stand stairs shall not encroach into
any required setback except that in which the equipment stand for which the
steps are accessing is placed. For example, if the encroaching equipment stand
is in a side yard setback, the steps permitting access to such stand shall not
encroach in the front or rear yard setbacks at either end of the equipment
stand.
         (c)   Utility/service equipment stands stairs shall not be considered
in calculating the permitted 30-foot length of the encroaching equipment stand.
         (d)   If the total length of the utility/service equipment stand is
split between one side yard and the rear yard (resulting in two equipment
stands), only one set of stairs is permitted for access and the permitted
stairs must access the equipment stand immediately adiacent to the power meter.
         (e)   Non-conforming utility/service equipment stands erected prior to
adoption of this ordinance may be repaired or replaced notwithstanding the
maximum encroachment as outlined hereinabove: provided that they comply with
this ordinance to the extent possible.
         (f)   The area beneath permitted encroaching utility/service equipment
stands and stairs permitting access to such stands may be enclosed but such
enclosure must be constructed to be 40% open as required by applicable flood
ordinances.
         (g)   No stairs are allowed leading to the roof of the structure from
the utility/service equipment stand.
      (4)   Vertical outdoor platform lifts defined as a fully powered vertical
platform device designed to raise a person or objects in order to overcome a
step or similar vertical barrier that does not include or require an enclosure,
shaft, or surrounding structure. Vertical outdoor platform lifts do not include
traditional enclosed elevators such as those tvpically found within a
structure. Vertical outdoor platforms located in a required side or rear yard
setback are subject to the following regulations:
         (a)   Vertical outdoor platform lifts and any associated equipment may
encroach up to a maximum of four feet into the side and rear setbacks and may
not encroach into the front yard setback. Vertical outdoor platforms and all
associated equipment shall not exceed a length of six feet within the required
setback.
         (b)   The total length of vertical outdoor platform lifts and their
accompanying equipment shall be included in the cumulative length calculation
of utility/service equipment stands. This cumulative length must adhere to the
maximum allowable limit specified in
155.2.10(2).
         (c)   Vertical outdoor platforms lifts shall be limited to one lift
per single-family unit or two lifts per duplex.
         (d)   Vertical outdoor platform lifts located in the side or rear yard
setback shall only be permitted on buildings constructed prior to 9-13-2023.
         (e)   The maximum height of a permitted vertical outdoor platform
lift's floor shall not exceed the height of the first livable floor of the
structure to which it grants access.
         (f)   The permitted vertical outdoor platform lift may have an
overhead cover attached to the lift itself.
         (g)   The platform of a permitted vertical outdoor lift shall not
exceed 16 square feet.
         (h)   The height of walls or guardrails for a permitted vertical
outdoor lift shall be subiect to building code for residential use.
      (5)   Arbors may encroach into any required yard on the conditions that:
         (a)   No stand-alone arbors shall be permitted in the required yards.
All arbors shall be part of a fence or wall or contiguous landscaping that
serves the same purpose as a fence or wall.
         (b)   Arbors may be no taller than 7.5 feet.
         (c)   Arbors may be no more than 12 inches in depth.
      (6)   Fences may encroach into any required yard so long as they are in
conformance with the regulations set forth in Section
155.7.10.
      (7)   Driveways may encroach within the street frontage yards, provided
that they are in conformance with Section
155.2.14.
      (8)   Driveways, parking, and sidewalks may encroach into the required
yards in the P-C, C-2, C-3, C-4, and C-5 Districts in conformance with the
applicable district regulations found in Section
155.6.5.
      (9)   Landscaping, including but not limited to flower beds, planters,
tree, etc., may encroach into any required yard. This shall not include gravel,
pervious pavers, or impervious pavers, the primary purpose of which is to
provide parking. These materials shall be considered as driveways and may
encroach into the street frontage yards so long as they are in conformance with
Section
155.2.14.
      (10)   Walkways no more than 36 inches wide elevated no more than six
inches above grade composed of pervious materials, including but limited to
wood and pervious pavers, provided that they are erected for the sole purpose
of providing access to residences, piers, or permitted establishments located
on the same property or located adjacent to the same property.
      (11)   Bulkheads as defined in this Ordinance installed in accordance
with Division of Coastal Management Rules and Regulations.
      (12)   Uncovered stairs and stair landings in pre-FIRM (1970) structures
may encroach into the front yard setback in the R-1 zoning district up to a
maximum of five feet.
      (13)   Buried LP gas tanks are allowed in the setbacks and free standing
tanks may encroach four feet into the side or rear-yard setback area.
      (14)   Retaining walls exceeding 30 inches but not exceeding 48 inches
above the lowest adjacent grade erected for soil stabilization, support and
safety. These walls do not require the involvement of a licensed civil engineer
unless their height exceeds 48 inches. In cases where these walls are designed
by a licensed civil enqineer to meet State Building Code requirements and are
approved by the Town Floodplain Administrator, the property owner must furnish
an engineering inspection report and certification to the town upon completion.
Retaining walls constructed to protect public beach access sites are exempt
from all height restrictions.
      (15)   A church memorial garden and columbarium and any walkway providing
access thereto.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1797, passed 7-9-20; Am. Ord. 1813, passed
10-8-20; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22; Am. Ord. 1840, passed 7-19-22; Am. Ord.
1850, passed 9-13-23; Am. Ord. 1862, passed 12-12-24)
Section 155.2.11 Fire Districts.
   (A)   Fire districts are to comply with the provisions of Appendix D, Fire
Districts, of the North Carolina State Building Code: Building Code, 2009
Edition, and as thereafter amended, and are established as follows:
      (1)   Fire District No I. Those areas shown as C-1 and C-4 on the
official zoning map of the town, as adopted March 13, 2008.
      (2)   Fire District No II. Those areas shown as C-2, C-3, C-5, and all
private club zones on the official zoning map of the town, as adopted March 13,
2008.
   (B)   The limit boundaries of both Fire Districts Nos. I and II shall change
with, and conform to any official changes in the official zoning map with
respect to the zones set forth in this section.
   (C)   After May 27,1982, all buildings erected in the primary and secondary
fire districts shall be required to install an approved fire alarm system and
an approved sprinkler system.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.2.12 Property Owners’ Association.
   (A)   No preliminary plat, site plan, or special use permit for which a
property owners' association will exist shall be approved until all required
legal instruments have been reviewed by the Town Attorney as to legal form and
effect and approved by the town.
   (B)   If common open space is deeded to a property owners' association, the
owner or developer shall file with the New Hanover County Register of Deeds and
the Town of Wrightsville Beach a declaration of covenants, conditions, and
restrictions that will govern such association. The provisions of such
declaration of covenants, conditions, and restrictions shall include, but not
be limited to, the following:
      (1)   The property owners' association must be set up before any property
is sold in the development.
      (2)   Membership must be mandatory and automatic when property is
purchased in the development.
      (3)   The open space requirement must be permanent, not just for a period
of years.
      (4)   The association must be responsible for liability insurance, local
taxes, and maintenance of recreational and other common facilities including
private streets.
      (5)   Property owners must pay their pro rata share of the cost; the
assessment levied by the association can become a lien on the property.
      (6)   The association must be able to adjust the assessment to meet
changed needs.
      (7)   Covenants for maintenance assessments shall run with the land.
      (8)   Provision ensuring that control of such association will gradually
be vested in the property owners' association.
      (9)   All lands so conveyed shall be subject to the right of the grantee
or grantees to enforce maintenance and improvement of the common facilities.
      (10)   Stormwater management system maintenance schedule.
   (C)   All POA documents submitted as part of a development or site plan
approval must be reviewed and approved by the Town of Wrightsville Beach
Attorney prior to the issuance of building permits for the project.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.2.13 Temporary Buildings.
   Temporary buildings, including mobile structures, incidental to a
construction project may be permitted to be used concurrent with the permit for
permanent building(s) or construction. Such temporary building shall be removed
within 14 days following completion of construction. No such building shall be
used for dwelling purposes. Refer to Section
155.11.18(H) for additional regulations regarding temporary structures in a
floodplain.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.2.14 Permit to Construct Driveway Required.
   No person shall construct, reconstruct, or repair any driveway within the
town without first obtaining from the UDO Administrator a zoning permit to do
so. Such person shall construct, reconstruct, and repair such driveway under
the supervision of the UDO Administrator, and in accordance with
Article 155.9, Part II of this Ordinance.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.2.15 Building Design.
   (A)   In all zoning districts, roofing materials shall have non-reflective/
non-glare finishes.
   (B)   For buildings in non-residential zoning districts, exterior metal
finishes shall not be allowed on the front facade of the building.
   (C)   In accordance with N.C.G.S. § 160D-703 and N.C.S.L. 2019-174,
structures subject to the One- and Two-Family Building Code shall not be
subject to regulations requiring a minimum square footage.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
ARTICLE 155.3
ADMINISTRATIVE/LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY
PART I.
UDO ADMINISTRATOR
Section 155.3.1 Powers and Duties.
   (A)   The UDO Administrator, to be designated by the Town Manager, is hereby
authorized and it shall be his/her duty to enforce the provisions of this
Ordinance. This official shall have the right to enter upon the premises during
reasonable hours necessary to carry out his/her duties, in accordance with the
requirements of subsection
155.1.12.6.(B). It is the intention of this Ordinance that all questions
arising in connection with enforcement and interpretation shall be presented
first to the UDO Administrator and/or designated agent. Appeal from his/her
decision may be made to the Board of Adjustment.
   (B)   In administering the provisions of this Ordinance, the UDO
Administrator and/or designated agent shall:
      (1)   Make and maintain records of all applications for development
approvals, including permits, special uses, and requests listed herein, and
records of all development approvals issued or denied, with notations of all
special conditions or modifications involved.
      (2)   File and safely keep copies of all plans submitted, and the same
shall form a part of the records of his/her office and shall be available for
inspection at reasonable times by any interested party.
      (3)   Transmit to the Planning Board, Board of Aldermen, and/or the Board
of Adjustment all applications and plans for which their review and approval is
required.
      (4)   Conduct inspections of premises and, upon finding that any of the
provisions of this Ordinance are being violated, notify in writing the person
responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the violation and
ordering the action necessary to correct it. The UDO Administrator shall order
discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings or structures; removal of
illegal buildings or of additions, alterations, or structural changes thereto;
discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall take any other action
authorized by this Ordinance to insure compliance with or to prevent violation
of its provisions.
   (C)   In addition, the UDO Administrator shall have the following duties:
      (1)   Prepare a report of the technical review procedure and
recommendations for the Planning Board, Board of Adjustment, or Board of
Aldermen as may be required.
      (2)   Provide administrative interpretations and determinations of
development regulations in the UDO.
         (a)   All determinations shall be given in writing to the owner of the
property that is the subject of the determination and to the party who sought
the determination.
         (b)   The written notice shall be delivered by personal delivery,
electronic mail, or by first-class mail.
      (3)   Provide nonconformity determinations, including expansions of
nonconforming uses and structures.
      (4)   Review and approve zoning compliance applications.
      (5)   Review and approve applications for temporary uses, including
special events.
      (6)   Review and approve certificates of occupancy.
      (7)   Conduct concept meetings with applicants for development approval
as necessary or appropriate.
      (8)   Maintain the official zoning map, in either paper or digital
format, former zoning maps, and the public records of the Planning Department,
Planning Board, and Board of Adjustment, for public inspection.
      (9)   Maintain in paper or digital form, any state or federal agency map,
incorporated by reference in the zoning map.
      (10)   Perform site inspections.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
PART II.
TECHNICAL REVIEW PROCEDURE
Section 155.3.2 Purpose.
   The purpose of the Technical Review Procedure is to facilitate communication
and coordination between departments responsible for development review.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.3.3 Procedures; Composition.
   (A)   The technical review procedure shall be used to review all
applications for site-specific development approval for all special use
permits, preliminary and final plat approvals and amendments, development site
plans, development agreements, landscaping plans, and any application for
development approval if requested by the UDO Administrator. The technical
review procedure shall result in the provision of recommendations, as provided
herein, regarding the application under its review.
   (B)   The technical review procedure may include, but not necessarily be
limited to, the following individuals/departments: UDO Administrator (Planning
& Parks Department), Town Manager, Fire Department, Police Department, Public
Works Department.
   (C)   The UDO Administrator may request the participation of professional
experts or a representative from county, regional or state agencies if the UDO
Administrator determines that such entities can provide expertise concerning
the proposed development.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
PART III.
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST AND OATHS OF OFFICE
Section 155.3.4 Conflicts of Interest and Oaths of Office.
   (A)   Members of the Planning Board, and Board of Adjustment must act in the
public interest and not to advance their own interests. A member of the
Planning Board or Board of Adjustment shall not vote on any advisory or
legislative decision regarding a development regulation where the outcome of
the matter being considered is reasonably likely to have a direct, substantial,
and readily identifiable financial impact on the member. When a member is
disqualified for a conflict of interest, that member must not participate in
the hearing in any way, neither asking questions, nor debating, nor voting on
the case. If an objection is raised to a member's participation at or prior to
the hearing or vote on a particular matter and that member does not recuse
himself or herself, the remaining members shall by majority vote rule on the
objection.
   (B)   All members of appointed boards shall, before entering their duties,
qualify by taking an oath of office.
   (C)   No member of the Board of Alderman shall vote on any legislative
decision regarding a development regulation where the outcome of the matter
being considered is reasonably likely to have a direct, substantial, and
readily identifiable financial impact on the member. No member of the Board of
Alderman shall vote on any zoning amendment if the landowner of the property
subject to a rezoning petition or the applicant for a text amendment is a
person with whom the Board member has a close familial, business, or other
associational relationship. In addition, the Board of Aldermen shall act in all
matters in compliance with the Town of Wrightsville Beach Code of Ethics for
the Mayor and Board of Aldermen adopted August 26, 2010.
   (D)   No member of any board exercising quasi-judicial functions shall
participate in or vote on any quasi-judicial matter in a manner that would
violate affected persons' constitutional rights to an impartial decision maker.
Impermissible violations of due process include, but are not limited to, a
member having a fixed opinion prior to hearing the matter that is not
susceptible to change, undisclosed ex parte communications, a close familial,
business, or other associational relationship with an affected person, or a
financial interest in the outcome of the matter.
   (E)   The town's administrative staff shall not make a final decision on an
administrative decision if the outcome of that decision would have a direct,
substantial, and readily identifiable financial impact on the staff member or
if the applicant or other person subject to that decision is a person with whom
the staff member has a close familial, business, or other associational
relationship. If a staff member has a conflict of interest, the decision shall
be assigned to the supervisor of the staff person or the Town Manager.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
PART IV.
BOARD OF ALDERMEN
Section 155.3.5 Powers and Duties.
   (A)   The Wrightsville Beach Board of Aldermen has those powers and duties
as provided herein and by Article 5 of Chapter 160A of the North Carolina
General Statutes.
   (B)   In considering proposed changes in the text of this Ordinance or in
the zoning map, the Board of Aldermen acts in its legislative capacity and must
proceed in accordance with the requirements of
Article 155.4.
   (C)   Unless otherwise specifically provided in this Ordinance, in
considering amendments to this Ordinance or the zoning map, the Board of
Aldermen shall follow the regular voting and other requirements as set forth in
other provisions of the Town Code.
   (D)   To adopt temporary moratoria on any town development approval required
by law (refer to Section
155.4.3).
   (E)   To keep minutes of its proceedings.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
PART V.
PLANNING BOARD
Section 155.3.6 Creation.
   The Wrightsville Beach Board of Aldermen hereby authorizes, reaffirms, and
establishes the Planning Board under the authority granted by the N.C.G.S. §
160D-301. The Wrightsville Beach Planning Board shall constitute, function, and
may be referred to as the Planning Board.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.3.7 Composition; Filling Vacancies.
   (A)   The Planning Board shall consist of seven members appointed by the
Board of Aldermen.
   (B)   Per N.C.G.S. § 160D-307, the Planning Board shall include at least one
member of the town's extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ), appointed by the New
Hanover County Board of Commissioners shall appoint members from the ETJ. The
ratio of the number of members representing the town's corporate limits to the
number of members representing the ETJ shall be proportional to the ratios of
the respective populations of the corporate limits and the ETJ. Population
figures shall be updated at least every ten years with the decennial U.S.
Census and may be updated at additional intervals.
   (C)   All members shall be appointed for two-year terms or until a successor
is appointed. Members' terms shall run from February 1 through January 31. No
member of the Planning Board shall serve more than three consecutive terms.
Vacancies occurring for reasons other than expiration of terms shall be filled
as they occur by the Board of Aldermen for the period of the unexpired term.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.3.8 Organization, Meetings, Records.
   (A)   There shall be a Chairman and Vice Chairman elected annually by the
Board members at the regular meeting in February. The Board shall adopt Rules
of Procedure which shall be effective following approval by the Board of
Aldermen. Rules of Procedure shall be maintained by the Town Clerk or other
designee appointed by the Town Manager and posted on the town's website in
accordance with N.C.G.S. § 160D-308. The Board shall keep minutes of meetings,
records of the members' attendance and resolutions, discussions, findings and
recommendations, all of which minutes and such records shall be furnished to
the Board of Aldermen. The records shall be considered public records. The
Board shall hold at least one meeting each month and all meetings shall be open
to the public and subject to the provisions of N.C.G.S. Ch. 143A, Article 33C
regarding open meetings.
   (B)   The Board of Aldermen shall have the authority to remove any member
who misses three consecutive regular meetings or more than four total meetings
during his or her membership on the Planning Board. It shall be the
responsibility of the Chairman of the Planning Board to advise the Board of
Aldermen of any member who misses three consecutive regular meetings or more
than a total of four meetings. In the event the Board of Aldermen removes a
member because of his or her failure to comply with the attendance requirements
set forth herein, the Board of Aldermen shall notify the Chairman of the
Planning Board, in writing, that the member has been removed. Each member shall
notify the Chairman or the planning staff at least 48 hours before a regular
meeting when an absence is anticipated.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.3.9 Powers and Duties.
   The Planning Board shall have the following powers and duties:
   (A)   Studies. To make careful studies of present conditions and the
probable future development of the town and its environs. Such studies may
include but are not limited to land use surveys; population studies; economic
base studies; schools, parks, and recreation studies; traffic studies; and
urban renewal studies.
   (B)   Comprehensive Plan. To formulate and maintain a comprehensive plan of
the town and its environs for the purpose of achieving a coordinated, adjusted,
and harmonious development of the municipality which would promote, in
accordance with present and future needs, the safety, morals, order,
convenience, prosperity, and general welfare of its citizens; efficiency and
economy in the process of development; convenience of traffic; safety from fire
and other dangers; adequate light and air; healthful and convenience
distribution of population; provision of adequate open spaces; good civic
design and arrangement; wise and efficient expenditures of public funds;
adequate provision for public utilities; and other matters pertaining to public
requirements. The comprehensive plan shall consist of a number of parts which
may include but not be limited to the following: a land use plan, a major
thoroughfare plan, a utilities plan, a plan for economic development, a
recreation plan, a school plan, and a community facilities plan.
   (C)   Zoning Ordinances. To suggest revisions from time to time to the
existing zoning ordinances and to make other recommendations as the Planning
Board deems appropriate from time to time to the Board of Aldermen regarding
zoning ordinances.
   (D)   Subdivision Regulations. To suggest revisions from time to time to the
existing subdivision regulations and to make other recommendations as the
Planning Board deems appropriate from time to time to the Board of Aldermen
regarding subdivision ordinances.
   (E)   Powers of Review. To review and make recommendations to the Board of
Aldermen upon the extent, location, and design of all public structures and
facilities; on the acquisition and disposal of public properties; on the
opening, abandonment, widening, extension, narrowing, or other change to
streets and other public ways; and on the construction, extension, expansion,
or abandonment of utilities, whether publicly or privately owned. However, in
the absence of a recommendation from the Planning Board after the expiration of
30 days from the date on which the question has been submitted in writing to
the Board, the Board of Aldermen may if it deems wise, take final action.
   (F)   Annual Report. To submit, in April of each year, to the Board of
Aldermen, a report of its activities, for the preceding year.
   (G)   Prior Approval by the Board of Aldermen. In exercising the powers and
duties set forth herein, the Planning Board is authorized to appoint committees
made up in whole or in part of citizens of the town who are not members of the
Planning Board. Provided, however, that the creation of the committees and the
appointments thereto shall be subject to the prior approval of the Board of
Aldermen.
   (H)   Staff Support. The Town Manager shall be responsible for appointing
staff personnel to support the activities of the Planning Board. The Town
Manager shall designate those staff members so appointed in writing and shall
provide a copy of the designation to the Planning Board Chairman. The Planning
Board shall not utilize the services of any staff personnel other than those so
designated without the prior approval of the Town Manager.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
PART VI. BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
Section 155.3.10 Establishment of Board of Adjustment.
   (A)   The Board of Adjustment of the town, herein called "Board," is hereby
established to fulfill the duties and powers described to it by this Ordinance,
other applicable provisions of the Town Code, and by N.C.G.S. § 160D-302.
   (B)   The Board shall consist of five regular members and three alternate
members. All members shall be residents of the town and shall be appointed by
the Board of Aldermen. Members of the Board of Aldermen may be appointed as
members of the Board. The alternate members shall assume all rights,
privileges, and duties of the regular Board members when serving in the absence
of regular Board members.
   (C)   Per N.C.G.S. § 160D-307, the Board of Adjustment shall include at
least one member of the town's extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ), appointed
by the New Hanover County Board of Commissioners shall appoint members from the
ETJ. The ratio of the number of members representing the town's corporate
limits to the number of members representing the ETJ shall be proportional to
the ratios of the respective populations of the corporate limits and the ETJ.
Population figures shall be updated at least every ten years with the decennial
U.S. Census and may be updated at additional intervals.
   (D)   The term of office of members of the Board shall be for three years.
In the beginning, two regular members shall be appointed for three years, two
regular members shall be appointed for two years, and one regular member shall
be appointed for one year. As the terms of office expire, all subsequent
members shall be appointed for terms of three years, or until a successor is
appointed. The term of office of a member of the Board of Adjustment shall not
be reduced except in accordance with applicable North Carolina law.
   (E)   The Board shall adopt rules of procedure for the conduct of its
affairs and in keeping with the provisions of this Ordinance. Such rules of
procedure shall not be effective until approved by the Board of Aldermen. Rules
of Procedure shall be maintained by the Town Clerk or other designee appointed
by the Town Manager and posted on the town's website in accordance with
N.C.G.S. § 160D-308. All meetings held by the Board shall be held in accordance
with N.C.G.S. Ch. 143A, Article 33B or as may be amended. The Board shall keep
minutes of its proceedings suitable for review in court showing:
      (1)   The factual evidence presented to the Board by all parties
concerned;
      (2)   The findings of fact and the reasons for the determinations by the
Board; and
      (3)   The vote of each member, or if absent or failing to vote,
indicating such fact, all of which shall be public record and be filed with the
office of the Town Clerk.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.3.11 Powers of the Board of Adjustment.
   (A)   The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals from and review
any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by a public official or
employee charged with the enforcement of this Ordinance.
   (B)   The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide variance requests.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.3.12 Organization; Meetings.
   (A)   The Board shall elect one member to serve as Chair and preside over
its meetings and shall elect one member to serve as Vice-Chair to fulfill the
responsibilities of the Chair when the Chair cannot. The Board shall appoint a
clerk, who may be a town officer or employee, a member of the Board, or such
other person who is qualified to fulfill the requirements of the position. The
Board may create and fill such offices and committees as it may deem necessary.
The term of the Chair and other offices shall be one year with eligibility for
reelection. The Chair, or any member temporarily acting as Chair, is authorized
to administer oaths to any witnesses in any matter coming before the Board.
   (B)   The Board shall establish a regular meeting schedule and shall meet
frequently enough so that it may take action as expeditiously as reasonably
possible. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public, and reasonable
notice of the time and place thereof shall be given to the public in accordance
with the North Carolina General Statutes. The Board shall keep a record of its
meetings, including attendance of its members, the vote of each member on every
question, a complete summary of the evidence submitted to it, documents
submitted to it, and all official actions.
   (C)   Any member of the Board who misses more than three consecutive regular
meetings or more than half the regular meetings in a calendar year shall lose
his or her status as a member of the Board and shall be replaced or reappointed
by the Board of Aldermen. Absence due to sickness, death, or other emergencies
of like nature shall be recognized as excused absences, and shall not affect
the member's status on the Board, except that in the event of a long illness or
other such cause for prolonged absence, the member shall be replaced.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.3.13 Quorum and Voting.
   The concurring vote of four-fifths of the members of the Board shall be
necessary to grant a variance from the provisions of this Ordinance. A majority
of the members shall be required to decide any other quasi-judicial matter or
to determine an appeal made in the nature of certiorari. For the purposes of
this section, vacant positions on the Board and members who are disqualified
from voting on a quasi-judicial matter shall not be considered "members of the
Board" for calculation of the requisite supermajority if there are no qualified
alternates available to take the place of such members.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1727, passed 5-3-14; Am. Ord. 1838, passed
3-10-22)
ARTICLE 155.4
LEGISLATIVE/QUASI-JUDICIAL PROCEDURES
Section 155.4.1 Legislative Procedures.
   155.4.1.1 Procedure. The Board of Aldermen may amend, supplement, or change
the text of this Ordinance and zoning map or comprehensive plan, as well as
other legislative decisions, following review and recommendation of the
Planning Board, according to the procedures established in this Article.
   155.4.1.2 Action by Applicant. The following action shall be taken by the
applicant:
   (A)   Proposed changes or amendments may be initiated by the Board of
Aldermen, Planning Board, or by one or more interested parties, except that no
amendment to zoning regulations or a zoning map that down-zones property shall
be initiated nor is it enforceable without the written consent of all property
owners whose property is the subject of the down-zoning amendment, unless the
down-zoning amendment is initiated by the Town of Wrightsville Beach. For
purposes of this section, "down-zoning" means a zoning ordinance that affects
an area of land in one of the following ways:
      (1)   By decreasing the development density of the land to be less dense
than was allowed under its previous usage.
      (2)   By reducing the permitted uses of the land that are specified in a
zoning ordinance or land development regulation to fewer uses than were allowed
under its previous usage.
   (B)   An application for any change or amendment shall contain a description
and statement of the present and proposed zoning regulation or district
boundary to be applied, the names and addresses of the applicant, the owner of
the parcel of land involved in the change if different from the applicant, and
all adjacent property owners as shown on the New Hanover County tax listing.
Twenty copies of such application shall be filed with the UDO Administrator not
later than 30 days prior to the Planning Board meeting at which the application
is to be considered.
   (C)   When a proposed amendment is initiated by individuals or parties other
than the Board of Aldermen or Planning Board, a fee established from time to
time by the Board of Aldermen shall be paid to the town for each application
for an amendment to cover the necessary administrative costs and advertising.
   155.4.1.3 Action by the Planning Board.
   (A)   Zoning Map Amendment. In any case where the Planning Board will
consider a change in the zoning classification of a parcel of land, notice of
the proposed petition or application shall be mailed by first class mail to the
owner of the parcel of land involved in the change and all abutting property
owners as shown on the New Hanover County tax listing at the addresses listed
for such property owners on the New Hanover County tax abstracts, at least ten
days and not more than 25 days prior to the Planning Board meeting at which the
rezoning is to be considered. When multiple parcels are included in a proposed
zoning map amendment, a posting of each individual site is not required, but
the town shall post sufficient notices to provide reasonable notice to
interested persons. The UDO Administrator or his or her designee shall certify
to the Planning Board that such notices have been made.
   (B)   Zoning Text Amendment. In any case where the Planning Board will
consider an amendment to the zoning code text, notice of the amendment to be
considered shall be published once in a newspaper having general circulation in
the area. The notice shall be published not less than ten days before the date
of the Planning Board meeting at which the text amendment will be considered.
   (C)   Planning Board Action on Development Regulations and other Legislative
Decisions.
      (1)   Zoning Text or Map Amendments. The Planning Board shall advise and
comment on whether the proposed text amendment or map amendment is consistent
with the adopted comprehensive plan and any other applicable officially adopted
plans. The Planning Board shall provide a written recommendation to the Board
of Aldermen that addresses plan consistency and other matters as deemed
appropriate by the Planning Board, but a comment by the Planning Board that a
proposed amendment is inconsistent with the comprehensive plan shall not
preclude consideration or approval of the proposed amendment by the Board of
Aldermen.
      (2)   Comprehensive Plan Updates, Other Ordinances, and Actions. Any
development regulation or action required by this Ordinance other than a zoning
regulation may be referred to the Planning Board for review and comment.
      (3)   The review and comment of a proposed development ordinance or
zoning amendment as required herein and by N.C.G.S. § 160D-604, must be
performed by a separate board and not the Board of Aldermen.
   155.4.1.4 Action by the Board of Aldermen.
   (A)   Notice and Public Hearings - Zoning Text Amendment. No amendment shall
be adopted by the Board of Aldermen until after public notice and hearing.
Notice of such a public hearing shall be published once a week for two
successive calendar weeks in a local newspaper of general circulation in the
town. The notice shall be published the first time not less than ten days nor
more than 25 days before the date scheduled for the hearing.
   (B)   Notice and Public Hearings - Zoning Map Amendment.
      (1)   In any case where the Board of Aldermen will consider a change in
the zoning classification of a parcel of land, notice of the proposed petition
or application shall be mailed by first class mail to the owner of that parcel
of land and all abutting property owners as shown on the New Hanover County tax
listing at the last addresses listed for such property owners on the New
Hanover County tax abstracts. For purposes of this Ordinance, properties
adjacent to the parcel subject to the map amendment but separated by a street,
railroad, or other transportation corridor shall be considered "abutting" and
included. The party applying for the change in zoning classification shall
submit the following material with the request for rezoning; the application
shall be considered incomplete without such material:
         (a)   A list of names of owners, their addresses and the tax parcel
numbers of the property involved in the change and the properties immediately
adjacent to the property of the request, including the property owners directly
opposite the proposed request but separated by a street right-of-way, railroad,
or other transportation corridor, as shown on the New Hanover County tax
listing.
         (b)   Two sets of plain, letter sized envelopes equal in number to the
above list of names shall be furnished by the applicant. Both sets of envelopes
are to be unsealed, stamped, and addressed for mailing to the adjacent property
owners as shown on the New Hanover County tax listing, and bear the return
address of the town.
      (2)   At least ten but no more than 25 days prior to the date of the
meeting at which the Board of Aldermen will consider the request for rezoning,
the Town Clerk shall mail a letter of notification in the supplied envelopes
containing a description of the request and the time, date and location of the
public hearing. Additionally, the site proposed for rezoning or an adjacent
public right-of-way shall be posted with a notice of the public hearing within
the same time period specified for mailed notices of the hearing at which the
rezoning is to be considered. When multiple parcels are included in a proposed
zoning map amendment, a posting of each individual site is not required, but
the town shall post sufficient notices to provide reasonable notice to
interested persons. The Town Clerk shall certify to the Board of Aldermen that
such notices have been made and such certification shall be deemed conclusive
in the absence of fraud.
      (3)   The first class mail notice required under subsections (1) and (2)
of this section shall not be required if the zoning map amendment directly
affects more than 50 properties, owned by a total of at least 50 different
property owners, and the town elects to use the expanded published notice. In
this instance, the town may elect to either make the mailed notice provided for
in this section or may as an alternative elect to publish a notice of the
hearing as required by N.C.G.S. § 160D-601, but provided that each
advertisement shall not be less than one-half of a newspaper page in size. The
advertisement shall only be effective for property owners who reside in the
area of general circulation of the newspaper which publishes the notice.
Property owners who reside outside of the newspaper circulation area, according
to the address listed on the most recent New Hanover County property tax
listing for the affected property, shall be notified according to the
provisions of subsections (1) and (2).
      (4)   Reserved.
   (C)   Recommendations of Planning Board. The Board of Aldermen shall not
hold its required public hearing or take action on any proposed zoning
amendment until it has received a recommendation regarding such Ordinance
amendment from the Planning Board. If no recommendation is received from the
Planning Board within 30 days from the date when submitted to the Planning
Board, the Board of Aldermen may consider the proposal without a recommendation
from the Planning Board.
   (D)   Citizen Comments. If any resident or property owner submits a written
statement regarding a proposed amendment, modification or repeal to a zoning
ordinance to the Town Clerk at least two business days prior to the proposed
vote on such change, the Town Clerk shall deliver such written statement to the
Board of Aldermen.
   (E)   Statements of Consistency and Reasonableness.
      (1)   Plan Consistency. Prior to adopting or rejecting any zoning text
and/or map amendment, the Board of Aldermen shall adopt a statement describing
whether its action is consistent or inconsistent with an adopted comprehensive
plan. This requirement may also be met by a clear indication in the minutes of
the Board of Aldermen that at the time of action on the amendment the Board was
aware of and considered the Planning Board's recommendations and any relevant
portions of an adopted comprehensive plan. If a zoning map amendment is adopted
and the action was deemed inconsistent with the adopted comprehensive plan, the
zoning amendment shall have the effect of also amending any future land-use map
in the approved comprehensive plan, and no additional request or application
for a plan amendment shall be required. However, if the plan is one that
requires review and approval subject to N.C.G.S. § 113A-110, (CAMA Plan), the
plan amendment shall not be effective until that review and approval is
completed. A plan amendment and a zoning amendment may be considered
concurrently. A consistency statement is not subject to judicial review.
      (2)   Reasonableness Statement for Rezonings. When adopting or rejecting
any petition for a zoning map amendment, a statement analyzing the
reasonableness of the proposed rezoning shall be approved by the Board of
Alderman. A reasonableness statement may be provided to zoning text amendments.
This statement of reasonableness may consider, among other factors:
         (a)   the size, physical conditions, and other attributes of the area
proposed to be rezoned;
         (b)   the benefits and detriments to the landowners, the neighbors,
and the surrounding community;
         (c)   the relationship between the current actual and permissible
development on the tract and adjoining areas and the development that would be
permissible under the proposed amendment;
         (d)   why the action taken is in the public interest; and
         (e)   any changed conditions warranting the amendment.
      (3)   Single Statement. The statement of reasonableness and the plan
consistency statement may be approved as a single statement.
   (F)   A development regulation shall be adopted by ordinance on the first
reading, by a simple majority of the Board of Aldermen.
   155.4.1.5 Withdrawal of Application. An applicant may withdraw his or her
application at any time by written notice to the UDO Administrator.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1750, passed 10-13-15; Am. Ord. 1838,
passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.4.2 Establishment of Vested Rights.
   155.4.2.1 Purpose. The zoning vested right is a right, established pursuant
to N.C.G.S. § 160D-108, which precludes any action by a local government that
would change, alter, impair, prevent, diminish, or otherwise delay the
development or use of the property allowed by the applicable land development
regulation or regulations. As such, amendments in land development regulations
are not applicable or enforceable without the written consent of the owner with
regard to any of the following:
   (A)   Buildings or uses of buildings or land for which a development permit
application has been submitted and subsequently issued in accordance with
N.C.G.S. § 143-755.
   (B)   Subdivisions of land for which a development permit application
authorizing the subdivision has been submitted and subsequently issued in
accordance with N.C.G.S. § 143-755.
   (C)   A site-specific vesting plan pursuant to N.C.G.S. § 160D-108.1 and
subsection 155.4.2.8 below.
   (D)   A multi-phased development pursuant to subsection 155.4.2.4.
   (E)   A vested right established by the terms of a development agreement.
   155.4.2.2 Duration of a Vested Right.
   (A)   Upon issuance of a development permit, the vesting granted for a
project is effective upon the filing of the application, for so long as the
permit remains valid. Unless otherwise specified, building permits expire after
six months and development approvals/permits expire one year after issuance
unless work authorized by the permit has substantially commenced.
   (B)   Except where a longer vesting period is provided by this Ordinance,
the vesting granted expires for an uncompleted development project if
development work is intentionally and voluntarily discontinued for a period of
more than 24 consecutive months. The vesting period for a nonconforming use of
property expires if the use is intentionally and voluntarily discontinued for a
period of more than 24 consecutive months.
   155.4.2.3 Multiple Permits. Where multiple local development permits are
required to complete a development project, the applicant may choose the
version of each of the local land development regulations applicable to the
project, upon submittal of the application for the initial development permit.
This provision is applicable only for those subsequent development permit
applications filed within 18 months of the date following the approval of an
initial permit.
   155.4.2.4 Multi-Phased Development. A multi-phased development is a
development containing over 25 acres that is both submitted for a development
approval to occur in more than one phase and subject to a master development
plan with committed elements showing the type and intensity of each phase.
   (A)   A multi-phased development is vested for the entire development with
the land development regulations then in place at the time a site plan approval
is granted for the initial phase of the multi-phased development.
   (B)   A right which has been vested as provided for herein remains vested
for a period of seven years from the time a site plan approval is granted for
the initial phase of the multi-phased development.
   155.4.2.5 Continuing Review. Following issuance of a development permit, the
town may make subsequent inspections and reviews to ensure compliance with the
applicable land development regulations in effect at the time of the original
approval.
   155.4.2.6 Process to Claim a Vested Right. A person claiming a vested right
may submit information to the UDO Administrator, who shall make an initial
determination as to the existence of the vested right. The decision of the UDO
Administrator or officer may be appealed under N.C.G.S. § 160D-405. On appeal,
the existence of a vested right shall be reviewed de novo. In lieu of seeking
such a determination or pursuing an appeal under N.C.G.S. § 160D-405, a person
claiming a vested right may bring an original civil action as provided by
N.C.G.S. § 160D-1403.1.
   155.4.2.7 Runs with the Land. Vested rights run with the land except for the
use of land for outdoor advertising governed by N.C.G.S. § 136-136.1 and
N.C.G.S. § 136-131.2 in which case the rights granted by this section run with
the owner of the permit issued by the North Carolina Department of
Transportation.
   155.4.2.8 Site Specific Vesting Plans.
   (A)   A site-specific vesting plan consists of a plan submitted to the town
in which the applicant requests vesting, describing with reasonable certainty
on the plan the type and intensity of use for a specific parcel or parcels of
property. For purposes of this section the following plans or approvals qualify
as site-specific vesting plans:
      (1)   Preliminary Plat
      (2)   Minor Subdivision
      (3)   Major Subdivision
      (4)   Special Use Permit
   (B)   Establishment of Vested Right. A vested right is established with
respect to any property upon the valid approval, or conditional approval, of a
site-specific vesting. Such a vested right confers upon the landowner the right
to undertake and complete the development and use of the property under the
terms and conditions of the site-specific vesting plan, including any
amendments thereto.
   (C)   Approval Process for a Site-Specific Vesting Plan.
      (1)   Each site-specific vesting plan shall include the information
required by the Board of Aldermen for the underlying type of development
application.
      (2)   Each site-specific vesting plan shall provide the notice and
hearing required for the underlying type of development application. If the
vesting plan is not based on such an approval, a legislative hearing as
required by N.C.G.S. § 160D-602 shall be held.
      (3)   The town may approve a site-specific vesting plan upon any terms
and conditions that may reasonably be necessary to protect the public health,
safety, and welfare.
      (4)   A site-specific vesting plan is deemed approved upon the effective
date of the Board of Aldermen's decision approving the plan.
      (5)   An approved site-specific vesting plan and its conditions may be
amended with the approval of the owner and the local government in the same
manner as required for the underlying type of development plan.
   (D)   Duration and Termination of a Vested Right.
      (1)   A vested right for a site-specific vesting plan remains valid for
two years. Upon following the same process as required for the original
approval, the Board of Aldermen or the Administrator may extend the vesting of
a site-specific vesting plan up to three years (with total length of vesting
not to exceed five years) upon finding that:
         (a)   The permit has not yet expired;
         (b)   Conditions have not changed so substantially as to warrant a new
application; and,
         (c)   The extension is warranted in light of all other relevant
circumstances-including, but not limited to the size and phasing of
development, the level of investment, the need for the development, economic
cycles, and market conditions or other considerations.
      (2)   Upon issuance of a building permit, the provisions of N.C.G.S. §
160D-1111 and N.C.G.S. § 160D-1115 apply, except that a permit does not expire
and shall not be revoked because of the running of time while a vested right
under this section is outstanding.
      (3)   A right vested as provided in this section terminates at the end of
the applicable vesting period with respect to buildings and uses for which no
valid building permit applications have been filed.
   (E)   Changes and Exceptions.
      (1)   A vested right precludes any zoning action by the town which would
change, alter, impair, prevent, diminish, or otherwise delay the development or
use of the property as set forth in an approved site-specific vesting plan,
except under the following conditions outlined in N.C.G.S. § 160D-108.1.
      (2)   The establishment of a vested right does not preclude the
application of overlay zoning or other development regulations which impose
additional requirements but do not affect the allowable type or intensity of
use, or ordinances or regulations which are general in nature and are
applicable to all property subject to development regulation by a local
government, including, but not limited to, building, fire, plumbing,
electrical, and mechanical codes. Otherwise, applicable new regulations become
effective upon the expiration or termination of the vesting rights period of
the site-specific plan.
      (3)   Notwithstanding any provision of this section, the establishment of
a vested right does not preclude, change, or impair the authority of the town
to adopt and enforce development regulations governing nonconforming situations
or uses.
   155.4.2.9. Annexation Declaration. Whenever the town acquires jurisdiction
over a territory that theretofore has been subject to the jurisdiction of
another local government, any person who has acquired vested rights in the
surrendering jurisdiction may exercise those rights as if no change of
jurisdiction had occurred. The town acquiring jurisdiction may take any action
regarding such a development approval, certificate, or other evidence of
compliance that could have been taken by the local government surrendering
jurisdiction pursuant to its development regulations. Except as provided in
this subsection, any building, structure, or other land use in a territory over
which the town has acquired jurisdiction is subject to the development
regulations of the town.
   155.4.2.10. Permit Choice. If an applicant submits an application for any
type of development and a rule or ordinance is amended, including an amendment
to any applicable land development regulation, between the time the development
application was submitted and a decision is made, or if a land development
regulation is amended after a development permit decision has been challenged
and found to be wrongfully denied or illegal, N.C.G.S. § 143-755 applies. The
applicant may choose which adopted version of the rule or ordinance will apply
to the development and use of the building, structure, or land indicated on the
application. If the applicant chooses the version of the rule or ordinance
applicable at the time of the application, the applicant shall not be required
to await the outcome of the amendment to the rule, map, or ordinance prior to
acting on the development permit.
   (A)   When a development required multiple permits under the development
regulations of this Ordinance, the applicant may choose the regulations
applicable to the project at the time of their initial permit application. The
applicant must submit the subsequent applications within 18 months of approval
of the initial permit in order to claim permit choice.
   (B)   If the development permit applicant chooses the version of the rule or
ordinance applicable at the time of the permit application, the development
permit applicant shall not be required to await the outcome of the amendment to
the rule, map, or ordinance prior to acting on the development permit. The
provisions contained in N.C.G.S § 143-755 apply.
   (C)   If a permit application is on hold for six or more consecutive months
at the request of the applicant, then permit choice is waived and the rules in
effect at the time of resuming consideration of the application apply.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.4.3 Moratorium.
   155.4.3.1 Temporary Moratorium. The town may adopt temporary moratoria on
any town development approval required by law. The duration of any moratorium
shall be reasonable in light of the specific conditions that warrant imposition
of the moratorium and may not exceed the period of time necessary to correct,
modify, or resolve such conditions. Except in cases of imminent and substantial
threat to public health or safety, before adopting an ordinance imposing a
development moratorium with a duration of 60 days or any shorter period, the
governing board shall hold a public hearing and shall publish a notice of the
hearing in a newspaper having general circulation in the area not less than
seven days before the date set for the hearing. A development moratorium with a
duration of 61 days or longer, and any extension of a moratorium so that the
total duration is 61 days or longer, is subject to the notice and hearing
requirements of N.C.G.S. § 160D-601. Absent an imminent threat to public health
or safety, a development moratorium adopted pursuant to this section shall not
apply to any project for which a valid building permit issued pursuant to
N.C.G.S. § 160D-1108 is outstanding, to any project for which a special use
permit application has been accepted as complete, to development set forth in a
site-specific vesting plan approved pursuant to N.C.G.S. § 160D-108.1, to
development for which substantial expenditures have already been made in good
faith reliance on a prior valid development approval, or to preliminary or
final subdivision plats that have been accepted for review by the town prior to
the call for public hearing to adopt the moratorium. Any preliminary
subdivision plat accepted for review by the town prior to the call for public
hearing, if subsequently approved, shall be allowed to proceed to final plat
approval without being subject to the moratorium.
   155.4.3.2 Ordinance Establishing a Development Moratorium. Any ordinance
establishing a development moratorium must expressly include at the time of
adoption each of the following:
   (A)   A clear statement of the problems or conditions necessitating the
moratorium and what courses of action, alternative to a moratorium, were
considered by the town and why those alternative courses of action were not
deemed adequate.
   (B)   A clear statement of the development approvals subject to the
moratorium and how a moratorium on those approvals will address the problems or
conditions leading to imposition of the moratorium.
   (C)   An express date for termination of the moratorium and a statement
setting forth why that duration is reasonably necessary to address the problems
or conditions leading to imposition of the moratorium.
   (D)   A clear statement of the actions, and the schedule for those actions,
proposed to be taken by the town during the duration of the moratorium to
address the problems or conditions leading to imposition of the moratorium.
   155.4.3.3 Renewal or Extension of Moratorium. No moratorium may be
subsequently renewed or extended for any additional period unless the town
shall have taken all reasonable and feasible steps proposed to be taken by the
town in its ordinance establishing the moratorium to address the problems or
conditions leading to imposition of the moratorium and unless new facts and
conditions warrant an extension. Any ordinance renewing or extending a
development moratorium must expressly include, at the time of adoption, the
findings set forth in subsections (A) through (D) of Section
155.4.3.2, including what new facts or conditions warrant the extension.
   155.4.3.4 Persons Aggrieved by Imposition of Moratorium. Any person
aggrieved by the imposition of a moratorium on development approvals required
by law may apply to the appropriate division of the General Court of Justice
for an order enjoining the enforcement of the moratorium, and the court shall
have jurisdiction to issue that order. Actions brought pursuant to this section
shall be set down for immediate hearing, and subsequent proceedings in those
actions shall be accorded priority by the trial and appellate courts. In any
such action, the town shall have the burden of showing compliance with the
procedural requirements of this section.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.4.4 Administrative Appeals, Variances, and Interpretations.
   155.4.4.1 Administrative Appeals.
   (A)   The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals from decisions
of the UDO Administrator concerning the interpretation or administration of
development regulations contained in
Chapter 155 of the Town Code.
   (B)   Appeals under the provisions of this section may be filed by any
person who has standing under N.C.G.S. § 160D-1402(c) or by the town to the
Board of Adjustment.
   (C)   Decisions concerning the interpretation or administration of this
chapter shall be given in writing to the owner of the property that is the
subject of the decision and to the party who sought the decision, if different
from the owner. The written notice, or the notice of determination, shall be
delivered by personal delivery, electronic mail, or by first class mail. The
town shall assume that if a notice of determination is sent by mail, it is
received on the third business day after it is sent.
   (D)   The owner or other party shall have 30 days from receipt of the notice
of determination within which to file an appeal with the Town Clerk. Any other
person with standing to appeal shall have 30 days from receipt from any source
of actual or constructive notice of the decision within which to file an
appeal. The notice of appeal shall state the grounds for the appeal.
   (E)   It shall be conclusively presumed that all persons with standing to
appeal have constructive notice of the decision from the date a sign containing
the words "Zoning Decision" or "Subdivision Decision" in letters at least six
inches high and identifying the means to contact an official for information
about the decision is prominently posted on the property that is the subject of
the decision, provided the sign remains on the property for at least ten days.
Posting of signs is not the only form of constructive notice. Any such posting
shall be the responsibility of the landowner or applicant. Verification of the
posting shall be provided to the official who made the decision. Posting of a
sign as described herein is not required but shall be done at the discretion of
the landowner or applicant. The town may post such sign.
   (F)   The UDO Administrator shall transmit to the Board of Adjustment all
documents and exhibits constituting the record upon which the action appealed
from is taken. The UDO Administrator shall also provide a copy of the record to
the appellant and to the owner of the property that is the subject of the
appeal if the appellant is not the owner.
   (G)   An appeal of a notice of violation or other enforcement order stays
enforcement, including fines, of the action appealed from unless the official
who made the decision certifies to the Board of Adjustment after notice of
appeal has been filed that because of the facts stated in an affidavit, a stay
would cause imminent peril to life or property or because the violation is
transitory in nature, a stay would seriously interfere with enforcement of the
development regulation. In that case, enforcement proceedings shall not be
stayed except by a restraining order, which may be granted by a court. If
enforcement proceedings are not stayed, the appellant may file with the
official a request for an expedited hearing of the appeal, and the Board of
Adjustment shall meet to hear the appeal within 15 days after such a request is
filed. Notwithstanding the foregoing, appeals of decisions granting a
development approval or otherwise affirming that a proposed use of property is
consistent with the Ordinance shall not stay the further review of an
application for permits or permissions to use such property; in these
situations the appellant may request and the Board may grant a stay of a final
decision of development approval applications including building permits
affected by the issue being appealed.
   (H)   Subject to the provisions of subdivision (G) of this subsection, the
Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide the appeal within a reasonable time.
   (I)   The official who made the decision, or his/her successor, shall be
present at the hearing as a witness. The appellant shall not be limited at the
hearing to matters stated in the notice of appeal. If any party or the town
would be unduly prejudiced by the presentation of matters not presented in the
notice of appeal, the Board shall continue the hearing. The Board of Adjustment
may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the decision appealed
from and shall make any order, requirement, decision, or determination that
ought to be made. The Board shall have all the powers of the official who made
the decision.
   155.4.4.2 Variances.
   (A)   An application for a variance shall be submitted to the Board of
Adjustment by filing a copy of the application with the UDO Administrator.
Applications shall be handled in the same manner as applications for
development approvals.
   (B)   A variance may be granted by the Board of Adjustment if it concludes
that, by granting the variance, all of the following findings are supported by
the Board of Adjustment decision:
      (1)   Unnecessary hardship would result from the strict application of
the Ordinance. It shall not be necessary to demonstrate that, in the absence of
the variance, no reasonable use can be made of the property.
      (2)   The hardship results from conditions that are peculiar to the
property, such as location, size, or topography. Hardships resulting from
personal circumstances, as well as hardships resulting from conditions that are
common to the neighborhood or the general public, may not be the basis for
granting a variance.
      (3)   The hardship did not result from actions taken by the applicant or
the property owner. The act of purchasing property with knowledge that
circumstances exist that may justify the granting of a variance shall not be
regarded as a self-created hardship.
      (4)   The requested variance is consistent with the spirit, purpose, and
intent of the Ordinance, such that public safety is secured, and substantial
justice is achieved.
   (C)   No change in permitted uses may be authorized by a variance.
   (D)   Appropriate conditions may be imposed on any variance, provided that
the conditions are reasonably related to the variance.
   (E)   The nature of the variance and any conditions attached to it shall be
entered on the face of the zoning permit, or the zoning permit may simply note
the issuance of the variance and refer to the written record of the variance
for further information. All such conditions are enforceable in the same manner
as any other applicable requirement of this Ordinance.
   155.4.4.3 Interpretations.
   (A)   The Board of Adjustment is authorized to interpret the zoning map and
to pass upon disputed questions of lot lines or district boundary lines and
similar questions. If such questions arise in the context of an appeal from a
decision of the UDO Administrator, they shall be handled as provided in Section
155.4.4.1.
   (B)   An application for a map interpretation shall be submitted to the
Board of Adjustment by filing a standard Town of Wrightsville Beach appeal form
with UDO Administrator. The application shall contain sufficient information to
enable the Board to make the necessary interpretation.
   (C)   Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on
the Official Zoning Map, the rules of interpretation as specified in Section
155.1.10 shall be applied. Where uncertainties continue to exist after
application of the above rules, appeal may be taken to the Board of Adjustment
as provided in Section
155.4.4.1.
   (D)   Interpretations of the location of floodway and floodplain boundary
lines may be made by the UDO Administrator as provided in
Article 155.11, Part 1.
   155.4.4.4 Requests to be Heard Expeditiously. As provided in
Article 155.3, the decision- making board shall hear and decide all appeals,
variance requests, special use permits, and requests for interpretations,
including map boundaries, as expeditiously as possible, consistent with the
need to follow regularly established agenda procedures, provide notice in
accordance with subsection 155.4.4.6, and obtain the necessary information to
make sound decisions.
   155.4.4.5 Evidentiary Hearings for Quasi-Judicial Decisions.
   (A)   Boards shall follow quasi-judicial procedures in determining appeals
of administrative decisions, special use permits, variances, or
interpretations.
   (B)   The required application fee and all supporting materials must be
received by the UDO Administrator before an application is considered complete
and a hearing scheduled.
   155.4.4.6 Notice of Hearing. The UDO Administrator shall give notice of any
hearing required by subsection 155.4.4.5 as follows:
   (A)   Notice of evidentiary hearings conducted pursuant to subsection
155.4.4.5 shall be mailed to the person or entity whose appeal, application, or
request is the subject of the hearing; to the owner of the property that is the
subject of the hearing if the owner did not initiate the hearing; to the owners
of all parcels of land abutting the parcel of land that is the subject of the
hearing; and to any other persons owning real property, any portion of which is
located within 150 feet of the lot that is the subject of the hearing.
   (B)   In the absence of evidence to the contrary, the town may rely on the
county tax listings to determine owners of property entitled to be mailed
notice.
   (C)   The notice must be deposited in the mail at least ten days, but not
more than 25 days, prior to the date of the hearing. Within that same time
period, the town shall also prominently post a notice of the hearing on the
site that is the subject of the hearing or on an adjacent street or highway
right-of-way.
   (D)   The Board of Adjustment may continue an evidentiary hearing that has
been convened without further advertisement.
   155.4.4.7 Evidence/Presentation of Evidence.
   (A)   The provisions of this section apply to all evidentiary hearings for
which a notice is required by subsection 155.4.4.6.
   (B)   The applicant, the local government, and any person who would have
standing to appeal the decision under N.C.G.S. § 160D-1402(c) shall have the
right to participate as a party at the evidentiary hearing, including
presenting evidence, cross-examining witnesses, objecting to evidence, and
making legal arguments. Other witnesses may present competent, material, and
substantial evidence that is not repetitive as allowed by the board.
   (C)   The chair of the board or any member acting as chair and the clerk to
the board are authorized to administer oaths to witnesses in any matter coming
before the board. Any person who, while under oath during a proceeding before
the board determining a quasi-judicial matter, willfully swears falsely is
guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor.
   (D)   The administrator or staff to the board shall transmit to the board
all applications, reports, and written materials relevant to the matter being
considered. The administrative materials may be distributed to the members of
the board prior to the hearing if at the same time they are distributed to the
board a copy is also provided to the appellant or applicant and to the
landowner if that person is not the appellant or applicant. The administrative
materials shall become a part of the hearing record. The administrative
materials may be provided in written or electronic form.
   (E)   Objections regarding jurisdictional and evidentiary issues, including,
but not limited to, the timeliness of an appeal or the standing of a party, may
be made to the board. The board chair shall rule on any objections, and the
chair's rulings may be appealed to the full board. These rulings are also
subject to judicial review pursuant to N.C.G.S. § 160D-1402. Objections based
on jurisdictional issues may be raised for the first time on judicial review.
All findings and conclusions necessary to the issuance or denial of the
requested permit or appeal (necessary findings) shall be based upon competent,
material, and substantial evidence.
   (F)   The board making a quasi-judicial decision through the chair or, in
the chair's absence, anyone acting as chair may subpoena witnesses and compel
the production of evidence.
   (G)   The entirety of a quasi-judicial hearing and deliberation shall be
conducted in open session.
   (H)   Factual findings must not be based on hearsay evidence which would be
inadmissible in a court of law.
   (I)   If a member of the decision-making board has prior or specialized
knowledge about a case, that knowledge should be disclosed to the rest of the
board and parties at the beginning of the hearing. A member of any board
exercising quasi-judicial functions pursuant to this chapter shall not
participate in or vote on any quasi-judicial matter in a manner that would
violate affected persons' constitutional rights to an impartial decision maker.
Impermissible violations of due process include, but are not limited to, a
member having a fixed opinion prior to hearing the matter that is not
susceptible to change, undisclosed ex parte communications, a close familial,
business, or other associational relationship with an affected person, or a
financial interest in the outcome of the matter. If an objection is raised to a
board member's participation at or prior to the hearing or vote on a particular
matter and that member does not recuse himself or herself, the remaining
members of the board shall by majority vote rule on the objection.
   155.4.4.8 Voting.
   (A)   Appeals. A motion to reverse, affirm, or modify the order,
requirement, decision, or determination appealed from shall include a statement
of the specific reasons or findings of facts that support the motion. A
favorable vote of the majority of the members shall be required to reverse or
modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from.
   (B)   Variances.
      (1)   The board must vote affirmatively by a four-fifths majority; see
subsection
155.3.13. in granting a variance. Insofar as practicable, the motion shall
include a statement of the specific reasons or findings of fact supporting such
motion for each of the requirements set forth in subsection 155.4.4.2(B).
      (2)   A motion to deny a variance may be made on the basis that any one
or more of the criteria set forth in subsection 155.4.4.2(B) are not satisfied
or that the application is incomplete. Insofar as practicable, such a motion
shall include a statement of the specific reasons or findings of fact that
support it. This motion is adopted as the board's decision if supported by more
than one-fifth of the board's membership (excluding vacant seats).
   (C)   A majority of the members shall be required to decide any other quasi-
judicial matters.
   155.4.4.9 (Reserved)
   155.4.4.10 Modification of Application at Hearing.
   (A)   In response to questions or comments by persons appearing at the
hearing or to suggestions or recommendations by the Board of Adjustment, the
applicant may agree to modify his application, including the plans and
specifications submitted.
   (B)   Unless such modifications are so substantial or extensive that the
Board cannot reasonably be expected to perceive the nature and impact of the
proposed changes without revised plans before it, the Board may approve the
application with the stipulation that the permit will not be issued until plans
reflecting the agreed upon changes are submitted to the planning staff.
   155.4.4.11 Record.
   (A)   Accurate written minutes shall be kept of all such proceedings.
   (B)   All documentary evidence, including any exhibits, presented at a
hearing as well as all other types of physical evidence shall be made a part of
the record of the proceedings and shall be kept by the town for at least two
years.
   155.4.4.12 Written Decision.
   (A)   The Board shall determine contested facts and make its decision within
a reasonable time. Every quasi-judicial decision shall be based upon competent,
material and substantial evidence in the record. Each quasi-judicial decision
shall be reduced to writing and reflect the Board's determination of contested
facts and their application to the applicable standards. The written decision
shall be signed by the Chair or other duly authorized member of the Board.
   (B)   A quasi-judicial decision is effective upon filing the written
decision with the Clerk to the Board. The decision of the Board shall be
delivered by personal delivery, or electronic mail, or by first-class mail to
the applicant, property owner, and to any other person who has submitted a
written request for a copy prior to the date the decision becomes effective.
The Director of Planning and Parks or his/her designee shall certify that
proper notice has been made.
   (C)   Every quasi-judicial decision shall be subject to review by the
Superior Court by proceedings in the nature of certiorari pursuant to N.C.G.S.
§ 160D-1402. A petition for review shall be filed with the Clerk of Superior
Court by the later of 30 days after the decision is effective or after a
written copy thereof is given in accordance with subsection (B) above. When
first-class mail is used to deliver notice, three days shall be added to the
time to file the petition.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1727, passed 5-13-14; Am. Ord. 1838,
passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.4.5 Special Use Permits.
   155.4.5.1 Purpose and Applicability. This Ordinance provides for a number of
uses to be located by right in each general zoning district subject to the use
meeting certain area, height, yard, and off-street parking and loading
requirements. Beginning after the adoption of conditional zoning, no new
special-use permit (SUP) applications will be accepted except when a single
business within a multi- tenant center cannot practicably pursue conditional
zoning without rezoning the entire parcel or a subdivided portion of it. In
that case, the business may apply for a special-use permit limited to its
premises under the procedures of this section. In addition to these uses, this
Ordinance allows some uses to be allowed in these districts as a special use
subject to issuance of a special use permit by the Board of Aldermen. The
purpose of special use permits is to ensure that uses would be compatible with
surrounding development and in keeping with the purposes of the general zoning
district in which the uses are located and would meet other criteria as set
forth in this section. A lawfully issued special-use permit granted before the
adoption of conditional zoning remains valid, and the permit holder may seek
Board of Aldermen approval to amend, expand, or revoke that permit under the
same standard and evidentiary hearing process that governed the original
approval. All special use permits require some form of a site plan as outlined
in Section
155.5.3.
   155.4.5.2 Application Process/Completeness.
   (A)   The deadline for which a special use permit application shall be filed
with the UDO Administrator is the first business day of the month in the month
prior to the meeting at which the application will be heard. Permit application
forms shall be provided by the UDO Administrator.
         In the course of evaluating the proposed special use, the Board of
Aldermen may request additional information from the applicant. A request for
any additional information may stay any further consideration of the
application by the Board of Aldermen.
   (B)   No application shall be deemed complete unless it contains or is
accompanied by a site plan drawn to scale which complies with the requirements
contained in Section
155.5.3 and a fee, in accordance with a fee schedule approved by the Board of
Aldermen for the submittal of special use permit applications.
   (C)   One hard copy and one digital copy of an application, and all
attachments and maps, for a special use permit shall, be submitted to the UDO
Administrator.
   155.4.5.3 Technical Review Procedure.All applications for a special use
permit, including required site plans, shall follow the technical review
procedure (Article 155.3, Part II) before being submitted to the Board of
Aldermen for consideration. The UDO Administrator shall forward any comments
received during the technical review process to the Board of Aldermen.
   155.4.5.4 Board of Aldermen Action.
   (A)   Special use permits are quasi-judicial decisions approved by a simple
majority vote of the Board of Aldermen. Quasi-judicial decisions must be
conducted in accordance with subsections
155.4.4.5 through
155.4.4.12. For the purposes of this section, vacant positions on the Board and
members who are disqualified from voting on a quasi-judicial matter shall not
be considered "members of the Board" for calculation of the requisite majority
if there are no qualified alternates available to take the place of such
members.
   (B)   Once the comments of the Technical Review Committee have been made,
the Board of Aldermen shall hold an evidentiary hearing to consider the
application at its next regularly scheduled meeting. A quorum of the Board of
Aldermen is required for this hearing. Notice of the evidentiary hearing shall
be as specified in subsection
155.4.4.6. In addition, notice shall be given to other potentially interested
persons by publishing a notice one time in a newspaper having general
circulation in the area not less than ten nor more than 25 days prior to the
evidentiary hearing.
   (C)   In approving an application for a special use permit in accordance
with the principles, conditions, safeguards, and procedures specified herein,
the Board of Aldermen may impose reasonable and appropriate conditions and
safeguards upon the approval. Conditions and safeguards imposed under this
subsection shall not include requirements for which the local government does
not have authority under statute to regulate. In no instance shall any of these
conditions be less restrictive than any requirements which would pertain to
that particular development found elsewhere in a similar zoning district.
   (D)   The applicant has the burden of producing competent, material and
substantial evidence tending to establish the facts and conditions which
subsection
155.4.5.4(E) below requires.
   (E)   The Board of Aldermen shall issue a special use permit if it has
evaluated an application through a quasi-judicial process and determined that:
      (1)   The establishment, maintenance, or operation of the special use
will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, or general
welfare.
      (2)   The special use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of
other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted,
nor diminish or impair property values within the neighborhood.
      (3)   The establishment of the special use will not impede the normal and
orderly development and improvement of the surrounding property for uses
permitted in the district.
      (4)   Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage, parking, or necessary
facilities have been or are being provided.
      (5)   Adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress and
egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets.
      (6)   The special use shall, in all other respects, conform to all the
applicable regulations of the district in which it is located.
      (7)   Public access shall be provided in accordance with the
recommendations of the town's land use plan and access plan or the present
amount of public access and public parking as exists within the town now. If
any recommendations are found to conflict, the system requiring the greatest
quantity and quality of public access, including parking, shall govern.
      (8)   The proposed use shall be consistent with recommendations and
policy statements as described in the adopted land use plan.
   (F)   Conditions and Guarantees. Prior to the granting of any special use,
the Board of Aldermen may require, conditions and restrictions upon the
establishment, location, construction, maintenance, and operation of the
special use as is deemed necessary for the protection of the public interest
and to secure compliance with the standards and requirements specified above.
In all cases in which special uses are granted, the Board of Aldermen shall
require the applicant or land owner's written consent to the conditions as
evidence and guarantee that the conditions required in connection therewith are
being and will be complied with.
   155.4.5.5 Effect of Approval. If an application for a special use permit is
approved by the Board of Aldermen, the owner of the property shall have the
ability to develop the use in accordance with the stipulations contained in the
special use permit, or develop any other use listed as a permitted use for the
general zoning district in which it is located.
   155.4.5.6 Binding Effect. Any special use permit so authorized shall be
binding to the property included in the permit unless subsequently changed or
amended by the Board of Aldermen.
   155.4.5.7 Record. Any special use permit issued by the Board of Aldermen
shall require recordation with the New Hanover County Register of Deeds within
90 days of its approval.
   155.4.5.8 Certificate of Occupancy. No certificate of occupancy for a use
listed as a special use shall be issued for any building or land use on a piece
of property which has received a special use permit for the particular use
unless the building is constructed or used, or the land is developed or used,
in conformity with the special use permit approved by the Board of Aldermen. In
the event that only a segment of a proposed development has been approved, the
certificate of occupancy shall be issued only for that portion of the
development constructed or used as approved.
   155.4.5.9 Change in Special Use Permit. An application to materially change
a special use permit once it has been issued must follow the same procedure as
the original approval and first be submitted, reviewed, and approved in
accordance with subsections
155.4.5.3 and
155.4.5.4, including payment of a fee in accordance with the fee schedule
approved by the Board of Aldermen.
   155.4.5.10 Implementation of Special Use Permit. A special use permit, after
approval by the Board of Aldermen shall expire one year after the approval date
if work has not commenced or in the case of a change of occupancy the business
has not opened; however, it may be, on request, continued in effect for a
period not to exceed an additional one year by the UDO Administrator. No
further extension shall be added except on approval of the Board of Aldermen.
If such use or business is discontinued for a period of 12 months, the special
use permit shall expire. Any expiration as noted or any violation of the
conditions stated on the permit shall be considered unlawful and the special
use permit may be repealed through the same hearing process and procedure as
the original approval. The applicant will be required to submit a new special
use application to the appropriate agencies for consideration and the
previously approved special use permit shall become null and void.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22; Am. Ord. 1867,
passed 9-11-25)
Section 155.4.6 Rehearings.
   When an application involving a quasi-judicial procedure/petition is denied
by the Board of Aldermen or Board of Adjustment, reapplication involving the
same property, or portions of the same property, may not be submitted unless
the petitioner can demonstrate a substantial change in the proposed use,
conditions governing the use of the property, or conditions surrounding the
property itself.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.4.7 Appeals of Quasi-Judicial Decisions.
   Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any quasi-judicial
decision of the Board of Aldermen or Board of Adjustment, any taxpayer, or any
officer, department, board or bureau of the jurisdiction of this Ordinance may,
within 30 days after the filing of the decision in the office of said Board,
but not thereafter, present to the Clerk of the Superior Court, a petition duly
verified setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part,
specifying the ground of illegality, whereupon such decision of said Board
shall be subject to review by certiorari as provided by law.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.4.8 Conditional Zoning Procedure.
   155.4.8.1 Application and Conditional Zoning Review Procedure.
   (A)   The application for a conditional rezoning approval shall also be
accompanied by an application to amend the zoning map (rezoning) to the
Conditional Zoning District. The rezoning application shall be submitted
concurrently with the conditional zoning master development plan. The approved
master development plan shall provide the framework for development in the
Conditional Zoning District. All applications must include a master development
plan, supporting information and text which specifies the use or uses intended
for the property, dimensional standards, and any development standards to be
approved concurrently with the rezoning application. Development standards
include such things as parking, landscaping, design guidelines, and buffers.
   (B)   Applications and proposals for conditional zoning approval (with the
exception of proposals for churches or other places of worship) shall only be
considered within Nonresidential Zoning Districts (C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, C-5, PC,
and G-1). No conditional zoning proposals shall be considered within a
Residential Zoning District on the island portion of the town's planning
jurisdiction.
   (C)   Development agreements may be incorporated into any conditional zoning
request.
   (D)   An application for conditional zoning approval shall be accompanied by
eight hard copies and one digital copy of a conditional zoning master
development plan.
   (E)   The master development plan shall be prepared by and sealed by a
licensed land surveyor, landscape architect, or engineer registered to practice
in the state of North Carolina. The master development plan shall include the
submission requirements contained herein and any other information deemed
necessary by the UDO Administrator, Planning Board, or Board of Aldermen. For
nonresidential projects, the master development plan may be prepared in
accordance with the requirements of Section
155.5.2.2 to satisfy the site plan approval process thus necessitating only the
issuance of a zoning permit following approval. The following shall be included
on any proposed master development plan:
      (1)   Boundaries of any proposed or pending zoning districts on site.
Boundaries must be described by bearing and distance where they do not follow
described boundaries.
      (2)   Location, dimensions, density, and description of proposed land use
(s) on each tract or parcel, multi-family residential, commercial, office,
institutional, industrial, and recreational. Recreational uses shall specify
type and future ownership (approximation acceptable).
      (3)   Location and dimensions of existing structures on the site and all
adjacent tracts, including existing buildings or structures to be removed.
      (4)   Location of roads, streets, and circulation patterns, including any
proposed or required bicycle or pedestrian facilities (approximation
acceptable).
      (5)   FEMA-designated flood hazard areas, including flood zone
designations.
      (6)   Location and description of CAMA Areas of Environmental Concern,
including 404 Wetland areas as determined by the Army Corps of Engineers and
coastal wetlands as determined by NCDEQ.
      (7)   Generalized stormwater management plan.
      (8)   For residential uses, the total maximum number and type of dwelling
units, height, uses, and density, by development phase (approximation of
phasing is acceptable).
      (9)   For nonresidential uses, the height, approximate footprint and
location of all structures.
   (F)   The UDO Administrator or his/her designee will review the conditional
zoning master development plan and may require a Technical Review Procedure.
The Technical Review Committee may include, but not necessarily be limited to,
the following individuals/departments: UDO Administrator, Building Inspector,
Town Manager, Fire Department, Police Department, NC Division of Coastal
Management, NC Department of Environmental Quality, New Hanover County
Utilities, or New Hanover County Environmental Health. Comments and review
statements shall be included in the UDO Administrator's staff report to the
Planning Board which shall be provided within 60 days of receipt of a complete
application.
   (G)   The Planning Board shall provide a recommendation to the Board of
Aldermen within 90 days following receipt of the application for a Conditional
Zoning District proposal and associated master development plan.
   (H)   Following receipt of recommendation from the Planning Board, the Board
of Aldermen shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the conditional
zoning master development plan.
   (I)   When evaluating an application for the creation of a Conditional
Zoning District, the Planning Board and Board of Aldermen shall consider the
following:
      (1)   The application's consistency to the general policies and
objectives of the town's CAMA Land Use Plan, any other officially adopted plan
that is applicable, and the Unified Development Ordinance.
      (2)   The potential impacts and/or benefits on the surrounding area,
adjoining properties.
      (3)   The report of results from the public input meeting.
   (J)   The Board of Aldermen may not vote to rezone property to a Conditional
Zoning District during the time period beginning on the date of a municipal
general election and concluding on the date immediately following the date on
which the Board of Aldermen holds its organizational meeting following a
municipal general election unless no person spoke against the rezoning at the
public hearing.
   155.4.8.2 Public Input Meeting.
   (A)   Prior to the Planning Board meeting on the rezoning application, the
applicant must conduct one public input meeting and file a report of the
results with the UDO Administrator.
   (B)   The report for the Planning Board meeting will include a summary of
the public input meeting.
   (C)   The applicant shall mail a notice for the public input meeting to the
owners of all properties located within 500 feet of the perimeter of the
project bounds not less than ten days prior to the scheduled meeting.
   (D)   The notice shall include the time, date, and location of the meeting
as well as a description of the proposal.
   (E)   The applicant's report of the meeting shall include:
      (1)   A copy of the letter announcing the meeting.
      (2)   A list of adjoining property owners contacted.
      (3)   An attendance roster, including address of attendees.
      (4)   A summary of the issues discussed.
      (5)   The results of the meeting including changes to the project's
proposal, if any.
   155.4.8.3 Conditions to Approval of Petition.
   (A)   In approving a petition for the reclassification of property to a
Conditional Zoning District, the Planning Board may recommend, and the Board of
Aldermen may request that the applicant add reasonable and appropriate
conditions to the approval of the petition.
   (B)   Any such conditions shall be in accordance with NCGS § 160D-703 and
should relate to the relationship of the proposed use to the impact on town
services, surrounding property, proposed support facilities such as parking
areas and driveways, pedestrian and vehicular circulation systems, screening
and buffer areas, the timing of development, street and right-of-way
improvements, water and sewer improvements, stormwater drainage, the provision
of open space, and other matters that the participants in the public input
meeting, staff, Planning Board, and Board of Aldermen find appropriate or the
petitioner may propose. Such conditions to approval of the petition may include
right-of-way dedication, easements for streets, water, sewer, or other public
utilities necessary to serve the proposed development.
   (C)   The petitioner shall consider and respond to any such conditions after
the Planning Board meeting and within seven days prior to the staff report for
the Board of Aldermen being published. If the applicant does not agree with the
Planning Board or staff's recommendations of additional conditions, the Board
of Aldermen shall have the authority to accept any or all of the conditions
forwarded from the review process. All conditions shall be consented to in
writing by the applicant.
   (D)   If for any reason any condition for approval is found to be illegal or
invalid or if the applicant should fail to accept any condition following
approval, the approval of the site plan for the district shall be null and void
and of no effect and proceedings shall be instituted to rezone the property to
its previous zoning classification.
   155.4.8.4 Effect of Approval.
   (A)   If a petition for conditional zoning is approved, the development and
use of the property shall be governed by the predetermined ordinance
requirements applicable to the district's classification, the approved master
development plan for the district, and any additional approved rules,
regulations, and conditions, all of which shall constitute the zoning
regulations for the approved district and are binding on the property as an
amendment to these regulations and to the zoning maps.
   (B)   The conditional zoning request, once approved, shall be effective upon
property owner signature(s).
   (C)   Following the approval of the petition for a Conditional Zoning
District, the subject property shall be identified on the zoning map by the
appropriate district designation. A parallel conditional zoning shall be
identified by the same designation as the underlying general district followed
by the letters "CZ" (for example "C-1-CZ").
   (D)   No zoning or building permit shall be issued for any development
activity within a Conditional Zoning District except in accordance with the
approved petition and applicable site plan and/or subdivision plat.
Nonresidential projects may comply with the site plan requirement of Section
155.5.2 by including said requirements on the approved master development plan.
Accordingly, resubmittal of a minor or major site plan is not required.
   (E)   Any violation of the approved regulations and conditions for the
district shall be treated the same as any other violation of this Ordinance and
shall be subject to the same remedies and penalties as any such violation.
   155.4.8.5 Review of Approval of a Conditional Zoning District.
   (A)   It is intended that property shall be reclassified to a Conditional
Zoning District only in the event of firm plans to develop the property.
Therefore, no sooner than three years after the date of approval of the
petition, the UDO Administrator may examine the progress made toward developing
the property in accordance with the approved petition and any conditions
attached to the approval.
   (B)   A report of the findings of the UDO Administrator may be provided for
Planning Board consideration, which may then recommend that the property be
rezoned to its previous zoning classification or to another district.
(Ord. 1867, passed 9-11-25)
ARTICLE 155.5
SITE PLAN DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCESS
Section 155.5.1 Purpose and Applicability.
   The purpose of this Article is to establish an orderly process to develop
land within the Town of Wrightsville Beach. It is also the intent of this
Article to provide a clear and comprehensible development process that is fair
and equitable to all interests including the petitioners, affected neighbors,
town staff, related agencies, the Planning Board, the Board of Aldermen, and
the Board of Adjustment. Approved plans shall be the guiding documents for
final approval and permitting.
   The development review procedures outlined throughout this Article apply to
projects requiring a minor site plan or major site plan. Projects requiring
subdivision preliminary/final plat approval should follow the requirements
provided in
Article 155.12.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.5.2 Site Plan Procedures.
   155.5.2.1 Engineering Drawing Review and Approval Procedures.
   (A)   Applicability and Process. Minor site plans and major site plans shall
be submitted in accordance with this section except where specifically noted.
All site plans shall be engineered drawings prepared by a civil engineer,
registered land surveyor, or architect and drawn to a scale of not less than
one inch equals 30 feet. Upon determination by the UDO Administrator or their
designee that an application is complete, the engineering drawings shall follow
the approval process outlined in Section
155.5.4. Engineering drawings shall constitute the complete submittal
requirements for minor site plans prior to the issuance of a zoning permit.
   (B)   Submittal Requirements. Engineering drawings shall be drawn to the
specifications in Section
155.5.3. The types of plans to be included in a set of engineering drawings are
as follows:
      •   Site plan (existing and proposed)
      •   Existing conditions
      •   Grading plan
      •   Sedimentation and erosion control plan
      •   Landscaping plan
      •   Lighting plan
      •   Street details
      •   Infrastructure details
   155.5.2.2 Minor Site Plans. Projects requiring minor site plan approval:
      •   Single-family dwellings;
      •   Two-family (duplex) dwellings;
      •   Nonresidential development under 1,000 square feet of aggregate
building footprint area.
   Minor site plans follow the Administrative Approval process (see Section
155.5.4). Minor site plans shall be submitted as part of a full set of
engineering drawings. For single-family and two-family (duplex) dwellings, the
floor area ratio shall be provided. Engineering drawing approval is required
prior to the issuance of a zoning permit.
   For minor site plans, an as-built survey, a piling survey, and as-built
construction drawing(s) shall be submitted to the UDO Administrator by the
developer upon completion of the building foundation to ensure that setbacks
and building orientation match the approved site plan. If the survey shows that
the placement of the building is incorrect, then the UDO Administrator shall
issue a stop-work order and all construction shall be halted until the problem
is remedied.
   155.5.2.3 Major Site Plans. Projects requiring major site plan approval:
      •   Mixed use commercial-residential development;
      •   Nonresidential developments greater than 1,000 square feet;
      •   Residential dwellings containing three or more units;
      •   Development parcels which include areas of environmental concern as
defined by 15A NCAC 7H.
   Major site plans follow the Planning Board/Board of Aldermen approval
process (see Section
155.5.5). The major site plan shall be reviewed by the UDO Administrator using
the Technical Review Procedure for completeness, compliance with this
Ordinance, and soundness of design. The plan shall then be reviewed by the
Planning Board for preparation of a recommendation to the Board of Aldermen
and, subsequent approval by the Board of Aldermen. Major site plan approval is
required prior to the issuance of a zoning permit.
   For major sites plans, an as-built survey, a piling survey, and as-built
construction drawing(s) shall be submitted to the UDO Administrator by the
developer upon completion of the building foundation to ensure that setbacks
and building orientation match the approved site plan. If the survey shows that
the placement of the building is incorrect, then the UDO Administrator shall
issue a stop-work order and all construction shall be halted until the
nonconformity is corrected or a variance is obtained as provided in subsection
155.4.4.2.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.5.3 Site Plan Requirements.
   155.5.3.1 Information to be Shown on Site Plan.
   (A)   The site plan shall be prepared by a professional engineer, registered
land surveyor, or architect and shall be drawn to scale of not less than one
inch equals 30 feet. The site plan shall be based on the latest tax map
information and shall be of a size as required by each individual site plan.
   (B)   The site plan shall contain the following information:
      (1)   A key map of the site with reference to surrounding areas and
existing street locations.
      (2)   The name and address of the owner and site plan applicant, together
with the names of the owners of all contiguous land and of property directly
across the street as shown by the most recent tax records.
      (3)   Lot line dimensions.
      (4)   Location of all structures, streets, entrances, and exits on the
site and on contiguous property directly across the street.
      (5)   Location of all existing and proposed structures, including their
outside dimensions and elevations.
      (6)   Building setback, side line, and rear yard distances.
      (7)   Location of flood zones.
      (8)   All existing physical features, including water courses, dunes,
existing trees greater than one inch in diameter measured six feet above ground
level, and significant soil conditions.
      (9)   Topography showing existing and proposed contours at two-foot
intervals. All reference benchmarks shall be clearly designated.
      (10)   Parking, loading, and unloading areas shall be indicated with
dimensions, traffic patterns, access aisles, and curb radii per the
requirements of
Article 155.9, Part I.
      (11)   Improvements such as roads, curbs, bumpers, and sidewalks shall be
indicated with cross-sections, design details, and dimensions.
      (12)   Location and design of existing and proposed stormwater systems,
sanitary waste disposal systems, water mains and appurtenances, and method of
refuse disposal and storage.
      (13)   Landscaping and buffering plan showing what will remain and what
will be planted, indicating names of plants, trees, and dimensions, approximate
time of planting, and maintenance plans per the requirements of
Article 155.9, Part IV.
      (14)   Lighting plan indicating type of standards, location, radius of
light, and intensity in foot candles per the requirements of
Article 155.9, Part III.
      (15)   Location, dimensions, and details of signs per the requirements of
Article 155.10.
      (16)   North arrow.
      (17)   Public access shall be provided in accordance with the
recommendations of the town's land use plan and access plan or the present
amount of public access and public parking as exists within the town now. If
any recommendations are found to conflict, the system requiring the greatest
quantity and quality of public access, including parking, shall govern.
      (18)   Location of all 404 wetland areas, areas of environmental concern
as defined by 15A NCAC 7H, and shoreline development boundaries.
      (19)   A rendering or drawing of the proposed building shall be provided
which shows all sides of the structure.
   155.5.3.2 Performance Standards. In reviewing any site plan, the Planning
Board and the Board of Aldermen shall consider:
   (A)   Pedestrian and vehicular traffic movement within and adjacent to the
site with particular emphasis on the provision and layout of parking areas,
off-street loading and unloading, movement of people, goods, and vehicles from
access roads, within the site, between buildings, and between buildings and
vehicles. The Board shall ensure that all parking spaces comply with
Article 155.9, Part I. Access to the site from adjacent roads shall be designed
so as to interfere as little as possible with traffic flow on these roads and
to permit vehicles a rapid and safe ingress and egress to the site.
   (B)   The design and layout of buildings and parking areas shall be reviewed
so as to provide an aesthetically pleasing design and efficient arrangement.
Particular attention shall be given to safety and fire protection, impact of
surrounding development, and contiguous and adjacent buildings and lands.
   (C)   Adequate lighting, based upon the standards set forth in
Article 155.9, Part III, shall be provided to ensure safe movement of persons
and vehicles and for security purposes. Lighting standards shall be a type
approved by the Planning Board.
   (D)   Buffering shall be located around the perimeter of the site to
minimize headlights of vehicles, noise, light from structures, the movement of
people and vehicles, and to shield activities from adjacent properties in
accordance with
Article 155.9, Part IV.
   (E)   Landscaping shall be provided as part of the overall site design and
integrated into building arrangements, topography, parking, and buffering
requirements in accordance with v, Part IV.
   (F)   Signs shall be designed so as to be aesthetically pleasing, harmonious
with other signs on the site, and located so as to achieve their purpose
without constituting hazards to vehicles and pedestrians (refer to
Article 155.10).
   (G)   Storm drainage, sanitary waste disposal, water supply, and garbage
disposal shall be reviewed and considered. Particular emphasis shall be given
to the adequacy of existing systems, and the need for improvements, both on-
site and off-site, to adequately carry runoff and sewage, and to maintain an
adequate supply of water at sufficient pressure.
   (H)   Environmental elements relating to soil erosion, preservation of
trees, protection of water courses, and resources, noise, topography, soil, and
animal life shall be reviewed, and the design of the plan shall minimize any
adverse impact on these elements. Particular reference shall be made to areas
of environmental concern as designated by the Coastal Area Management Act and
the Coastal Resources Commission.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.5.4 Administrative Decisions.
Administrative decisions shall include:
   Minor site plans
   Final plats
   Zoning compliance permits
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6726.jpg]
 
   NOTE: A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until an as-built
survey outlining all completed site improvements has been submitted to the UDO
Administrator.
   155.5.4.2 Application for Review. An applicant desiring to obtain site plan
approval shall file with the UDO Administrator two copies of the site plan,
together with a completed application form and the required fee as set forth in
Section
155.2.9.
   155.5.4.3 Planning Staff and Technical Review Procedure. The UDO
Administrator or his/her designee will review the site plan and may require the
Technical Review Procedure as specified in
Article 155.3, Part II. The plan will be reviewed for compliance with this
Ordinance and all related plans and policies.
   155.5.4.4 Permit Issued or Final Plat Approved. If the plan, engineering
drawings, or final plat is found to meet all of the applicable regulations of
this Ordinance, then the UDO Administrator shall issue a zoning permit for site
plans.
   155.5.4.5 Zoning Inspections and Certificates of Occupancy. Prior to the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the Building Inspections Department,
the UDO Administrator or his designee shall conduct a final zoning inspection
to ensure that the approved plan has been followed and all required
improvements have been installed to town standards. Prior to the final zoning
inspection, an as-built survey must be submitted to the UDO Administrator. The
as-built survey shall be drafted and scaled by a surveyor registered in the
State of North Carolina and should show the location of all site improvements.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.5.5 Planning Board Review and Board of Aldermen Approval.
   Planning Board review and Board of Aldermen approval applies to the
following:
   Major site plans
   155.5.5.1 Planning Board Review and Board of Aldermen Approval Flowchart.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6728.jpg]
 
   NOTE: For special use permit public hearings, Planning Board recommendations
shall be submitted as evidence at the public hearing as specified in subsection
155.4.5.3, but shall not be considered by the decision-making board .
   155.5.5.2 Application for Review. An applicant desiring to obtain site plan
approval shall file with the UDO Administrator 18 copies of the site plan,
together with a completed application form and the required fee as set forth in
Section
155.2.9. The materials as required herein shall be filed not less than 30 days
prior to the regular Planning Board meeting at which the application will be
considered.
   155.5.5.3 Planning Staff and Technical Review Procedure.
   (A)   The UDO Administrator or his/her designee will review the site plan
and may require the Technical Review Procedure as specified in
Article 155.3, Part II. The plan will be reviewed for compliance with this
Ordinance and all related plans and policies.
   (B)   The UDO Administrator shall submit all recommendations and comments
resulting from the Technical Review Procedure at least five days prior to the
Planning Board meeting at which the site plan is to be considered. Failure to
submit a written recommendation and comment shall be deemed as a favorable
review of the site plan.
   155.5.5.4 Review and Recommendation by the Planning Board.
   (A)   At the next regular meeting of the Planning Board following receipt of
the materials specified in subsection
155.5.5.2, the Planning Board shall review and provide a recommendation on the
site plan.
   (B)   The Planning Board shall have up to 30 days from the date of referral
by the UDO Administrator to recommend approval, approval with conditions, or
denial of the request to the Board of Aldermen.
   155.5.5.5 Consideration by the Board of Aldermen.
   (A)   Upon receipt of a recommendation from the Planning Board, the Board of
Aldermen shall consider the application. For special use permits and vested
rights requests, quasi-judicial evidentiary public hearings shall be held.
Notice of public hearings shall be given as specified in subsection
155.4.4.6.
   (B)   Following public hearing (where appropriate), the Board of Aldermen
shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the request. Alternatively, the
Board of Aldermen may suspend the review period and request additional
information of the applicant, other governmental agencies, or interested/
affected parties in order to aid in the review of the request or deferral of
its consideration.
   (C)   Following denial by the Board of Aldermen, the applicant may file a
new application and associated fee. Unless the Board of Aldermen explicitly
states conditions that must be met prior to the resubmission of an application,
the applicant shall not submit a new application for the same property within
one year of the date of denial by the Board of Aldermen unless the application
is significantly different from the previously denied application. All
applications shall be resubmitted for full review unless the application is
resubmitted to address conditions set forth by the Board of Aldermen for
reapplication.
   155.5.5.6 Permit Issued. If the plan is found to meet all of the applicable
regulations of this Ordinance, then the Board of Aldermen shall approve
issuance of a zoning permit for the project.
   155.5.5.7 Zoning Inspections and Certificates of Occupancy. Prior to the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the UDO Administrator, the UDO
Administrator or his designee shall conduct a final zoning inspection to ensure
that the approved plan has been followed and all required improvements have
been installed to town standards.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
ARTICLE 155.6
ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 155.6.1 Purpose Statement.
   In accordance with the requirement of N.C.G.S. § 160D-703, that zoning
regulation be by districts, the town, as shown on the Zoning Map, is hereby
divided into the following districts which shall be governed by all of the
uniform use and dimensional requirements of this Ordinance.
   The purposes of establishing the following zoning districts are:
   •   To implement adopted plans;
   •   To promote public health, safety, and general welfare;
   •   To provide for orderly growth and development;
   •   To provide for the efficient use of resources;
   •   To facilitate the adequate provision of services;
   •   To protect property values and property rights.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.6.2 Interpretation.
   Zoning districts have uses specified as permitted by right, uses permitted
with supplemental regulations, and special uses. Detailed use tables are
provided in Section
155.6.4 showing the uses allowed in each district. The following describes the
processes of each of the categories that the uses are subject to:
   •   Permitted by Right: Administrative review and approval subject to
district provisions and other applicable requirements only.
   •   Permitted with Supplemental Regulations: Administrative review and
approval subject to district provisions, other applicable requirements, and
supplemental regulations outlined in
Article 155.7.
   •   Special Uses: Planning Board review and recommendation, Board of
Aldermen review and approval of special use permit subject to district
provisions, other applicable requirements, and conditions of approval. Some
special uses may also be subject to supplemental regulations outlined in
Article 155.7.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.6.3 Primary Zoning Districts.
   For the purposes of this Ordinance, the Town of Wrightsville Beach, North
Carolina is hereby divided into the following primary zoning districts:
   (A)   R-1 Residential District. The R-1 district is established as a
district in which the principal use of the land is for single-family
residences. The regulations of this district are intended to protect existing
residential areas with minimum lot sizes of 8,000 square feet and to encourage,
in selected portions of the planning area, the subdivision of undeveloped
property into lots with a minimum of 8,000 square feet.
   (B)   R-2 Residential District. The R-2 district is established as a
district in which the principal use of land is for medium-density residential
uses. The regulations of this district are intended to protect existing
residential areas with a minimum lot size of 8,000 square feet for the first
single-family residential dwelling or duplex and an additional minimum lot area
of 4,356 square feet per residential dwelling in excess of two. The minimum
required lot area for a duplex on a nonconforming lot in the R-2 district shall
be 4,000 square feet.
   (C)   Private Club District. The PC district is established to accommodate
private clubs.
   (D)   Commercial District I. The C-1 district is established to embrace the
existing and growing commercial, tourist, and short-term residential uses.
Maximum density for hotels and motels shall be 48 units per acre.
   (E)   Commercial District II. The C-2 district is established to embrace the
existing and growing commercial, tourist, and short-term residential uses.
Maximum density for hotels and motels shall be 48 units per acre.
   (F)   Commercial District III. The C-3 district is established to permit
those specialized uses which will fulfill the special needs of daily commuters
and periodic short-term visitors. Maximum density for hotels and motels shall
be 48 units per acre.
   (G)   Commercial District IV. The C-4 district is established to accommodate
a growing volume of short-term hotel-motel visitors. Maximum density for hotels
and motels shall be 48 units per acre.
   (H)   Commercial District V. The C-5 district is established to permit light
to medium neighborhood commercial use. Maximum density for hotels and motels
shall be 36 units per acre.
   (I)   Public and Semipublic District. The G-1 district includes property
owned by a local, state, or federal agency.
   (J)   Shore Zone. The S-1 district contains built up land constructed by the
state, the federal government, and the town. No lot or parcel of land shall be
used for any purpose whatsoever except in accordance with subsection
155.6.5.11.
   (K)   Conservation Zone. The P-1 district is established as a district in
which no lot or parcel of land may be developed for any purpose except
commercial piers ( where the P-1 zone adjoins a zone permitting a marina),
private piers (where the P-1 zone adjoins a residential district), and ocean-
related business activities as permitted in
Chapter 92 of the Code of Ordinances.
For a detailed table of specified permitted/special uses in the above listed
zoning districts, see Section
155.6.4.
(Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.6.4 Table of Permitted/Special Uses.
 
P - Permitted Use       P* - Permitted Use with Supplemental Regulations
CZ - Conditional Zoning BLANK - Not Permitted
Uses Primary Zoning Districts           Supplemental Regulations
     R1 R2 C1 C2 C3 C4 C5 G1 PC P1 S1 1
               Primary Zoning Districts                            Supplemental
Uses           R1   R2   C1  C2  C3  C4  C5  G1     PC     P1 S1 1 Regulations

ABC package            P   P   P      C Z                   155.7.24
and retail                               *4
Accessory      P*   P*   P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*     P*           155.7.2
buildings
Accessory      P*   P*   P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*     P*           155.7.2
structures
Accessory uses P    P    P   P   P   P   P   P      P             
Accounting             P   P   P      P                      
agencies
Activities
operated
exclusively
for pleasure,
recreation,
social,
athletic,
educational,                       P*                    155.7.3
research or
research-
related
purposes by a
private
business
entity
Adult care                   P*                          155.7.4
home
Antique and            P   P   P      P                      
gift shop
Art supply and         P   P   P      P                      
retail
Assembly
halls,
gymansiums,                           P*                  
and other
similar
structures
Assisted
living                       P                            
residence
Attorney’s           P   P   P      P                      
offices
Automatic
teller                 P   P   P      P                      
machines
Automobile
parking
operated in        P                                      
conjunction
with permitted
uses
Auto service                 C Z    C Z                   155.7.6
station                          *4      *4
Bakery                 P   P   P      P                      
Barber and             P   P   P      P                      
beauty shop
Boat rental
facility                     P                            
renting four
or fewer boats
Boat rental
facility                         C Z
renting more                 *4                           
than four
boats
Boat sales/                  C Z    P                      
service                          *4
Book and
stationery             P   P   P      P                      
store
Car wash                           P*                    155.7.7
Child care                         P*                    155.7.8
center
Chiropractic           P   P   P      P                      
office
Church
memorial       C Z  C Z        C Z    C Z C Z *4              
garden and     *4   *4           *4      *4
columbarium
Church parking
lots used as   P    P                   P                  155.9.2.1
commercial
parking lots
Churches       C Z  C Z        C Z    C Z C Z *4              
               *4   *4           *4      *4
Clothing store         P   P   P      P                      
Coffee shop,
no food                P*  P*  P*     P*                    155.7.20
prepared on
site
Coffee shop,             C Z C Z C Z     C Z
with outside           *4  *4  *4     *4                     
seating
Commercial                   C Z                         155.7.6
marina                           *4
Commercial
parking lot              C Z C Z C Z C Z
not associated         *4  *4  *4  *4                        
with another
use
Commercial
piers as                                          P       
permitted in
Section 6.5.10
Computer sales         P   P   P      P                      
and repair
Convenience                  C Z                          
stores                           *4
Dairy bar/ice
cream
manufactured           P   P   P                            
for retail
sale on the
premises
Department/            P   P   P                            
variety store
Detached       C Z  C Z                                   155.7.9
garages        *4   *4
Docks and
piers owned
and operated
by a local,                           P            P       
state, or
federal
government
agency
Drug store             P   P   P      P                      
Dry cleaning                             C Z
pick up                P   P   P      *4                     
stations
Dry cleaning
pick up in                         P                      
shopping
center
Dry dock/boat                    C Z
works/marine                 *4                           
railways
Exercise and
physical               P   P   P      P                      
fitness
centers
Family care    P*   P*                                    155.7.4
home
Family child   C Z                                        
care home      *4
Fences and     P*   P*   P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*     P*           155.7.10
walls
Finance/loan                       P                      
company
Financial
institutions/          P*  P*  P*     P*                     
banks
Floating homes                                           
Florist,               P   P   P      P                      
retail
Food store,
retail;
grocery,
delicatessen,
meat and fish,         C Z C Z C Z    C Z                    
but excluding            *4  *4  *4      *4
the killing
and dressing
of flesh or
fowl
Food store,
specialty in                       P                      
shopping
center
Furniture                          P                      
store
Government                            P                   
buildings
Grocery                C Z C Z C Z    C Z                    
                         *4  *4  *4      *4
Group housing             C Z                            155.7.25
developments                 *4
Health club            P            P                      
Home appliance                     P                      
dealers
Home           P*   P*   P*  P*  P*  P*                        
occupation
Hotel/motel            C Z       C Z C Z                    
                         *4          *4  *4
Ice cream
sales, not             P   P   P      P                      
mobile
Insurance              P   P   P      P                      
office
Jewelry and            P   P   P      P                      
watch sales
Launderette
service, where
individual
family-sized
laundry                P   P   S                            
equipment is
rented for use
by the
customer
Launderette
service in                         P                      
shopping
center
Laundry pick           P   P   P      C Z                    
up                                       *4
Libraries,
museums, and                          P                   
art galleries
Light                            C Z
construction/                *4                          155.7.6
marina
Marina/                      C Z                          
boatominium                      *4
Marina                       C Z                         155.7.28
restaurant                       *4
Massage and
bodywork               P*  P*  P*  P*  P*                     
therapy
Meeting and                  C Z                          
events center                    *4
Meeting rooms                      C Z                    
                                         *4
Mixed use                C Z C Z C Z
commercial-            *4  *4  *4                          155.7.6
residential
Multi-unit
assisted                     P*                          155.7.4
housing with
services
Nursing home                 C Z                         155.7.14
                                 *4
Ocean-related
business                                          P*     155.7.15
activities
Office, house,
barracks,
storage shed,
pier, boat
house or ramp,
garage, or any
and all other
types of
buildings or
houses or
usages which                          P                   
shall be
needed or
necessary in
the
performance or
discharge of
the
governmental
activity for
which the area
is used
Offices,
professional
businesses or          P   P   P      P                      
public
agencies
On-street and
off-street
parking
facilities     P    P    P   P   P   P   P   P      P      P  P     
owned or
managed by the
town
Open air                  C Z C Z    C Z C Z *4              
market                       *4  *4      *4
Opticians              P   P   P      P                      
Parking lot                        C Z                    
off-site                                 *4
Police, fire,
rescue, civil  C Z  C Z  P   P   P   P      P                   
defense        *4   *4
station
Private club                                C Z *4       155.7.16
Public
buildings to
include space
leased in
public
buildings to                       C Z P                   
private                                  *4
entities for
use as offices
or
professional
businesses
Public utility
distribution
lines,
transformer
stations,
water tanks
and towers,    C Z  C Z                  C Z                       155.7.18 for
telephone      *4   *4   P   P   P      *4  P                  collocations
exchanges, but                                                     only
no service or
storage yards
or wireless
facilities
except
collocations
Real estate            P   P   P      P                      
offices
Residence,     P*   P*                                    155.7.17
single-family
Residence,         P*                                    155.7.17
duplex
Residence,                   C Z                         155.7.6 or
multi-family                     *4                                155.7.26
Residential                      C Z
child-care                   *4                          155.7.4
facility
Restaurant,            C Z          C Z                    
carry-out                *4              *4
Restaurant,                  C Z    C Z                    
fast-food                        *4      *4
Restaurant,            C Z C Z C Z C Z C Z                    
standard                 *4  *4  *4  *4  *4
Retail stores
similar to
those                  P   P   P      P                      
otherwise
named on the
list
School, public                        P                   
Schools,
limited public P                       P                   
classroom
leases2
Seafood                          C Z
process,                     *4                          155.7.6
wholesale
Shopping                     C Z    C Z                   155.7.6
center                           *4      *4
Sidewalk café            C Z                            155.7.30
                             *4
Sporting goods         P   P   P      P                      
Taxicab stands               P      P                      
Temporary
storage        P*   P*   P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*     P*           155.7.19
containers
Theaters
housed in a              C Z             C Z
permanent              *4           *4                     
indoor
structure
Therapeutic                  P*                          155.7.4
foster home
Tourist or
guest homes,           C Z C Z C Z C Z                       
including bed            *4  *4  *4  *4
and breakfast
Town owned or
controlled
grounds,
recreation     C Z  C Z
facilities and *4   *4                  P                   
other
facilities for
open air
activities
Travel                 P   P   P      P                      
agencies
Vessel for
hire carrying                P                            
six or fewer
passengers
Vessel for
hire carrying                C Z                          
seven or more                    *4
passengers
Veterinarian
clinics, no
outside                            C Z                    
kennels or                               *4
animal use
areas
WIRELESS
FACILITIES,                                             155.7.18
Communications
Small wireless
facility,      P* 3 P* 3 P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*     P*     P* P*   155.7.18.4
micro wireless
facility
Stealth
wireless
facility,      P*   P*   P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*     P*     P* P*   155.7.18.5
collocation on
existing
structure
Wireless
facility,                    C Z C Z C Z C Z *4             155.7.18.3
substantial                      *4  *4  *4
modification
1   Refer to Section
155.6.5.11
2   Automatically terminates at midnight, June 30, 2015 without additional
action by the Board or Aldermen.
3   NOT permitted in R1 or R2 outside the PROW
4   In the case of a previously issued special use permit before the adoption
of conditional zoning or in the case of multiple commercial businesses on a
single parcel refer to Section
155.4.5 for special use permits
 
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1705, passed 4-11-13; Am. Ord. 1725,
passed 3-19-14; Am. Ord. 1739, passed 3-12-15; Am. Ord. 1742, passed 4-8-15;
Am. Ord. 1758, passed 4-14-16; Am. Ord. 1759, passed 5-12-16; Am. Ord. 1765,
passed 2-9-17; Am. Ord. 1767, passed 6-8-17; Am. Ord. 1792, passed 1-15-20; Am.
Ord. 1796, passed 7-9-20; Am. Ord. 1799, passed 7-9-20; Am. Ord. 1803, passed
7-9-20; Am. Ord. 1808, passed 10-8-20; Am. Ord. 1813, passed 10-8-20; Am. Ord.
1838, passed 3-10- 22; Am. Ord. 1862, passed 12-12-24; Am. Ord. 1867, passed 9-
11-25)
Section 155.6.5 Zoning District Development Standards.
   155.6.5.1 R-1 Residential District.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6731.jpg]
 
A   Minimum Lot Area   Residential =      Non- residential =
            8,000 Square Feet   24,000 Square Feet
B   Minimum Lot Width   Residential =       Non-residential =
               70 Feet      200 Feet
C   Minimum Lot Depth   None
D   Minimum Front Yard Setback   15 Feet
E   Side Yard Minimum Setback      15 Feet
F   Rear Yard Minimum Setback   15 Feet
G   Principal Building Height
   •   No building shall exceed 40 feet in height. Church spires, antennas,
chimneys, and similar accessories to buildings are exempt from this limitation.
H   Accessory Building
   •   Must be 15 feet from any lot line;
   •   Must be located behind the rear building line; and
   •   Shall not exceed 10 feet by 10 feet by 12.5 feet in height, except
detached garages which shall not exceed 10 feet by 20 feet by 14 feet in
height.
I   One- and Two-Family residential dwellings with wood roof shingles shall
have a minimum of 30 feet of separation between buildings.
The following list provides the location of additional standards which apply
to the development of uses permitted within this district:
Table of Uses                          Section
                                       155.6.4
Off-Street Parking& Off-Street Loading Article 155.9, Part I
Outdoor Lighting                       Article 155.9, Part II
Landscaping, Buffering, & Screening    Article 155.9, Part III
Sign Regulations                       Article 155.10
Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance      Article 155.11, Part I
Sedimentation and Soil Erosion Control Article 155.12, Part II
Fences and Walls Requirements          Section
                                       155.7.10
                                       Section
Visibility on Corner Lots              155.2.5 and Section
                                       155.7.10
Definitions                            Exhibit A
Open Space Requirements                Section
                                       155.2.10
Floor Area Ratio                       Section
                                       155.7.17
Nonconforming Situations               Article 155.8
 
   155.6.5.2 R-2 Residential District.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6733.jpg]
 
A   Minimum Lot Area   One Residential Dwelling or Duplex =
            8,000 Square Feet
            Duplex Dwelling on Nonconforming Lot =
            4,000 Square Feet
            Minimum required additional lot area per residential unit in excess
of two =
            4,356 Square Feet
B   Minimum Lot Width   Permitted Use =    Special Use =
            70 Feet      100 Feet
C   Minimum Lot Depth   None
D   Minimum Front Yard Setback   15 Feet
E   Side Yard Minimum Setback      15 Feet, which shall increase 15 feet for
each additional 50 feet of property frontage.
   Note: For special uses only, where residential units have rear exits into
side yards, the yard shall increase 2 feet in width for each unit having such
exit.
F   Rear Yard Minimum Setback   15 Feet
G   Principal Building Height
   •   No building shall exceed 40 feet in height. Church spires, antennas,
chimneys, and similar accessories to buildings are exempt from this limitation.
H   Accessory Building
   •   Must be 15 feet from any lot line;
   •   Must be located behind the rear building line; and
   •   Shall not exceed 10 feet by 10 feet by 12.5 feet in height, except
detached garages which shall not exceed 10 feet by 20 feet by 14 feet in
height.
I   Residential dwellings with wood roof shingles shall have a minimum of 30
feet of separation between buildings.
The following list provides the location of additional standards which apply
to the development of uses permitted within this district:
Table of Uses                          Section
                                       155.6.4
Off-Street Parking& Off-Street Loading Article 155.9, Part I
Outdoor Lighting                       Article 155.9, Part II
Landscaping, Buffering, & Screening    Article 155.9, Part III
Sign Regulations                       Article 155.10
Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance      Article 155.11, Part I
Sedimentation and Soil Erosion Control Article 155.12, Part II
Fences and Walls Requirements          Section
                                       155.7.10
                                       Section
Visibility on Corner Lots              155.2.5 and Section
                                       155.7.10
Definitions                            Exhibit A
Open Space Requirements                Section
                                       155.2.10
Floor Area Ratio                       Section
                                       155.7.17
Nonconforming Situations               Article 155.8
 
   155.6.5.3 C-1 Commercial District I.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6735.jpg]
 
A   Minimum Lot Area   Permitted Use = None
            Special Use = 10,000 Square Feet
B   Maximum Density   •   48 units per acre for hotels and motels
            •   20 units per acre for apartments or residential buildings
C   Minimum Lot Width   Permitted Use = None
               Special Use = 100 Feet
D   Minimum Lot Depth   Permitted Use = None
               Special Use = 100 Feet
E   Minimum Front Yard Setback   None
F   Side Yard Minimum Setback      None
   However, when a side yard is provided, it shall be at least 7.5 feet in
width, except where the side yard borders on a public thoroughfare.
G   Rear Yard Minimum Setback   None
H   Principal Building Height
   No building shall exceed 40 feet in height. Church spires, antennas,
chimneys, and similar accessories to buildings are exempt from this limitation.
I   Lot Dimension Exception for Mixed-Use Commercial Residential Development
   The minimum lot width and depth requirements for special uses in the C-
1 District shall not apply to Mixed- Use Commercial Residential projects
approved by the Board of Aldermen pursuant to Section
155.7.6.
The following list provides the location of additional standards which apply
to the development of uses permitted within this district:
Table of Uses                          Section
                                       155.6.4
Off-Street Parking& Off-Street Loading Article 155.9, Part I
Outdoor Lighting                       Article 155.9, Part II
Landscaping, Buffering, & Screening    Article 155.9, Part III
Sign Regulations                       Article 155.10
Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance      Article 155.11, Part I
Sedimentation and Soil Erosion Control Article 155.12, Part II
Fences and Walls Requirements          Section
                                       155.7.10
                                       Section
Visibility on Corner Lots              155.2.5 and Section
                                       155.7.10
Definitions                            Exhibit A
Open Space Requirements                Section
                                       155.2.10
 
   155.6.5.4 C-2 Commercial District II.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6737.jpg]
 
A   Minimum Lot Area   Permitted Use = None
            Special Use = 10,000 Square Feet
B   Maximum Density   •   48 units per acre for hotels and motels
            •   20 units per acre for apartments or residential buildings
C   Minimum Lot Width   50 Feet
D   Minimum Lot Depth   None
E   Front Yard Minimum Setback   15 Feet
   7.5 Feet of which shall be developed for sidewalks, grass, plants, and the
necessary entrances and exits to driveways.
F   Side Yard Minimum Setback      7.5 Feet
G   Rear Yard Minimum Setback   7.5 Feet
Note: No portion of any building shall be closer than 15 feet to the right of
way or street.
H   Principal Building Height
   No building shall exceed 40 feet in height. Church spires, antennas,
chimneys, and similar accessories to buildings are exempt from this limitation.
   Frame Structures
   A frame structure may be erected in a number two fire district if there is a
minimum setback of 15 feet on the side, rear, and front yards, and a two-hour
fire wall is provided for walls that face the wall of another structure or
adjoin a lot where another structure may be built. If a property owner provides
a 30 Foot setback from all property lines so that no structure may ever be
erected within 30 Feet of the proposed or existing structure, then the two-hour
fire wall may not be required.
Note: A parking lot, as a special use, shall not be subject these dimension
standards.
The following list provides the location of additional standards which apply
to the development of uses permitted within this district:
Table of Uses                          Section
                                       155.6.4
Off-Street Parking& Off-Street Loading Article 155.9, Part I
Outdoor Lighting                       Article 155.9, Part II
Landscaping, Buffering, & Screening    Article 155.9, Part III
Sign Regulations                       Article 155.10
Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance      Article 155.11, Part I
Sedimentation and Soil Erosion Control Article 155.12, Part II
Fences and Walls Requirements          Section
                                       155.7.10
                                       Section
Visibility on Corner Lots              155.2.5 and Section
                                       155.7.10
Definitions                            Exhibit A
Open Space Requirements                Section
                                       155.2.10
 
   155.6.5.5 C-3 Commercial District III.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6739.jpg]
 
A   Minimum Lot Area   Permitted Use = None
            Special Use = 10,000 Square Feet
B   Maximum Density   •   48 units per acre for hotels and motels
            •   20 units per acre for apartments or residential buildings
C   Minimum Lot Width   Permitted Use = 50 Feet
               Special Use = 100 Feet
D   Minimum Lot Depth   None
E   Front Yard Minimum Setback   Permitted Use = 15 Feet
                  Special Use = 15 Feet
   7.5 Feet of which shall be developed for sidewalks, grass, plants, and the
necessary entrances and exits to driveways.
F   Side Yard Minimum Setback    Permitted Use = 7.5 Feet
                  Special Use = 20 Feet
G   Rear Yard Minimum Setback   Permitted Use = 7.5 Feet
                  Special Use = 20 Feet
Note: No portion of any building shall be closer than 15 feet to the right of
way or street.
H   Principal Building Height No building shall exceed 40 feet in height.
Church spires, antennas, chimneys, and similar accessories to buildings are
exempt from this limitation.
I   Frame Structures   A frame structure may be erected in a number two fire
district if there is a minimum setback of 15 feet on the side, rear, and front
yards, and a two-hour fire wall is provided for walls that face the wall of
another structure or adjoin a lot where another structure may be built. If a
property owner provides a 30 Foot setback from all property lines so that no
structure may ever be erected within 30 Feet of the proposed or existing
structure, then the two-hour fire wall may not be required.
J   Setback Exception for Marina Residential The minimum front, side and rear
setbacks and minimum lot area for special uses in the C-3 District shall not
apply to Marina Residential projects approved by the Board of Aldermen pursuant
to Section
155.7.26.
Note: See Section
155.7.6, Mixed Use Commercial Residential
The following list provides the location of additional standards which apply
to the development of uses permitted within this district:
Table of Uses                          Section
                                       155.6.4
Off-Street Parking& Off-Street Loading Article 155.9, Part I
Outdoor Lighting                       Article 155.9, Part II
Landscaping, Buffering, & Screening    Article 155.9, Part III
Sign Regulations                       Article 155.10
Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance      Article 155.11, Part I
Sedimentation and Soil Erosion Control Article 155.12, Part II
Fences and Walls Requirements          Section
                                       155.7.10
                                       Section
Visibility on Corner Lots              155.2.5 and Section
                                       155.7.10
Definitions                            Exhibit A
Open Space Requirements                Section
                                       155.2.10
 
   155.6.5.6 C-4 Commercial District IV.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6741.jpg]
 
A   Minimum Lot Area   Permitted Use = None
            Special Use = 10,000 Square Feet
B   Maximum Density   •   48 units per acre for hotels and motels
            •   30 units per acre for apartments or residential buildings
C   Minimum Lot Width   100 Feet, however, a parking lot permitted as a special
use under this section is not subject to this requirement.
D   Minimum Lot Depth   Permitted Use = None
            Special Use = 100 Feet
E   Front Yard Minimum Setback   30 Feet
   which shall be developed for sidewalks, grass, plants, and the necessary
entrances and exits to driveways.
   •   Off-street parking shall be permitted in the front yard area provided
that 10 Feet of the yard area be developed and used as a buffer adjacent to the
existing or proposed street.
F   Side Yard Minimum Setback      20 Feet
G   Rear Yard Minimum Setback   20 Feet
   H   Principal Building Height
   No building shall exceed 96 feet in height. Church spires, antennas,
chimneys, and similar accessories to buildings are exempt from this limitation.
Note: No portion of any building shall be closer than 30 Feet to the right-of-
way or street.
Note: A parking lot, as a special use, shall not be subject to these dimension
standards.
The following list provides the location of additional standards which apply
to the development of uses permitted within this district:
Table of Uses                          Section
                                       155.6.4
Off-Street Parking& Off-Street Loading Article 155.9, Part I
Outdoor Lighting                       Article 155.9, Part II
Landscaping, Buffering, & Screening    Article 155.9, Part III
Sign Regulations                       Article 155.10
Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance      Article 155.11, Part I
Sedimentation and Soil Erosion Control Article 155.12, Part II
Fences and Walls Requirements          Section
                                       155.7.10
                                       Section
Visibility on Corner Lots              155.2.5 and Section
                                       155.7.10
Definitions                            Exhibit A
Open Space Requirements                Section
                                       155.2.10
 
   155.6.5.7 C-5 Commercial District V.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6743.jpg]
 
A   Maximum Density         36 units per acre for hotels and motels
B   Minimum Lot Area         10,000 Square Feet; A church shall have a minimum
lot area of 24,000 Square Feet
C   Minimum Lot Width         100 Feet
D   Minimum Lot Depth         None
E   Front Yard Minimum Setback   30 Feet which shall be landscaped using
shrubs, grass, ground cover, and trees.
   •   A minimum of one tree for each 30 Linear Feet of property frontage along
the street right-of-way shall be required. Required trees shall be broad leaf
evergreens planted and maintained such that at 15-year maturity, a continuous
shade producing tree shall result that will have a foliage diameter of at least
24 Feet.
   •   Landscaping shall not obstruct vehicular sight lines at points of exit
from or entrance to streets.
   •   The property owner shall be responsible for continuous maintenance of
the landscaped area.
   •   Driveways to provide entrances and exits to the property may be included
in the 30 Foot front yard setback.
   •   No commercial driveway shall go through a residential zone to obtain
access to any street.
   •   Off-street parking may be provided within the 30 Foot front yard
setback, however, in all cases, 10 Feet of the setback immediately adjacent to
the right-of-way shall be developed as a landscaped area in accordance with the
requirements of Section 9.17.
   •   A sidewalk, a minimum of 5 Feet wide by 6 Inches thick of reinforced
concrete shall be constructed within the right-of-way immediately adjacent to
the front property line. Such sidewalk shall extend across the entire property
frontage that adjoins such right-of-way.
F   Side Yard Minimum Setback      10 Feet; except where the property adjoins a
residential district in which case the side yard setback shall be 20 Feet.
G   Rear Yard Minimum Setback   20 Feet
H   Principal Building Height
   No building shall exceed 40 feet in height. Church spires, antennas,
chimneys, and similar accessories to buildings are exempt from this limitation
provided that building height shall be defined below:
   •   The vertical distance measured from a point in the center line of the
street (whether public or private) adjoining the front of the lot on which a
structure is to be built or improved that is an equal distance from the side
lines extended to the center line of the adjoining street to the highest point
of the coping of a flat roof, to the ridge line of a mansard roof, to the ridge
of a gable, hip or gambrel roof, or to the highest point of a roof deck or hand
rail. Elevator penthouses and necessary mechanical service equipment are exempt
from this height limitation provided they are properly screened. Also exempt
are chimneys, solar panels, and church steeples, For corner lots adjoining two
streets or for those lots that do not adjoin a street, the adjoining street for
the purposes of this definition shall be the street which is the address of the
lot. Features which increase the heigh of the street at its center above its
average grade, such as speed bumps, shall be omitted in determining building
height.
      •   In lieu of the definition set forth in Exhibit A, when the following
conditions are satisfied:
         •   The property owner or his agent requests that said definition be
utilized as a special use through an application submitted in accordance with
Section
155.4.5;
         •   The Board of Aldermen shall find that the standards set forth in
subsection
155.4.5.4 are met; and
         •   The Board of Aldermen shall find, in addition to those matters set
forth in subsection
155.4.5.4, that
            •    The special  use, if permitted, will result in the retention
of the natural terrain of the subject property;
            •   The special use, if permitted, will reduce the impact on the
natural environment of the subject property and surrounding properties.
      •   In making its decision the Board of Aldermen shall comply in all
respects with the provisions of this section and Section
155.4.5.
I   Frame Structures
   A frame structure may be erected in a number two fire district if there is a
minimum setback of 15 feet on the side, rear, and front yards, and a two-hour
fire wall is provided for walls that face the wall of another structure or
adjoin a lot where another structure may be built, If a property owner provides
a 30 Foot setback from all property lines so that no structure may ever be
erected within 30 Feet of the proposed or existing structure, then the two-hour
fire wall may not be required.
The following list provides the location of additional standards which apply
to the development of uses permitted within this district:
Table of Uses                           Section
                                        155.6.4
Off-Street Parking& Off- Street Loading Article 155.9, Part I
Outdoor Lighting                        Article 155.9, Part II
Landscaping, Buffering, & Screening     Article 155.9, Part III
Sign Regulations                        Article 155.10
Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance       Article 155.11, Part I
Sedimentation and Soil Erosion Control  Article 155.12, Part II
Fences and Walls Requirements           Section
                                        155.7.10
                                        Section
Visibility on Corner Lots               155.2.5 and Section
                                        155.7.10
Definitions                             Exhibit A
Open Space Requirements                 Section
                                        155.2.10
 
   155.6.5.8 G-1 Public and Semipublic District.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6745.jpg]
 
A   Minimum Lot Area   5,000 Square Feet
B   Minimum Lot Width   50 Feet
C   Minimum Lot Depth   None
D   Front Yard Minimum Setback*   7.5 Feet
                  (15 Feet for Frame Buildings)
E   Side Yard Minimum Setback*      7.5 Feet
                  (15 Feet for Frame Buildings)
F   Rear Yard Minimum Setback*   7.5 Feet
                  (15 Feet for Frame Buildings)
   *   Minimum front, side, and rear setbacks for a church shall be 15 Feet.
G   Principal Building Height
   •   No building shall exceed 40 feet in height. Church spires, antennas,
chimneys, and similar accessories to buildings are exempt from this limitation.
H   Accessory Building
   May be located in the required rear yard setback provided:
   •   The building shall be 15 feet from the principal building
   •   Must be not less than 5 feet from any lot line; and
   •   Must not occupy more than 10% of the required rear yard.
The following list provides the location of additional standards which apply
to the development of uses permitted within this district:
Table of Uses                          Section
                                       155.6.4
Off-Street Parking& Off-Street Loading Article 155.9, Part I
Outdoor Lighting                       Article 155.9, Part II
Landscaping, Buffering, & Screening    Article 155.9, Part III
Sign Regulations                       Article 155.10
Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance      Article 155.11, Part I
Sedimentation and Soil Erosion Control Article 155.12, Part II
Fences and Walls Requirements          Section
                                       155.7.10
                                       Section
Visibility on Corner Lots              155.2.5 and Section
                                       155.7.10
Definitions                            Exhibit A
Open Space Requirements                Section
                                       155.2.10
Floor Area Ratio                       Section
                                       155.7.17
Nonconforming Situations               Article 155.8
 
   155.6.5.9 PC Private Club District.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6747.jpg]
 
A   Minimum Lot Area         24,000 Square Feet
B   Minimum Lot Width         150 Feet
C   Front Yard Minimum Setback   15 Feet
   which shall be developed for sidewalks, grass, plants, and necessary
entrances, exits, and driveways.
D   Side Yard Minimum Setback      7.5 Feet
E   Rear Yard Minimum Setback   7.5 Feet
   No portion of any building shall be closer to the street or highway than 15
feet.
F   Principal Building Height
   •   No building shall exceed 40 feet in height. Church spires, antennas,
chimneys, and similar accessories to buildings are exempt from this limitation.
G   Accessory Building
   May be placed on a lot provided that the building shall be 7.5 feet from the
principal building and located behind the rear building line.
H   Frame Structures
   A frame structure may be erected in a number two fire district if there is a
minimum setback of 15 feet on the side, rear, and front yards, and a two-hour
fire wall is provided for walls that face the wall of another structure or
adjoin a lot where another structure may be built. If a property owner provides
a setback of 30 feet from all property lines so that no structure may ever be
erected within 30 feet of the proposed or existing structure, then the two-hour
fire wall may not be required.
The following list provides the location of additional standards which apply
to the development of uses permitted within this district:
Table of Uses                          Section
                                       155.6.4
Off-Street Parking& Off-Street Loading Article 155.9, Part I
Outdoor Lighting                       Article 155.9, Part II
Landscaping, Buffering, & Screening    Article 155.9, Part III
Sign Regulations                       Article 155.10
Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance      Article 155.11, Part I
Sedimentation and Soil Erosion Control Article 155.12, Part II
Fences and Walls Requirements          Section
                                       155.7.10
                                       Section
Visibility on Corner Lots              155.2.5 and Section
                                       155.7.10
Definitions                            Exhibit A
Open Space Requirements                Section
                                       155.2.10
Floor Area Ratio                       Section
                                       155.7.17
Nonconforming Situations               Article 155.8
 
   155.6.5.10 P-1 Conservation Zone.
   (A)   Within the conservation zone, designated as P-1 on the official zoning
map, no lot or parcel of land may be developed for any purpose except
commercial piers (where the P-1 Zone adjoins a zone permitting a marina),
private piers (where the P-1 Zone adjoins a residential zone), town owned docks
and piers, on-street and off-street town owned or managed parking facilities
and their support structures, town owned and operated recreational facilities,
facilities designed to mitigate the impacts of stormwater run-off, and ocean-
related business activities as permitted in
Chapter 92 of this Code. There shall be no clearing, disturbance, removal,
burning, destruction, harming, cutting, or mowing of trees, shrubs, or other
natural vegetation in the P-1 Zone, except for (1) maintenance on public or
private property that is determined by the town to be necessary for public
health, safety, or general welfare; (2) as deemed necessary by the town in
conjunction with the construction or maintenance of town owned or operated
facilities; (3) clearing as is necessary to remove damage caused by hurricane,
flood, storm, fire, insects, or infectious organisms; or (4) clearing in
conjunction with development of a pier permitted by this section.
   (B)   The UDO Administrator or his or her designee will determine when
maintenance is necessary for the public health, safety, and general welfare.
Any property owner dissatisfied with the decision of the UDO Administrator or
his or her designee may appeal such decision to the Town Manager by delivering
written notice of appeal to the Town Manager within ten days of the decision of
the UDO Administrator or his or her designee. The decision of the Town Manager
in this manner is final.
   155.6.5.11 S-1 Shore Zone. Within the shore zone, as indicated on the zoning
map, which in the main is built up land constructed by the state, the federal
government, and the town, no lot or parcel of land shall be used for any
purpose whatsoever except in accordance with the following:
   (A)   No structure shall be built or no land or parcel of land in this zone
shall be used for any purpose whatsoever unless application has been made to
and permission granted by the town in accordance with the terms, conditions,
and specifications as the Board of Aldermen may prescribe.
   (B)   Permission shall not be granted by the Board of Aldermen for the use
of any land or parcel of land for the construction of any type building or
structure except piers, municipally owned or operated parks, recreation areas,
or other municipal uses; except that those commercial enterprises which were in
existence on the original passage of this Ordinance, and which have been used
continuously as commercial enterprises since that time may continue the same
commercial use. There shall be no change to any other commercial use, nor any
expansion of any commercial use existing at that time.
   (C)   Gazebos (shelters which are open on all sides) shall be permitted
subject to plan approval by the Board of Aldermen where land ownership is
established.
   (D)   Fences shall be limited to three feet in height. No fence shall extend
beyond the established bulkhead line or mean high water mark. Fence height
shall be measured from grade at any given point along the span of the fence.
   (E)   No vehicular parking is permitted on any lot or parcel of land in this
zone, provided, that this restriction shall not apply to property owned by the
town, the state, the United States government or any agency of such entities.
   (F)   No increase in impervious surface is permitted within the Shore Zone.
For purposes of this section, impervious surface shall include, but not be
limited to, areas covered by concrete, asphalt, crushed stone or gravel.
   (G)   All development within the Shore Zone must be in compliance with both
state and federal regulations.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1722, passed 2-18-14; Am. Ord. 1740,
passed 3-12-15; Am. Ord. 1765, passed 2-9-17; Am. Ord. 1792, passed 1-15-20;
Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
ARTICLE 155.7
SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
Section 155.7.1 Introduction.
   The following supplemental regulations shall pertain to the various uses
listed in the Table of Uses located in
Article 155.6. If not otherwise listed, these regulations shall be applicable
in all districts in which the individual uses are allowed.
   For any use which requires the issuance of a special use permit, the
supplemental use regulations listed herein may be in addition to any other
reasonable and appropriate conditions placed on the use by the Board of
Aldermen. The conditions may impose greater restrictions on a particular use
than those which are listed herein.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.7.2 Accessory Buildings/Structures.
   (A)   Accessory Buildings. Accessory buildings to residential uses are
permitted provided that no accessory building shall include habitable space or
be rented or occupied for gain and provided accessory building shall meet the
minimum yard and height requirements as defined in Section
155.6.5.
   (B)   Accessory Structures. Accessory structures, as defined in
Exhibit A, are permitted provided they are located in the rear yard and comply
with all applicable rear and side yard setbacks.
   (C)   Any use that requires a special use permit would require a special use
permit for the addition of an accessory structure or building.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.7.3 Activities Operated Exclusively for Pleasure, Recreation, Etc.
   Activities operated exclusively for pleasure, recreation, social, athletic,
educational, research or research-related purposes by a private business entity
may be allowed pursuant to the use tables provided in Section
155.6.4, provided that the entity shall have a contract with the town which
defines the terms and conditions under which its operations shall be performed.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.7.4 Health Care Facilities.
   As defined by N.C.G.S. § 131E-256, shall not be located within a one-half
mile radius of an existing health care facility.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.7.5 Assembly Halls, Gymnasiums, and Other Similar Structures.
   Assembly halls, gymnasiums, and other similar structures may be allowed
pursuant to the use tables provided in Section
155.6.4, provided that no part of the net earnings of which inures to the
benefit of any person, club, corporation, shareholder, or any other legal
entity.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.7.6 Mixed Use Commercial-Residential.
   (A)   Conceptual Plan Review. It is the intent of the site analysis data and
conceptual development plan process to provide an opportunity for public input
and to provide the Board of Aldermen, UDO Administrator, Town Manager, the town
staff, and other appropriate state and federal agencies the opportunity to
review and evaluate the impact of a mixed use development proposal on the
character of the area in which it is proposed to be located. This process is
intended to take into consideration the general form of the land, density, and
ratio of residential to commercial use before and after development as well as
the spatial relationships of the proposed structures, open spaces, landscaped
areas, and general access and circulation patterns as they relate to the
proposed development and the surrounding area, as well as any other criteria
deemed relevant by the Board of Aldermen.
   (B)   Applicability. The procedures for conceptual plan review shall apply
only to mixed use commercial-residential projects as defined in Exhibit A.
   (C)   Procedures.
      (1)   Application Submittal Requirements. No application shall be
accepted in which the proposed development exceeds the height limit of 40 feet.
Applications for conceptual development plan review shall be submitted to the
UDO Administrator on forms prescribed by the town.
         (a)   Forms shall include the name and address of the applicant, the
name and address of the owner of each zoning lot involved, and the relationship
of the applicant and property owner in connection with the plan.
         (b)   If the applicant or property owner is an entity other than an
individual, the application shall also include the names and addresses of (i)
all officers and shareholders of a corporation, (ii) all members and managers
of a limited liability company, and (iii) all officers and members of an
unincorporated association. If a corporation or limited liability company is a
shareholder of a corporate applicant or a member of a limited liability company
applicant, the same information for such shareholder or member corporation or
limited liability company shall be provided.
         (c)   The application shall also include a statement of the
development experience of the applicant as well as that of its officers and
shareholders if a corporation, its members and managers if a limited liability
company, and its officers and members if an unincorporated association.
         (d)   The conceptual review application shall be accompanied by a
plan, which demonstrates a high quality of overall site design.
         (e)   The conceptual development plan application shall include a
written statement which addresses the following:
            (i)   The relationship and balance among site elements;
            (ii)   The relationship of the development to natural features;
            (iii)   The relationship of the development to neighboring
developments and undeveloped land; and
            (iv)   The application shall also describe access and circulation
systems, retention of natural vegetation, alteration of natural topography,
mitigation of erosion and sedimentation, mitigation of stormwater drainage and
flooding, arrangement and orientation of buildings and amenities in relation to
each other and to neighboring developments and streets, landscaping,
preservation or enhancement of vistas, and mitigation of traffic impacts.
         (f)   The UDO Administrator shall prescribe any other material that
may reasonably be required to determine compliance with this section,
ordinances, and relationship to the town's comprehensive plan.
         (g)   No less than 15 copies of the requested materials shall be
provided. More copies may be requested if required for necessary referrals and
records.
         (h)   The application shall be accompanied by one set of plain letter-
sized envelopes, stamped, unsealed, and addressed to property owners within a
300-foot radius of the proposed development, as shown on the New Hanover County
tax listing, and bearing the return address of the town.
         (i)   The conceptual development plan application shall be submitted
together with the fee as established from time to time by the Board of
Aldermen.
         (j)   The UDO Administrator shall accept no conceptual development
plan application unless it complies with such submittal requirements.
Applications that are not complete shall be returned forthwith to the
applicant, with a notation of the deficiencies in the applications.
      (2)   Time Frame for Action on Concept Plans. Upon receipt of a complete
conceptual development plan application, the UDO Administrator shall forward
all information submitted by the applicant for review to each town department
and other local, state, or federal agencies as deemed necessary. The UDO
Administrator shall forward the application to the Board of Aldermen for review
and consideration within 30 days of receipt of a complete application.
      (3)   Public Notice of Conceptual Development Plan Review. Not less than
ten days and not more than 25 days prior to the meeting at which the conceptual
development plan will be reviewed by the Board of Aldermen, notification of
such review shall be mailed by first class mail to all property owners within a
300-foot radius of the proposed development as shown on the New Hanover County
tax listings. In addition, a sign announcing the date, time and location of all
conceptual development plan review meetings shall be posted on the development
site, and the public right-of-way adjacent to where cars enter and exit the
town shall be posted not less than ten days prior to said meetings. The UDO
Administrator or his or her designee shall mail the property notification and
post the sites indicated above. The Town Clerk shall certify to the Planning
Board and Board of Aldermen that the required notices have been mailed.
      (4)   Aspects of Review; Board of Aldermen Review.
         (a)   The Board of Aldermen, in examining conceptual development plan
applications, shall consider the various aspects of design, with special
emphasis on whether the proposed development is consistent with the goals and
objectives of the town's comprehensive plans, the height requirements of this
Ordinance, and the setback requirements of this Ordinance.
         (b)   The Board of Aldermen shall consider public comments and shall
base its recommendation on its determination of whether or not the application
conforms to applicable provisions of this section, including but not limited to
the height, parking, and setback requirements, and the adopted comprehensive
plans.
         (c)   The Board of Aldermen may appoint a subcommittee to review the
conceptual development plan application. The Mayor shall determine the make-up
of the subcommittee.
         (d)   After considering public comments and the recommendations of the
UDO Administrator, Town Manager, the town staff, and other appropriate state
and federal agencies, the Board of Aldermen shall adopt a resolution
transmitting its preliminary recommendations to the applicant. Such resolution
may reject, modify, or approve the conceptual plan in whole or in part. This
resolution does not vest the applicant or property owner with any rights, other
than the right to submit a formal development plan and request consideration of
special use permit for mixed use development.
   (D)   Mixed Use Special Use Permit Application. After receipt of the
conceptual plan resolution from the Board of Aldermen, the applicant may apply
for a special use permit following the procedures set forth in Section
155.4.5. When reviewing the mixed use special use permit, the Planning Board
and Board of Aldermen shall consider all standards and requirements set forth
in Section
155.4.5 and the additional conditions set forth in subsection (E) below.
   (E)   Additional Special Use Permit Standards for Mixed Use Development. In
addition to meeting the standards for a special use permit as set forth in
Section
155.4.5, each mixed use development must meet the following additional
conditions:
      (1)   That the proposed development provides open space in accordance
with Section
155.2.10 (Open Space); including the proposed method for the maintenance and
conservation of said open space.
      (2)   That all stages contained in the preliminary development plan can
exist as a compatible and feasible independent development.
      (3)   That adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide
ingress and egress designed so as to minimize traffic congestion in the public
streets. This may include provisions for bicycling, walking, and other
alternatives to the automobile. In addition, that adequate primary streets and
thoroughfares are available to support traffic generated within the proposed
mixed use development.
      (4)   That the public benefits derived from the proposed development
justify the requested departure from the standard zoning district requirements.
      (5)   That important natural amenities, to include but not be limited to
primary dunes as defined by the Coastal Area Management Act (CAMA), trees,
vegetative buffers, and scenic views and vistas on the site and in the
surrounding area of the proposed development are preserved.
      (6)   That the proposed development meets the spirit and intent of the
adopted CAMA land use plan.
      (7)   That the proposed development meets all required parking standards
unless such standards are reduced or an exception is granted to such standards
in accordance with
Article 155.9, Part I.
   (F)   Public Notice Requirement for Mixed Use Developments. Application for
a mixed use special use permit ("MUSUP") shall be filed with the UDO
Administrator or his or her designee on a form prescribed by the town. The
application shall be accompanied by such plans and data prescribed by the UDO
Administrator, four sets of plain letter-sized envelopes, stamped, unsealed,
and addressed to property owners within a 300-foot radius of the proposed
development as shown on the New Hanover County tax listing, and bearing the
return address of the town, together with the fee as established from time to
time by the Board of Aldermen. The applicant shall include a statement in
writing, supported by adequate evidence, that the proposed MUSUP will conform
to the standards set forth in Sections
155.4.5 and
155.7.7(E). Notice that the MUSUP will be considered shall be mailed by first
class mail to all property owners within a 300-foot radius as shown on the New
Hanover County tax listing at the last addresses listed for such property
owners on the New Hanover County tax abstracts, not less than 14 days prior to
the public hearings at which the application will be considered. In addition,
the proposed development site and the public right-of-way adjacent to where
cars enter and exit the town shall be posted with a sign announcing the date,
time, and location of all Planning Board meetings and the Board of Aldermen
meetings at which the application is to be considered not less than ten days
prior to said meetings. The Town Clerk shall certify to the Planning Board and
Board of Aldermen that the required notices have been mailed. The Planning
Board, after its review of the application and supporting documents, shall send
its written findings and recommendations to the Board of Aldermen for action.
   (G)   Certain Construction Within the Front Building Setback Allowed for
Mixed Use Development. Notwithstanding anything in the town's ordinances to the
contrary, in approving a mixed use special use permit pursuant to subsections
(A) through (F), the Board of Aldermen may allow for the construction of (i)
vertical public accesses ( e.g., stairwells, elevators) for means of ingress
and egress, and (ii) vertical shaftways for elevator system components and fire
protection systems within the established front building setback upon a finding
by the Board of Aldermen that the proposed construction within the front
setback:
      (1)   Does not materially impede vehicle, bicycle or pedestrian vision
from any adjacent street or highway;
      (2)   Does not negatively impact any scenic views from properties
adjacent to the mixed use development;
      (3)   Is not objected to by the town's Fire, Police, and Public Works
Departments;
      (4)   Is offset by an equal amount of pervious green space within the
building footprint of the mixed use development;
      (5)   Is located no nearer than 15 feet to the existing edge of any
sidewalk or pavement on any street or highway, whichever is more restrictive;
      (6)   Is located no nearer than 20 feet to any corner of the mixed use
building that is adjacent to a side property line; and
      (7)   Does not otherwise endanger the public health, safety or welfare.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.7.7 Car Wash.
   Car washes shall be permitted in accordance with the use tables in Section
155.6.4, subject to the following:
   (A)   No storage, repair, or sales of vehicles shall be allowed on the site.
   (B)   Provisions shall be made for an on-site drainage system to capture
water used to wash vehicles; or provide connections to an approved sanitary
sewer system.
   (C)   Vehicle stacking shall be provided as required by
Article 155.9, Part I.
   (D)   Accessory sales or services are not permitted.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.7.8 Child Care Centers.
   Child care centers may be allowed pursuant to the use tables provided in
Section
155.6.4, subject to the following standards:
   (A)   Licensing. A child care facility shall be licensed by the New Hanover
County Health Department and the NC Division of Child Development.
   (B)   Vehicle Circulation. In addition to the requirements of
Article 155.9, Part I, an applicant for a child care center shall provide a
vehicular circulation plan showing on-site queuing and circulation based upon
the location and number of patrons that utilize the facility.
   (C)   Recreational Facilities. Outdoor recreational facilities shall be
located in the rear yard.
   (D)   Landscaping. In addition to the landscaping requirements of
Article 155.9, Part IV, one additional shade tree per 1,000 square feet of
outdoor play or activity area shall be installed.
   (E)   Setbacks from Residential. All stationary play equipment, dumpsters,
garbage cans, or recycling bins, and similar equipment shall be located at
least 20 feet from any abutting residential property line.
   (F)   Hours of Operation. Child care centers adjacent to residential areas
shall not operate between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
   (G)   Parking. Parking areas for child care centers shall be located to the
side or rear of the building.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.7.9 Detached Garages.
   Detached garages may be allowed pursuant to the use tables provided in
Section
155.6.4, provided they comply with the requirements outlined in subsections
155.6.5.1,
155.6.5.2, and
155.11.18(H)(1).
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.7.10 Fences and Walls.
   (A)   Intent. This section regulates fences located between the property
line and the setback line on any lot. Fences elsewhere on the property (for
example, an outdoor shower privacy screen) are considered part of the primary
or accessory structure and are not regulated by this section. The intent of
this section is to ensure that physical boundaries between properties do not
interfere significantly with visibility or air movement on adjoining
properties.
   (B)   Fences.
      (1)   Maximum fence height shall be measured from grade at any given
point along the span of a fence. Maximum permitted height of fences shall be as
follows:
         (a)   Fences constructed adjacent to any street right-of-way from
which there is vehicular access to a lot shall not exceed four feet in height.
         (b)   Fences located within the front yard setback of a lot shall not
exceed four feet in height.
         (c)   Fences not restricted as set forth in sections (a) or (b) above
shall not exceed six feet in height, except in the C-1, C-2, C-3, and C-
4 zoning districts, where fences shall not exceed eight feet in height or in
the R-1 and R-2 zoning districts along a property line that abuts the C-1, C-2,
or C-3 zoning district.
         (d)   Fences located within the triangular area as stated in
subsection (C) of a corner lot shall not exceed three feet in height.
         (e)   Permitted nonconforming fences in existence adjacent to Causeway
Drive as defined herein on the date of adoption of this Ordinance may be
removed and rebuilt to their height as of the date of adoption of this
Ordinance, but in no event to exceed six feet in height. The provisions of this
subsection (e) shall only apply to permitted nonconforming fences located on
property occupied by a permitted or permitted nonconforming multiple dwelling.
The provisions of this subsection (e) shall apply to property adjacent to
Causeway Drive extending from the western side of the bridge crossing Banks
Channel westwardly to the intersection of Causeway Drive with the eastern line
of Seacrest Drive.
      (2)   No person shall undertake construction of a fence without first
acquiring a permit from the town. Applications for construction of fences shall
be submitted on forms prepared by the UDO Administrator and shall include a
site plan showing the location of the fence, the proposed distance from any
property line, the proposed height and a cross section of the fence. Corner
lots shall indicate compliance with subsection (C). All fences must comply with
the town's floodplain ordinances, the North Carolina State Building Code and
any applicable wind load requirements.
      (3)   This section shall not supersede any buffering or fencing
requirements established by this Ordinance.
      (4)   No chain link fences are allowed in the R-1 and R-2 districts.
   (C)   Corner Lot Visibility. All fences shall comply with the requirements
of Section
155.2.6.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1775, passed 4-12-18; Am. Ord. 1838,
passed 3-10-22; Am. Ord. 1861, passed 9-12-24)
Section 155.7.11 Financial Institutions/Banks.
   Financial institutions with a drive-through may be allowed pursuant to the
use tables provided in Section
155.6.4, subject to the following standards:
   (A)   Stacking lanes for drive-through windows shall be located so as to
avoid conflict with the normal flow of traffic on the site.
   (B)   A vehicle pass-by lane shall be constructed adjacent to each window to
provide for complete, unimpeded circulation throughout the site.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.7.12 Reserved.
Section 155.7.13 Home Occupations.
   (A)   This section is intended to regulate the operation of an occupation
within a dwelling unit to minimize the impact to surrounding residential uses
and maintain the character of the town's residential areas.
   (B)   Home occupations are permitted in the following zoning districts: R-1,
R-2, C-1, C-2, C-3, and C-4, provided that:
      (1)   Only one person other than residents of the dwelling unit shall be
engaged in such occupation;
      (2)   Not more than 250 square feet of the floor area of the dwelling
unit shall be used in the operation of the home occupation;
      (3)   Permitted home occupations shall be limited to office and
professional use and homecrafts;
      (4)   There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the dwelling
or premises, or other visible evidence of the operation of the home occupation;
      (5)   There shall be no rental of goods or equipment;
      (6)   No traffic shall be generated by the home occupation which will
exceed the normal volumes of traffic anticipated within the residential area;
      (7)   No equipment or process shall be used in connection with the home
occupation which will create noise, vibration, fumes, or electrical
interference not customarily associated with the operation of a household;
      (8)   No vehicles other than typical passenger vehicles, 1/2-ton pickup
trucks, and standard step vans shall be used in connection with the home
occupation. Off-street parking requirements shall be as set forth in
Article 155.9, Part I; and
      (9)   The home occupation shall be carried out solely within the
principal dwelling unit. There shall be no display or storing of goods or
supplies so as to be visible from the street or adjoining properties.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.7.14 Nursing Home.
   A nursing home may be allowed pursuant to the use tables provided in Section
155.6.4, subject to the following standards:
   (A)   A landscaped buffer shall be provided, at a minimum, between a nursing
home and all abutting residential districts.
   (B)   There shall be at a minimum 50 feet of road frontage.
   (C)   Adequate provisions shall be made for service vehicles with access to
the building at a side or rear entrance, and without backing onto rights-of-way
to exit the property.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.7.15 Ocean-Related Business Activities.
   A business engaged in ocean-related business activities may operate on the
beach front pursuant to the use tables provided in Section
155.6.4, subject to the following terms and conditions:
   (A)   Such business shall only operate pursuant to an annual permit issued
by the town. Such permit shall expire on January 1 of each year. A fee
established by the Board of Aldermen shall be charged for such permit.
   (B)   Each business to which an annual permit is issued shall be required to
maintain a general liability insurance policy with the town named as an
additional insured and worker's compensation insurance as required by the State
of North Carolina. Prior to the issuance of a permit, the business must provide
the town with evidence that such insurance is in force.
   (C)   Such business shall purchase the required privilege license in
addition to the permit required in the preceding subsection.
   (D)   Hours of operation of such business shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m. Businesses engaged in teaching surfing, paddle boarding, and kite
boarding shall not operate between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on
Easter, Memorial Day, 4th of July, and Labor Day.
   (E)   The geographical area of operation of such businesses shall be the
"designated surfing areas" as established under the provisions of §
92.12 of the Code of Ordinances. Provided that this limitation shall not apply
to the rental of chairs and umbrellas by hotels located immediately adjacent to
the beach front.
   (F)   Any representative of such business when operating on the beach front
shall have a copy of the permit required under subsection (A) above immediately
available at all times that such business operations are taking place.
   (G)   No sale or rental of merchandise or equipment shall be conducted in
connection with the operation of such business on the beach front. No payment
of any fees shall be accepted by such business on the beach front. Any rental
or sales of merchandise or equipment or payment for such items and for personal
services must be carried out at the primary business location of such business.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.7.16 Private Club.
   Private clubs may be allowed pursuant to the use tables provided in Section
155.6.4, however:
   (A)   No private club shall be allowed on any property within any
residential zone; and
   (B)   No residential units shall be permitted in a private club.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.7.17 Floor Area Ratio.
   (A)   It is the intent of this section to control the relationship of lot
size to the size or bulk of any building constructed on such lot in an effort
to maintain the neighborhood identities that prevail within the town.
   (B)   The allowable floor area ratio for single-family and duplex structures
shall not exceed a ratio of 0.7.
   (C)   The square footage of porches and decks, pools and hot tubs that are
elevated greater than four feet above ground and not enclosed by habitable
space, may not exceed 25% of the allowable square footage as determined by the
floor area ratio permitted by subsection (B) of this section. Provided that in
cases where the permitted measured area is not fully utilized, unutilized
measured area may be traded for additional porch and deck space. The trade
ratio shall be 1:1.
   (D)   A single-family or duplex structure having habitable space (as defined
in Exhibit A) below the base flood elevation (as defined in Exhibit A) that was
created prior to November 11, 1974, may be reconfigured so that such habitable
space is relocated above base flood elevation. After such reconfiguration, the
ratio of measured area (as defined herein above) to lot square footage shall be
the greater of that permitted by subsection (B) and subsection (C) of this
section; or, that created by adding the measured area above base flood
elevation that existed before the reconfiguration and the square footage of the
habitable space below base flood elevation that existed before the
reconfiguration.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1811, passed 10-8-20; Am. Ord. 1838,
passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.7.18 Wireless Facilities and Wireless Support Structures.
   155.7.18.1 Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this section is to ensure that
residents and businesses in the Town of Wrightsville Beach have reliable access
to wireless telecommunications networks and state of the art communications
services while also ensuring that this objective is achieved in a fashion that
preserves the intrinsic aesthetic character of the community and is
accomplished according to the Town of Wrightsville Beach's zoning, planning and
design standards. The Telecommunication Act of 1996, the regulations of the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) and the N.C. General Statutes
(particularly N.C.G.S. § 160D-930, et seq.) preserved, with certain
limitations, local government land use and zoning authority concerning the
placement, construction, and modification of wireless facilities. The Town of
Wrightsville Beach recognizes that facilitating the development of wireless
service technology can be an economic development asset to the Town of
Wrightsville Beach and a significant benefit to residents. This section
establishes parameters for the siting of wireless telecommunications
facilities. It is the intent of this section to:
   (A)   Ensure access to reliable wireless telecommunications services
throughout all areas of the Town of Wrightsville Beach;
   (B)   Encourage the use of existing monopoles, towers, utility poles and
other structures for the collocation of telecommunications facilities;
   (C)   Encourage the location of new monopoles and towers in non-residential
areas;
   (D)   Minimize the number of new monopoles and towers that would otherwise
need to be constructed by providing incentives for the use of existing
structures;
   (E)   Encourage the location of monopoles and towers, to the extent possible
in areas where the adverse impact on the community will be minimal;
   (F)   Minimize the potential adverse effects associated with the
construction of monopoles and towers through the implementation of reasonable
design, landscaping and construction practices;
   (G)   Ensure public health, safety, welfare and conveniences; and
   (H)   Conform to federal and state laws that allow certain antennas to be
exempt from local regulations.
   This section is divided into subsections, one for each type of wireless
facility listed in Section
155.6.4, Table of Permitted/Special uses. The three types of facilities as
defined in
Appendix A are:
      (1)   Wireless facility and substantial modifications (See subsection
155.7.18.3 below.);
      (2)   Small wireless facility (See subsection
155.7.18.4 below.); and
      (3)   Stealth wireless facility and collocation on existing structures.
(See subsection
155.7.18.5 below.).
      (4)   Stealth wireless facilities may be small wireless facilities.
Stealth wireless facilities that do not meet the definition of small wireless
facility must meet the standards of this section. This section is also
mandatory for collocations that do meet the definition of a small wireless
facility.
      (5)   The fifth subsection discusses non-conforming situations.
   155.7.18.2. General Requirements.
   (A)   Requirements for all applications.
      (1)   Applications will be deemed abandoned if left incomplete for more
than 90 days from the date the applicant was notified in writing that the
application was incomplete or deficient.
      (2)   No work of any kind may begin until all the required permits have
been approved. Collocations on existing structures and small wireless
facilities require a certificate of zoning compliance and a building permit,
unless constructed in a town public right-of-way (PROW). Small wireless
facilities constructed in a PROW also require an encroachment permit. Stealth
facilities require a certificate of zoning compliance and a building permit.
Stealth facilities located on town property require an encroachment permit. All
other wireless facilities, including substantial modifications, require a
special use permit, certificate of zoning compliance and building permit(s).
      (3)   The applicant must provide a deed, lease, or in the case of siting
in the PROW, an application for an encroachment permit substantiating that it
has the right to use the property for a wireless facility.
      (4)   All wireless support structures and their accessory structures
shall use building materials, colors and textures designed to blend with the
structure to which it may be affixed and to harmonize with the natural
surroundings. The use of stealth camouflage or concealment is encouraged.
      (5)   Any technical information must be provided in such a manner, detail
and form that the content and any conclusions are able to be verified by a
third party using the information provided by the applicant.
   (B)   Exemptions.
      (1)   Ordinary maintenance of existing telecommunications facilities and
wireless support structures, shall be exempt from zoning and permitting
requirements.
      (2)   In addition, the following facilities are not subject to the
provisions of this subsection:
         (a)   antennas used by residential households solely for broadcast
radio and television;
         (b)   satellite antennas used solely for residential or household
purposes;
         (c)   cells on wheels (COWS) placed for a period of not more than 120
days at any location within the town after a declaration of an emergency or a
disaster by the Governor or by the responsible official of the Town of
Wrightsville Beach.
      (3)   The replacement of one facility with another like facility. For
example, the replacement of a small wireless facility with another small
wireless facility.
      (4)   Installation, placement, maintenance or replacement of micro
wireless facilities that are suspended between existing utility poles or town
utility poles.
      (5)   Communication services providers authorized to occupy town rights-
of-way who are paying taxes under N.C.G.S. § 105-164.4(a), (4c) or (6).
   (C)   Abandonment and removal.
      (1)   Wireless services providers are required to remove an abandoned
wireless facility within 180 days of abandonment. Should the wireless services
provider fail to timely remove the abandoned wireless facility, the town may
cause such wireless facility to be removed and may recover the actual cost of
such removal, including legal fees, if any, from the wireless services
provider. For purposes of this subsection, a wireless facility shall be deemed
abandoned at the earlier of the date that the wireless services provider
indicates that it is abandoning such facility or the date that is 180 days
after the date that such wireless facility ceases to transmit a signal, unless
the wireless services provider gives the town reasonable evidence that it is
diligently working to place such wireless facility back in service.
      (2)   This section applies to rights-of-way controlled by the N.C. Dept.
of Transportation and the town.
      (3)   Any wireless support structure or part of a tower that ceases to be
used for communications broadcasting and/or broadcast receiving shall be
removed by the tower owner at the tower owner's expense, along with any and all
associated structure. The owner of the wireless facility or wireless support
structure shall remove the wireless facility within six months of its
abandonment. Upon removal, the site shall be revegetated to blend with the
existing surrounding vegetation. In the event that a wireless support structure
is not removed by its owner in the specified time, the tower and associated
structures may be removed by the town and the costs of removal assessed against
the tower or property owner. The Town of Wrightsville Beach shall ensure and
enforce removal by means of its existing regulatory authority.
   (D)   Multiple uses on a single parcel or lot telecommunications facilities
and support structures may be located on a parcel containing another principal
use on the same site.
   (E)   All work on wireless facilities shall be done in accordance with the
current applicable technical, safety and safety-related codes of the town, the
state or U.S. government including, but not limited to the most recent edition
of the TIA ANSI Code, the recommended practices of the National Assoc. of Tower
Erectors and accepted and responsible workmanlike industry practices. In the
event of a conflict between any codes or regulations, the most stringent shall
apply.
   155.7.18.3 Wireless Facility and Substantial Modifications Scope: All
wireless facilities NOT meeting the definitions of small wireless facility,
micro wireless facility, collocation or stealth are subject to this section.
   (A)   Special Use Permit. New wireless facilities and substantial
modifications up to 50 feet in height shall be permitted in the C-3, CA, and C-
5 Commercial Districts and the Public and Semi-Public Zoning District (G-1)
after Planning Board review and upon the granting of a special use permit (SUP)
from the Board of Aldermen in accordance with the standards set forth in this
Ordinance.
   (B)   Time Limits: Applications may be rejected if they are incomplete 90
days from the date of application. Applications deemed incomplete shall be
returned to the applicant with a written explanation of the deficiencies and
measures needed to remedy the deficiency. Applications not rejected by the town
within 90 days of receipt are deemed to be complete. The Board of Aldermen
shall issue a final decision on complete applications in no more than 150 days.
If a final decision has not been reached in 150 days from the date of
application, the application shall be deemed approved.
   (C)   All special use permit applications for wireless facilities and
wireless support structures and substantial modifications must contain the
following:
      (1)   Special use permit application form signed by applicant (refer to
Section
155.4.5).
      (2)   A copy of lease or letter of authorization from the property owner
evidencing applicant's authority to pursue zoning application.
      (3)   Written description and scaled drawings of the proposed wireless
support structure, including structure height, ground and structure design, and
proposed materials.
      (4)   Number and type of proposed antennas and their height above ground
level, including the proposed placement of antennas on the support structure.
      (5)   When locating adjacent to a residential area, a written technical
and operational analysis of why a wireless support structure at a height of
less than 50 feet cannot be used.
      (6)   Line-of-sight diagram or photo simulation, showing the proposed
wireless support structure set against the skyline and viewed from at least
four directions within the surrounding areas.
      (7)   A statement justifying why collocation, or a stealth communications
facility is not feasible. Such statement shall include:
         (a)   Such technical information and other justification as is
necessary to document the reasons why collocation is not a viable option; and
         (b)   The applicant shall provide a list of all existing structures
considered as alternatives to the proposed location. The applicant shall
provide a written explanation why the alternatives considered were either
unacceptable or infeasible due to technical, physical, or financial reasons. If
an existing tower was listed among the alternatives, applicant must
specifically address why the modification of such tower is not a viable option.
         (c)   A statement that the proposed wireless support structure will be
made available for collocation to other service providers at commercially
reasonable rates.
      (8)   Special use permit application fee.
   (D)   General Standards and Design Requirements.
      (1)   Design.
         (a)   Wireless support structures shall be subject to the following:
            (i)   Wireless support structures shall be monopoles designed to
accommodate at least two telecommunications providers.
            (ii)   The compound area surrounding the wireless support structure
must be of sufficient size to accommodate accessory equipment for at least two
telecommunications providers.
            (iii)   Unless otherwise required by the Federal Communications
Commission, the Federal Aviation Administration, or the Town of Wrightsville
Beach, wireless support structures shall be galvanized silver or gray finish.
            (iv)   Except for omni-directional antennas, all new or replacement
antennas shall be flush mounted, or as close to flush mounted on the wireless
support structure as is functionally possible unless it can be demonstrated by
clear and convincing technical evidence that flush mounting has the effect of
prohibiting the provision of service to the intended service area, or unless
the applicant proves that flush mounting is technologically impracticable.
            (v)   If mounted on a building, all antennas shall be flush mounted
on the building's fascia and camouflaged so as to match the color and, if
possible, the texture of the building, or in a manner to make the antennas as
undetectable as is reasonably possible given the facts and circumstances.
         (b)   Stealth telecommunications facilities shall be designed to
accommodate the collocation of other antennas whenever feasible.
         (c)   Upon request of the applicant, the Board of Aldermen may waive
the requirement that new wireless support structures accommodate the
collocation of other service providers if it finds that collocation at the site
is not essential to the public interest, or that the construction of a shorter
wireless support structure with fewer antennas will promote community
compatibility.
      (2)   Setbacks.
         (a)   Properly lines. Unless otherwise stated herein, wireless support
structures shall be setback from all property lines a distance equal to their
height measured from the base of the structure to its highest point, excluding
antennas.
         (b)   Residential dwellings. Unless otherwise stated herein, wireless
support structures shall be setback from all off-site residential dwellings a
distance equal to the height of the structure, excluding antennas. There shall
be no setback requirement from dwellings located on the same parcel as the
proposed structure. Existing or replacement utility poles shall not be subject
to a setback requirement.
         (c)   Unless otherwise stated herein, all accessory equipment shall be
located in the equipment compound. The equipment compound shall be setback from
all property lines in accordance with the minimum setback requirements in the
underlying zoning district. Accessory equipment associated with an existing or
replacement utility pole shall not be subject to a setback requirement.
         (d)   The Board of Aldermen shall have the authority to reduce or
waive any required setback upon the request of the applicant if the wireless
facility or wireless support structure will be less visible as a result of the
diminished setback. The Board of Aldermen must also find that the reduction or
waiver of the setback is consistent with the purposes and intent of this
Ordinance. The structure must still meet the underlying setback requirements of
the zoning district.
      (3)   Height. Height shall be measured from the natural undisturbed
ground surface below the center of the tower base to the top of the tower,
excluding the highest antenna or piece of equipment attached thereto.
         (a)   In non-residential districts, support structures shall not
exceed a height of 50 feet from the base of the structure to the top of the
highest point. Any proposed support structure shall be designed to be the
minimum height needed to meet the service objectives of the applicant.
         (b)   Support structures and antennas located on buildings shall not
exceed 15 feet in height. Roof-mounted antennas extending over five feet above
the principle building shall be located behind a facade that blends with the
principal building.
         (c)   In all districts, the Board of Aldermen shall have the authority
to reduce or waive the height restrictions listed in this section upon a
satisfactory showing of the need for a greater height. With its request the
applicant shall submit such technical information or other justification as are
necessary to document the need for the additional height to the satisfaction of
the Board of Aldermen.
      (4)   Aesthetics.
         (a)   Lighting and marking. Wireless facilities or wireless support
structures shall not be lighted or marked unless required by the Federal
Communications Commission or the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). Any
additional lighting beyond minimum FAA requirements must be approved by the
Board of Aldermen. If approved, the lighting shall be shielded and oriented so
as not to project directly onto adjacent property, and so as to minimize glare
onto adjacent property and streets.
         (b)   Signage. Signs on any portion of a tower and/or related
accessory building, fence, or wall shall be prohibited with the following
exceptions:
            (i)   A two square foot sign located at the telecommunications
facility shall be limited to ownership and contact information, FCC antenna
registration number (if required) and any other information as required by
government regulation. Commercial advertising is strictly prohibited.
            (ii)   Warning signs may be placed on the premises. Equipment
information signs may be placed at appropriate locations as determined by the
Town Manager or his/her designee.
            (iii)   A freestanding sign may be permitted only if the lot also
contains the main business office of the telecommunications server.
            (iv)   A sign permit is required whenever a sign is allowed.
      (5)   Landscaping. In all districts, the Board of Aldermen shall have the
authority to impose reasonable landscaping requirements surrounding the
equipment compound or accessory equipment. Required landscaping shall be
consistent with surrounding vegetation and shall be maintained by the facility
owner. The Board of Aldermen may choose to not require landscaping for sites
that are not visible from the public rights-of-way or adjacent property or in
instances where in the judgment of the Board of Aldermen, landscaping is not
appropriate or necessary.
      (6)   Equipment compounds and/or accessory equipment, including any
buildings, cabinets or shelters, shall be used only to house equipment and
other supplies in support of the operation of the wireless facility or wireless
support structure. Any equipment not used in direct support of such operation
shall not be stored on the site. Ground mounted accessory equipment, wireless
facilities and wireless support structures shall be secured and enclosed with
fence not less than six feet in height as deemed appropriate by the Board of
Aldermen and must comply with the UDO. Barbed wire, razor ribbon, concertina
wire and other similar security measures shall be prohibited. The Board of
Aldermen may waive the fencing requirement if it is deemed that a fence is not
appropriate or needed at the proposed location.
         (a)   An equipment building, shelter or cabinet must not exceed 560
square feet and 12 feet in height, including the support structure for the
equipment.
         (b)   Equipment buildings must comply with local, state and federal
flood zone restrictions.
         (c)   Exception to height restriction. Upon the applicant's request,
the Board of Aldermen may waive the height restriction to allow for the
stacking of equipment on top of each other. The Board of Aldermen must find
that there is a practical necessity for the stacking of the equipment and that
any resulting impact on adjoining properties is minimal or may be minimized by
requiring appropriate screening. The Board of Aldermen may also waive the
height restriction where a higher support structure is needed to raise the
equipment above a slope or floodplain.
         (d)   If the equipment compound and/or accessory equipment is adjacent
to or visible from a residential zone, the Board of Aldermen may require that
the building or shelter be faced with brick or other suitable material on all
sides and that the compound area is surrounded by landscaping providing a
screen of at least three feet in height at installation. The equipment compound
and/or accessory equipment must conform to the setback standards of the
applicable zone. In the situation of stacked equipment buildings, additional
screening/landscaping measures may be required by the Board of Aldermen.
   155.7.18.4 Small Wireless Facility.
   (A)   Approval Criteria. Applications for certificates of zoning compliance
for small wireless facilities may be approved under this subsection only if the
application meets the following requirements:
      (1)   The small/micro wireless facility meets the definitions
Appendix A, § 3, Definitions; and
      (2)   The proposed facility meets the height requirement of Table 1.
 
Table 1: Small Wireless Facility Height Requirements
                            New, Modified or Height of Small
                            Replacement      Wireless Facility
            Zoning District Utility Pole     Above Utility     Total Height (in
In PROW?    Permitted       Town Utility     Pole, Wireless    feet)
                            Pole (Height in  Support Structure
                            Feet)            or Town Utility
                                             Pole
            R1, R2, C1, C2, 50 above ground
YES         C3, C4, C5, G1, level            10 feet           60
            PC, P1
NO          C1, C2, C3, C4, 50 above ground  10 feet           60
            C5, G1, PC, P1  level
Yes, and
utilities   R1, R2          40 above ground  10 feet           50
located                     level
underground
 
      (3)   The proposed facility is located in NC DOT or town-owned rights-of-
way or outside of the PROW on property that is not zoned R-1, R-2, or in any
historic district.
      (4)   Unless otherwise required by the FCC, the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA), or the town, wireless support structures shall be
galvanized silver or gray finish.
      (5)   Unless proven unfeasible by clear and convincing evidence, in lieu
of installing new poles, any wireless installation in the PROW shall replace a
pre-existing distribution pole, secondary pole or streetlight.
      (6)   Wireless installations shall be on poles that meet or exceed
current NESC standards and wind and ice loading requirements of ANSI 222
Version G for essential services.
      (7)   Any new poles installed shall be environmentally "green" and not
leach any volatile organic compounds or toxic materials into the ground.
      (8)   To avoid unsightly rust and corrosion, any new or replacement pole
installed shall not be metal or reinforced concrete.
      (9)   All antennas shall be undiscernible by an average person from 250
feet away.
      (10)   Wireless installations shall utilize a "concealed" design,
including all cabling being inside the support structure.
      (11)   All radios, network equipment and batteries will be enclosed in a
pedestal cabinet near the pole, or in a pole-mounted cabinet or under a pole-
mounted shroud.
      (12)   All small wireless facilities shall be designed to accommodate the
collocation of other antennas whenever feasible.
         (a)   Upon request of the applicant, the Town Manager or designee may
waive the requirement that new small wireless facility accommodate the
collocation of other service providers if it finds that collocation at the site
is not essential to the public interest, or that the construction of a shorter
wireless support structure with fewer antennas will promote community
compatibility, or that collocation of other service providers is technically
unfeasible.
      (13)   Signage. Signs on any portion of a small wireless facility shall
be prohibited with the following exceptions:
         (a)   A two square foot sign located at the telecommunications
facility shall be limited to ownership and contact information, FCC antenna
registration number (if required), warning information and any other
information as required by government regulation. Commercial advertising is
strictly prohibited.
         (b)   A sign permit is required whenever a sign is allowed.
      (14)   Landscaping. Outside of the PROW in all districts, the Town
Manager or designee shall have the authority to impose reasonable landscaping
requirements surrounding the equipment compound or accessory equipment.
Required landscaping shall be consistent with surrounding vegetation and shall
be maintained by the facility owner. The Town Manager or designee may choose to
not require landscaping for sites that are not visible from the public rights-
of-way or adjacent property or in instances where landscaping is not
appropriate or necessary.
      (15)   Equipment compounds are not permitted in the PROW.
      (16)   Equipment compounds and/or accessory equipment, including any
buildings, cabinets or shelters, shall be used only to house equipment and
other supplies in support of the operation of the small wireless facility. Any
equipment not used in direct support of such operation shall not be stored on
the site. Ground mounted accessory equipment and small wireless facilities may
be secured and enclosed with fence not less than six feet in height and must
comply with the UDO. Barbed wire, razor ribbon, concertina wire and other
similar security measures shall be prohibited. The Town Manager or designee may
waive the fencing requirement if it is deemed that a fence is not appropriate
or needed at the proposed location.
         (a)   An equipment building, shelter or cabinet must not exceed 560
square feet and 12 feet in height, including the support structure for the
equipment.
         (b)   Equipment buildings must comply with local, state and federal
flood zone restrictions.
         (c)   Exception to height restriction. Upon the applicant's request,
the Town Manager or designee may waive the height restriction to allow for the
stacking of equipment on top of each other. The Town Manager or designee must
find that there is a practical necessity for the stacking of the equipment and
that any resulting impact on adjoining properties is minimal or may be
minimized by requiring appropriate screening. The Town Manager or designee may
waive the height restriction where a higher support structure is needed to
raise the equipment above a slope or floodplain.
         (d)   If the equipment compound is adjacent to or visible from a
residential zone, the building or shelter shall be faced with brick or other
suitable material on all sides and that the compound area is surrounded by
landscaping providing a screen of at least three feet in height at
installation. The equipment must conform to the setback standards of the
applicable zone. In the situation of stacked equipment buildings, additional
screening/landscaping measures may be required by the Town Manager or designee.
   (B)   Approval Process. Applications for certificates of zoning compliance
to collocate small wireless facilities in the public rights-of-way (PROW) or on
new, existing or replacement wireless support structures, or in the non-
residential zoning districts are subject to the approval process required by
N.C.G.S. Ch. 160D, Art. 9, Part 3. Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.
      (1)   Time of review of applications for certificate of zoning
compliance. Review and processing shall be completed within 45 days of the
town's receipt of a completed application. The town shall provide written
notice that an application is incomplete within 30 days of the receipt of the
application.
      (2)   Standard of review. Applications for certificates of zoning
compliance for small wireless facilities shall be reviewed for conformance with
this UDO, including the applicable site plan and state building code
requirements.
      (3)   Reasons for denial of application for certificate of zoning
compliance. The town may deny an application for a small wireless facility only
on the basis that it does not meet any of the following:
         (a)   The town's applicable codes;
         (b)   Town code provisions or regulations that concern public safety,
objective design standards for decorative utility poles, town utility poles, or
reasonable and nondiscriminatory stealth and concealment requirements,
including screening or landscaping for ground-mounted equipment;
         (c)   Public safety and reasonable spacing requirements concerning the
location of ground-mounted equipment in a right-of-way; or
         (d)   The requirements of any historic district.
      (4)   Contents of application for certificate of zoning compliance. In
addition to the requirements of subsection
155.1.12.4, the application for a small wireless facility must include a sworn,
notarized attestation that the small wireless facilities shall be:
         (a)   Activated for use by a wireless services provider to provide
service no later than one year from the permit issuance date;
         (b)   Collocation shall commence within six months of the permit
issuance date; and
         (c)   If not, the permit may be revoked.
      (5)   Applicants option to file a "consolidated application". Applicants
for certificates of zoning compliance for small wireless facilities may file a
consolidated application for no more than 25 separate facilities and receive a
permit for the collocation of all the small wireless facilities meeting the
requirements of this Ordinance. Town may remove small wireless facility
collocations from a consolidated application and treat separately small
wireless facility collocations:
         (a)   For which incomplete information has been provided; or
         (b)   That are denied.
         The town may issue a separate permit for each collocation that is
approved.
      (6)   Applications for small wireless facilities to be located in town
rights-of-way shall meet the requirements of Chapter IX, Streets and Sidewalks.
   155.7.18.5 Collocation and Stealth Communications Facility.
   (A)   Scope. Applications for certificates of zoning compliance for
collocated antenna and stealth telecommunications facilities ("stealth
facility") are permitted by the Town Manager or designee if the conditions of
this section are met. This section applies to stealth facilities and to
collocations that meet the definitions of small or micro wireless facilities.
This section does not apply to substantial modifications. (Collocated antennas
and stealth facilities are sometimes referred to together in this subsection as
"the facility".)
   (B)   Additional Approval Criteria for Certificates of Zoning Compliance.
Collocations may only be approved if all the following criteria are met:
      (1)   The additional antenna(s) does not exceed the number of wireless
facilities previously approved for the wireless support structure on which the
collocation is proposed and meet all the other requirements of the original
approval; or
      (2)   The application meets all the following requirements:
         (a)   The collocation does not exceed a height of ten feet above the
utility pole and the width of the tower or wireless support structure to which
the wireless facilities are to be attached;
         (b)   The collocation does not increase the ground space area approved
in the site plan for equipment enclosures and ancillary facilities;
         (c)   The wireless telecommunications facilities in the proposed
collocation comply with applicable regulations, restrictions, or conditions, if
any, applied to the initial wireless facilities placed on the tower or other
wireless support structure;
         (d)   The additional wireless facilities comply with all federal,
state and local safety requirements; and
         (e)   The collocation does not exceed the applicable weight limits for
the wireless support structure; or
         (f)   The collocation is not a substantial modification.
      (3)   The collocation and/or stealth facility meets the definitions
Appendix A, § 3, Definitions.
      (4)   The proposed facility meets the height requirement of 40 feet or
less.
      (5)   Unless otherwise required by the FCC, the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA), or the town, the facilities shall not be lighted.
      (6)   All stealth facilities shall be designed to accommodate the
collocation of other antennas whenever feasible. Upon request of the applicant,
the Town Manager or designee may waive the requirement that new stealth
facilities accommodate the collocation of other service providers if it finds
that collocation at the site is not essential to the public interest, or that
the construction of a shorter wireless support structure with fewer antennas
will promote community compatibility, or that collocation of other service
providers is technically unfeasible.
      (7)   Signage. Signs on any portion of the facility shall be prohibited
with the following exceptions:
         (a)   A two square foot sign located at the telecommunications
facility shall be limited to ownership and contact information, FCC antenna
registration number (if required), warning information and any other
information as required by government regulation. Commercial advertising is
strictly prohibited.
         (b)   A sign permit is required whenever a sign is allowed.
      (8)   Landscaping. The Town Manager or designee shall have the authority
to impose reasonable landscaping requirements surrounding the equipment
compound or accessory equipment. Required landscaping shall be consistent with
surrounding vegetation and shall be maintained by the facility owner. The Town
Manager or designee may choose to not require landscaping for sites that are
not visible from the public rights-of-way or adjacent property or in instances
where landscaping is not appropriate or necessary.
      (9)   Equipment compounds and/or accessory equipment, including any
buildings, cabinets or shelters, shall be used only to house equipment and
other supplies in support of the operation of the small wireless facility. Any
equipment not used in direct support of such operation shall not be stored on
the site. Ground mounted accessory equipment and small wireless facilities may
be secured and enclosed with fence not less than six feet in height and must
comply with the UDO. Barbed wire, razor ribbon, concertina wire and other
similar security measures shall be prohibited. The Town Manager or designee may
waive the fencing requirement if it is deemed that a fence is not appropriate
or needed at the proposed location.
         (a)   An equipment building, shelter or cabinet must not exceed 560
square feet and 12 feet in height, including the support structure for the
equipment.
         (b)   Equipment buildings must comply with local, state and federal
flood zone restrictions.
         (c)   Exception to height restriction. Upon the applicant's request,
the Town Manager or designee may waive the height restriction to allow for the
stacking of equipment on top of each other. The Town Manager or designee must
find that there is a practical necessity for the stacking of the equipment and
that any resulting impact on adjoining properties is minimal or may be
minimized by requiring appropriate screening. The Town Manager or designee may
waive the height restriction where a higher support structure is needed to
raise the equipment above a slope or floodplain.
         (d)   If the equipment compound is adjacent to or visible from a
residential zone, the building or shelter shall be faced with brick or other
suitable material on all sides and that the compound area is surrounded by
landscaping providing a screen of at least three feet in height at
installation. The equipment must conform to the setback standards of the
applicable zone. In the situation of stacked equipment buildings, additional
screening/landscaping measures may be required by the Town Manager or designee.
      (10)   Setbacks.
         (a)   Property lines. Unless otherwise stated herein, the facility
shall be setback from all property lines the distance required for the existing
wireless support structure or the use the stealth facility is mimicking.
         (b)   Unless otherwise stated herein, all accessory equipment shall be
located in an equipment compound. The equipment compound shall be setback from
all property lines in accordance with the minimum setback requirements in the
underlying zoning district. Accessory equipment associated with an existing or
replacement utility pole shall not be subject to a setback requirement.
         (c)   The Town Manager or designee shall have the authority to reduce
or waive any required setback upon the request of the applicant if the facility
will be less visible as a result of the diminished setback. A stealth facility
must also meet the underlying setback requirements of the zoning district.
   (C)   Approval Process for Certificates of Zoning Compliance. Applications
for the facilities are subject to the approval process required by the FCC
regulations and N.C.G.S. Ch. 160D, Art. 9, Part 3, Wireless Telecommunications
Facilities.
   (D)   Time of Review of Certificates of Zoning Compliance for Collocations.
Staff review and processing shall be completed within 45 days of the town's
receipt of a completed application. The town shall provide written notice that
an application is incomplete within 45 days of the receipt of the application.
Applications for certificates of zoning compliance for stealth applications
shall be reviewed by the Technical Review Committee and approved within 90 days
of the town's receipt of a completed application.
   (E)   Standard of Review. Applications for certificates of zoning compliance
for stealth facilities or collocations shall be reviewed for conformance with
this UDO, including the applicable site plan and state building code
requirements.
   (F)   Contents of Application for Certificate of Zoning Compliance. In
addition to the requirements of subsections
155.1.12.4 and
155.7.18.2, an application for a facility must include a sworn, notarized
attestation that the wireless facilities shall be:
      (1)   Activated for use by a wireless services provider to provide
service no later than one year from the permit issuance date;
      (2)   Collocation (or construction of a stealth facility) shall commence
within six months of the permit issuance date; and
      (3)   If not, the permit may be revoked.
   155.7.18.6 Telecommunications Facilities and Support Structures in Existence
on the Date of Adoption of this Ordinance.
   (A)   Wireless facilities and wireless support structures that were legally
permitted on or before the date this Ordinance was enacted shall be considered
a permitted nonconforming use.
   (B)   Non-conforming wireless facility, including wireless support
structures.
      (1)   Non-conforming wireless facilities including accessory equipment:
ordinary maintenance may be performed on non-conforming wireless facilities and
accessory equipment.
      (2)   Minor modifications to non-conforming wireless facilities may be
permitted upon the granting of approval by the Town Manager or designees
(including the Public Works Director).
      (3)   Substantial modifications to non-conforming wireless facilities may
be permitted only upon the granting of special use permit approval by the Board
of Aldermen.
(Ord. 1796, passed 7-9-20; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.7.19 Temporary Storage Containers.
   (A)   Temporary storage containers are defined as:
      (1)   Containers no larger in dimension than 8ft x 8ft 6in x 16ft and
transported to a designated location for temporary storage purposes, including
moving (typically known as PODS).
      (2)   Containers designed or used on property zoned or used for
residential property for the collection and hauling of waste or debris,
including but not limited to roll-off containers or boxes and bin containers
(construction dumpsters).
      (3)   Non self-propelled, fully enclosed trailers that are designed or
used to transport goods, materials and equipment and are placed on property
zoned or used for residential purposes (semi-trailers).
   (B)   Temporary storage containers may be allowed pursuant to the uses
tables contained in Section
155.6.4, upon compliance with all of the following:
      (1)   No more than two temporary storage containers shall be located on a
single lot or parcel of land.
      (2)   No other type of container or shipping container is located on the
same lot or parcel of land.
      (3)   Temporary storage containers shall not be used to store or
transport nonresidential materials and substances, including but not limited to
the following: solid waste, hazardous materials, explosives and unlawful
substances and materials.
      (4)   Permits issued for temporary storage containers will be issued
incident to an active building permit. Subsequent to issuance of a certificate
of occupancy all temporary storage containers must be removed within 30 days.
The owner of a lot or parcel on which a dumpster will be placed shall be
jointly responsible for providing notice to the UDO Administrator within 24
hours of the placement.
         The placement of the storage container will require the issuance of a
permit through the Town of Wrightsville Beach Planning Department. The UDO
Administrator may approve an extension by issuing a permit up to 90 days, upon
determining all of the following:
         (a)   That a principal residential structure is damaged or
dilapidated.
         (b)   That the residential structure will undergo renovation, repair
or reconstruction during the extension.
         (c)   That a building permit has been issued for the renovation,
repair or reconstruction, if required, and remains valid during the extension.
         (d)   That the temporary storage container will not be used to store
nonresidential materials and equipment such as contractor's materials and
equipment during the extension. Temporary storage containers shall comply with
the following setbacks:
            -   If a temporary storage container is placed in the required
front yard, then the temporary storage container shall be located only in the
area primarily used for vehicular ingress and egress and must have five feet
setback from the edge of the paved right-of-way, unless otherwise approved by
the UDO Administrator.
            -   If a temporary storage container is placed in the required rear
or side yard, no setback shall be required except that no temporary storage
container shall encroach upon adjacent property.
      (5)   Temporary storage containers (PODS) for the purposes of moving may
be at a location for no more than 30 days in any six month period.
      (6)   Temporary storage containers shall be constructed of noncombustible
materials.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.7.20 Coffee Shops, No Food Prepared On Site.
   Coffee shops with no food prepared on site shall be permitted in accordance
with the use tables in Section
155.6.4 provided that no outdoor seating of any kind shall be allowed.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1749, passed 9-10-15; Am. Ord. 1838,
passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.7.21 Private Access Easement.
   Private access easements shall only be permitted subject to the following
conditions:
   (A)   Private access easements shall only be permitted in order to create
access to a maximum of four landlocked lots. For purposes of this Ordinance,
landlocked lots shall mean those lots not abutting a public street, a private
street or a common area as described in Section
155.2.3.
   (B)   A private access easement shall be a minimum of ten feet in width and
shall not exceed 125 feet in length.
   (C)   Private access easements shall only be permitted if all the owners of
lots served by such private access easement execute and record a maintenance
agreement for maintenance of the private access easement in a form acceptable
to the town.
   (D)   Private access easements shall only be used as means of access for
lots located in the R-1 or R-2 Zoning Districts.
   (E)   All private access easements shall be surfaced with either asphalt,
concrete, pervious concrete, gravel, or some other pervious surface approved by
the town.
   (F)   Setbacks for construction on lots crossed by a private access easement
shall be determined from the property line of the affected lot. Areas within
the private access easement shall be counted in determining the permitted floor
area ratio of the lot in question.
   (G)   No obstructions or encroachments of any kind whatsoever shall be
permitted on the surface of or in the air space above a private access
easement.
   (H)   A private access easement shall only be used by the landlocked lots
served by such easement and by non-landlocked lots which are immediately
adjacent to and adjoin such private access easement.
   (I)   No private access easement shall be permitted as a means of access to
a lot unless a plat is recorded in the New Hanover County Register of Deeds
depicting such easement and including the written approval of the Planning
Director of the town.
(Ord. 1728, passed 5-13-14; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22; Am. Ord. 1854,
passed 1-11-24)
Section 155.7.22 Boat Rental Facilities.
   Boat rental facilities renting no more than four boats are permitted as a
permitted use in accordance with the Table of Permitted/Special uses as set
forth in Section
155.6.4 subject to the following conditions. Boat rental facilities renting
more than four boats are permitted as a special use in accordance with the
Table of Permitted/Special uses as set forth in Section
155.6.4 subject to the following conditions:
   (A)   No motor boats or trailers of any kind may be stored on the lot where
the boat rental facility office is located.
   (B)   Boat rental facilities may not offer for rent or use or rent of permit
the use of jet skis or personal watercraft as defined in N.C.G.S. § 75A-13.1
   (C)   Boat rental facilities shall operate only between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
(Ord. 1758, passed 4-14-16; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.7.23 Massage and Bodywork Therapy.
   Massage and bodywork therapy is allowed as a permitted use in accordance
with the Table of Permitted/Special uses set forth in Section
155.6.4 subject to the following conditions:
   (A)   No person shall engage in the practice of massage and bodywork therapy
as those terms are defined in N.C.G.S. Ch. 90, Article 36, as amended, without
holding a license issued to such person by the North Carolina Board of Massage
and Bodywork Therapy in accordance with the provisions of N.C.G.S. Ch. 90,
Article 36.
   (B)   Any person desiring to engage in the activities described herein shall
provide proof of a current license under the provisions of N.C.G.S. Ch. 90,
Article 36 at the time application for a zoning compliance permit is made.
(Ord. 1767, passed 6-8-17; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.7.24 ABC Package and Retail.
   ABC package and retail stores are allowed as a special use with supplemental
regulations in the C-5 Commercial District V in accordance with the Table of
Permitted/Special uses set forth in Section
155.6.4 subject to the following conditions:
   (A)   ABC package and retail stores shall be subject to all requirements for
uses in the C-5 Commercial District V except as amended herein.
   (B)   The front yard minimum setback shall be 15 feet which shall be
landscaped using shrubs, grass, ground cover and trees.
   (C)   Permitted parking spaces may encroach into the required side yard
minimum setback and rear yard minimum setback.
   (D)   A maximum of two driveways may be permitted and a permitted driveway
may encroach into the side yard minimum setback.
   (E)   Required off-street parking shall be one space for each 250 square
feet of gross floor area.
   (F)   Compact car parking spaces shall not exceed 50% of the required
parking spaces.
   (G)   The Board of Aldermen may grant an exception to the requirements set
forth in Part IV Landscape, Buffering and Screening of Article 155 if the Board
finds that the requested exception is in the best interest of the public and
consistent with the intent and spirit of Part IV Landscape, Buffering and
Screening.
(Ord. 1777, passed 6-12-18; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.7.25 Group Housing Developments.
   Section 155.7.25.1 Commonly Owned Areas.
   (A)   All group housing developments shall contain commonly owned land equal
in area to 20% of the entire development, exclusive of streets and parking
areas.
   (B)   The area of the proposed group housing development must be one acre or
more.
   (C)   Common areas shall be owned and controlled by a non-profit corporate
homeowners' association or similar organization or by the developer in a renter
occupied development. In consideration of the purpose served by a group housing
development, the title to the common areas or property shall be preserved for
the perpetual benefit of the private properties in the development and shall be
restricted against private ownership for any other purpose. The developer shall
submit and, after approval by the town, record a declaration of the covenants
and restrictions that will govern the ownership, management, and maintenance of
common areas.
   Section 155.7.25.2 Zoning, Density and Exemptions from Requirements.
   (A)   Group housing developments shall only be allowed in the C-2 Commercial
District II zoning district and the overall density of a group housing
development shall not exceed 22 units per acre. All remaining land not shown as
lots, streets, or parking area shall be designated as common areas.
   (B)   Group housing developments shall be exempt from the following sections
in
Chapters 155 and
152:
      (1)   Section
155.2.4 One Principal Building or Use.
      (2)   The requirements for frame structures as set forth in subsection
155.6.5.4. Provided that this exception shall not apply to any commercial uses
that comprise part of the group housing development.
      (3)   The subdivision requirements as set forth in
Article 155.12 of
Chapter 155.
      (4)   The landscape, buffering and screening requirements of Part IV of
Article 155.9 of
Chapter 155.
      (5)   The requirements of subsection (C) of Section
155.2.11 Fire Districts. Provided that this exception shall not apply to any
commercial uses that comprise part of the group housing development.
      (6)   The requirements of Part I. Off-Street Parking and Off-Street
Loading Requirements of Article 155.9 for any commercial use within a group
housing development. Provided that notwithstanding this exemption, a Group
Housing Development shall provide a minimum of two off-street parking spaces
for each permitted commercial use.
      (7)   The requirements of subsection
155.9.18.8(a) and (b).
      (8)   The requirements of §
152.007 shall apply with the following exceptions : (i) a zero setback from the
1939 property line shall be permitted as set forth in subsection
155.7.25.3(C) below; and (ii) side yard setbacks of 7.5 feet shall be permitted
on the condition that the walls of all structures immediately adjacent to the
side yard setback are two-hour fire rated walls, that all roof overhangs
immediately adjacent to the side yard setbacks are constructed as two-hour fire
rated walls, and that all roofs of all structures immediately adjacent to the
side yard setback are metal roofs.
   Section 155.7.25.3 Permitted Uses and Applicable Setbacks.
   (A)   Only single family and duplex residences and commercial uses as
described hereinafter shall be allowed in a group housing development.
   (B)   Commercial uses permitted in the C-2 Commercial District II shall be
permitted in a group housing development in the same manner that such
commercial uses are permitted in the C-2 Commercial District II provided that
the total enclosed floor area of such permitted commercial uses plus the area
of any outside decks or porches used in conjunction with such commercial uses
shall not exceed 10% of the area of the tract of land on which the group
housing development is located.
   (C)   Applicable setbacks in the C-2 Commercial District II zoning district
shall apply to all structures in the group housing development except that zero
setback from the 1939 property line shall be permitted and ten-foot minimum
separation between structures shall be permitted on the condition that the
walls of all structures facing another structure within the group housing
development are two-hour fire rated walls, that all roof overhangs facing
another structure within the group housing development are constructed as two-
hour fire rated walls, and that all roofs are metal roofs.
   Section 155.7.25.4 Unit Ownership and Condominiums. Before a declaration
establishing a group housing development may be recorded, the declaration plan
and restrictions shall be approved by the UDO Administrator.
   Section 155.7.25.5 Site Plans. Group housing developments shall comply with
the site plan development review process set forth in
Article 155.5 of
Chapter 155.
   Section 155.7.25.6 Public Access, Easements, and Private Party Walls.
   (A)   Building lots may abut or be provided with frontage on common areas,
properly restricted through a homeowners' association to assure adequate
access, if in the opinion of the Board of Aldermen, a public street is within
an acceptable distance and would allow adequate community services.
   (B)   Easements over the common area for access, ingress, and egress from
and to public streets and walkways and easements for enjoyment of the common
areas, as well as for parking, shall be granted to each owner of a residential
site.
   (C)   All common walls between individual residences shall be party walls
and provisions for the maintenance thereof and restoration in the event of
destruction or damage shall be established and such walls shall be constructed
and maintained in accordance with applicable provisions of the N.C. State
Building Code.
   Section 155.7.25.7 Utilities and Improvements Required.
   (A)   All group housing developments shall include town water and sewer. All
streets and parking constructed within the group housing development shall be
paved or otherwise surfaced in a manner that complies with applicable town
ordinances and shall have storm drainage. Group housing developments shall
comply with all stormwater regulations set forth in the Town Code or other
applicable county or state regulations.
   (B)   If any part of the group housing development includes a permitted
encroachment into a town right-of-way, a signed and recorded encroachment
agreement from the developer shall be required.
   (C)   Group housing developments shall comply with the principal building
height for structures in the C-2 Commercial District as set forth in subsection
155.6.5.4.
(Ord. 1771, passed 11-9-17; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.7.26 Marina Residential.
Marina residential is allowed as a special use with supplemental regulations in
the C-3 Commercial District III in accordance with the Table of Permitted/
Special uses set forth in Section
155.6.4 subject to the following conditions:
   (A)   The C-3 zoned property and associated riparian area must include a
marina containing at least 15 wet boat slips in existence as of the date of
adoption of this section.
   (B)   No more than four multi-family residential units shall be allowed in
the entire marina residential project.
   (C)   Each residential unit shall have a minimum of 1,500 square feet and a
maximum of 2,000 square feet of heated space.
   (D)   The minimum lot area shall be 9,500 square feet.
   (E)   The front yard minimum setback shall be 15 feet.
   (F)   The side and rear yard minimum setbacks shall be 7.5 feet.
   (G)   Off-street parking required for the marina shall be one parking space
for every two boat slips.
   (H)   The project must otherwise meet all required parking standards unless
such standards are reduced or an exception is granted to such standards in
accordance with
Article 155.9, Part I; however, in granting an exception, it shall not be
necessary for the Board of Aldermen to find that the proposed use is directed
primarily toward pedestrian trade existing in the area as set forth in
subsection
155.9.1.6(C)(1).
   (I)   The Board of Aldermen may grant an exception to the requirements set
forth in Part II, Driveway Construction of
Article 155.9 and allow a marina residential project to utilize the dimensions
and location of any driveway(s) existing on the site at the time of the
adoption of this section upon finding that that use of such driveway
configuration or a portion thereof is necessary for adequate vehicular ingress
and egress to and from the project and does not endanger the public health,
safety or welfare.
   (J)   The Board of Aldermen may grant an exception to the requirements set
forth in Part IV, Landscape, Buffering and Screening of
Article 155.9 if the Board finds that the requested exception is necessary
given the site limitations and the overall design of the marina residential
project and that the landscaping, buffering and screening provided are
otherwise consistent with the intent and spirit of Part IV of
Article 155.9.
(Ord. 1792, passed 1-15-20; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.7.27 Reserved.
Section 155.7.28 Marina Restaurant.
Marina restaurant is allowed as a special use with supplemental regulations in
the C-3 Commercial District III in accordance with the Table of Permitted/
Special uses set forth in Section
155.6.4 subject to the following conditions:
   (A)   Marina restaurants shall be permitted only by special use permit in C-
3 zoned property and riparian area. Marina restaurants are allowed only in
conjunction with the operation of a yacht club and related marina meeting all
of the requirements set forth in this section.
   (B)   Marina restaurants shall be located and permanently moored only within
a marina adjacent to the Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway and containing at least
75 wet boat slips in existence as of the date of adoption of this Ordinance.
   (C)   Marina restaurants shall not exceed 31 feet in width and 120 feet in
length.
   (D)   No marina restaurant shall extend beyond the town's pierhead line.
   (E)   The height of a marina restaurant shall not exceed 28 feet above the
top of the bulkhead; provided that antennas, removable canopies, masts, and
electronic and navigational equipment shall not be included in making this
height determination.
   (F)   All walkways or gangways providing access to any marina restaurant
shall comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   Be constructed in accordance with the pier and dock ordinance of
the town.
      (2)   Be lighted to provide illumination of 0.1 foot-candles at the deck
level, but in no case less than 0.05 foot-candles.
   (G)   The off-street parking requirements for a marina restaurant shall be
as follows: One parking space for each six seats in the marina restaurant.
   (H)   Each marina restaurant shall provide permanent water and sewer systems
approved by the Public Works Department of the town. Each marina restaurant
shall be connected to such water and sewer system. All wastewater piping from
the marina restaurant shall be constructed in accordance with the North
Carolina State Plumbing Code and all water and sewer connections to the public
utility system shall be as prescribed under Federal and State Safe Drinking
Water Acts. No overboard discharge openings through the hull shall be permitted
except for one dewatering pipe, which may not be connected to wastewater piping
or to any bilge or sump into which wastewater drains. For purposes of this
section, wastewater shall include bathwater, dishwater, and other greywater as
well as sewage.
   (I)   All electrical wiring running on docks and/or shore from the
distribution center to the point of supply on the marina restaurant shall
conform to the National Electrical Code.
   (J)   A system for the collection and removal of solid wastes approved by
the Public Works Department of the town shall be provided by each marina
restaurant.
   (K)   Each marina restaurant shall provide a dry pipe firefighting system
approved by the Fire Chief of the Fire Department and constructed in accordance
with the provisions of the pier and dock ordinance of the town.
   (L)   A site plan shall be submitted for approval in connection with the
application for a special use permit, such plan to include all improvements as
required by this section.
   (M)   No more than one marina restaurant shall be permitted for any marina
meeting all requirements of this section.
(Ord. 1798, passed 7-9-20; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.7.29 Reserved.
Section 155.7.30 Sidewalk Café.
   (A)   For all buildings immediately adjacent to an encroachment a clear path
of travel must be maintained from any building exit equal in width to the exit
door. This path of travel must be free of obstructions for the entire length of
the encroachment.
   (B)   Encroachments shall not involve permanent alterations to public space.
Any tables, chairs, barricades, stanchions, platforms, or other obstructions
used in the encroachment area shall be of a type that is easily removed from
the public right-of-way. Encroachments shall be removed within 24 hours of
notice from the town. If such items are not removed upon 24-hours' notice, the
town shall have the right to remove and dispose of these items and may assess
the property owner for the cost of such removal and disposal. The town shall
also have the right to remove such items immediately in emergency situations.
The town shall not be responsible for damage to removed encroachments under any
circumstances.
   (C)   At 10:00 p.m. all tables, chairs, barricades, stanchions, and
platforms used in the operation of the sidewalk café shall be removed. The area
of the sidewalk café shall be reopened to the public and shall not be
considered part of the premises of the eating and/or drinking establishment. A
sidewalk café may open at 7:00 a.m. each morning.
   (D)   Sidewalk Encroachments. For standard restaurants located adjacent to
public sidewalks.
      (1)   Five feet of unobstructed area shall remain on all sidewalks
adjacent to approved encroachments.
      (2)   Alcoholic beverages in approved encroachment areas. It shall be the
responsibility of the operator of the establishment to ensure that patrons
comply with these provisions or else be subject to civil penalties. Alcoholic
beverages may be served in encroachment areas provided the following
requirements are met:
         (a)   The adjacent standard restaurant shall otherwise be authorized,
permitted, or licensed under the state law and this Code to serve and sell
alcoholic beverages for on premises consumption.
         (b)   The encroachment area must be included as part of the premises
for which an ABC permit is issued pursuant to N.C.G.S. § 18B-1001 for the
purpose of applying and enforcing state laws regarding the sale or consumption
of alcoholic beverages.
         (c)   The premises of the encroachment shall be clearly delineated
with stanchions indicating the boundaries where patrons must stay within while
in possession of alcoholic beverages in open or unsealed containers. The
consumption of alcoholic beverages shall only occur while patrons are seated at
tables.
         (d)   Signs shall be posted, visible at all exit points from the
encroachment area, that it is unlawful to remove alcoholic beverages in open or
unsealed containers from the premises. Further, consumption of alcoholic
beverages shall only be allowed while seated.
         (e)   The eating establishment operator shall not have violated any
law, regulation, or ordinance relating to the possession, sale, transportation
or consumption of intoxicating beverages or controlled substances for the three
years preceding the commencement of the sale of alcoholic beverages at the
sidewalk café.
         (f)   Congregating of patrons in or around encroachment areas shall be
prohibited.
(Ord. 1802, passed 7-9-20; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
ARTICLE 155.8
NONCONFORMING SITUATIONS
PART I.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 155.8.1 Minimum Single Lot Requirements.
   Where the owner of a lot upon adoption of this Ordinance, or his or her
successor in title thereto, does not own sufficient land to enable him or her
to conform to the dimensional requirements of this Ordinance, the lot may be
used as a building site for a single-family residence in a district in which
residences are permitted or for a duplex in R-2 Districts provided the single-
family residence or duplex shall conform to the minimum housing code and to the
following setback requirements: 15-foot setback for the front yard street
access frontage and seven and one-half feet for all other yards (see Section
155.2.10 for open space requirements); and minimum required lot area for a
duplex in the R-2 District shall be 4,000 square feet. Setbacks for landlocked
waterfront lots shall conform to the following setback requirements: 15 feet
for the front lot line and seven and one-half feet for all other yards.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.8.2 Minimum Multi-Lot Requirements.
   Where there exist two or more adjoining and vacant lots considered either as
a single lot or several lots under single ownership with dimensions smaller
than that required in the zoning district in which they are located, the owner
shall be permitted to join as one or more lots by submitting a request and plat
of the proposed combination to the UDO Administrator and recording the change
in the office of the Register of Deeds of the county provided these lots or the
subdivision of these lots was recorded by the county Register of Deeds prior to
the date of adoption of this Ordinance; that the proposed permitted uses shall
conform to the minimum side and front yard requirements set out in this
Ordinance for the district in which these uses are located except that the
minimum side yard requirement shall be 15% of the property width but in no case
to be less than seven and one-half feet.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.8.3 Extension or Enlargement of Nonconforming Situations
Prohibited.
   Except as specifically provided in this section, it shall be unlawful for
any person to engage in any activity that causes an increase in the extent of
nonconformity of a nonconforming situation.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.8.4 Elevation of Nonconforming Structures in Order to Comply with
Flood Ordinances.
   An extension or enlargement of a nonconforming situation is permitted if it
involves only raising a structure which, prior to being raised, was in
violation of the Federal Flood Insurance Program as implemented through
Article 155.11, Part I. Provided, that no increase in the extent of
nonconformity of the nonconforming situation shall occur when the structure is
raised other than those activities absolutely essential to accomplish bringing
the structure into compliance with the Federal Flood Insurance Program as
implemented through
Article 155.11, Part I.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1756, passed 2-11-16; Am. Ord. 1838,
passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.8.5 Change in Nonconforming Situation.
   Where a nonconforming situation exists, the equipment or process may be
changed if these or similar changes amount only to changes in degree of
activity rather than changes in kind of activity and no violations of other
provisions of this Ordinance occur.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.8.6 Discontinuance or Abandonment.
   If operation of a nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of 365
consecutive days, the property involved shall thereafter be used only for a
conforming use. If a nonconforming use is maintained on one lot in conjunction
with a conforming use, discontinuance of the nonconforming use for 365
consecutive days shall terminate the right to maintain it thereafter.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.8.7 Compliance with Flood Ordinance.
   Any extension or enlargement of a nonconforming situation permitted under
the provisions of this section may only be carried out if such extension or
enlargement complies with all requirements of the Federal Flood Insurance
Program as implemented through
Article 155.11, Part I.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
PART II.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES
Section 155.8.8 Repairs and Maintenance.
   Repairs and normal maintenance required to keep nonconforming structures in
a safe condition are permitted, provided that no alterations may be made except
those allowed by this Ordinance or required by law or ordinance.
   This section shall not be construed to prevent strengthening or repair of a
structure in compliance with the order of a public official whose duties
include protecting the public safety.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
PART III.
SINGLE-FAMILY AND DUPLEX STRUCTURES
Section 155.8.9 Expansion or Enlargement.
   A single-family residence or a duplex that is maintained as a nonconforming
structure may be enlarged or expanded so long as the enlargement or expansion
complies with the provisions of this Ordinance to include Section
155.8.9 and the following provisions:
   (A)   A single-family residence or duplex may be expanded or enlarged to an
extent that does not exceed 50% of the measured area of the structure. For the
purposes of calculating the permitted expansion or enlargement, all expansion
or enlargement permitted under the provisions of this section within the five-
year period preceding the date on which any work to enlarge or expand the
dwelling is started shall be included within the proposed expansion.
   (B)   For purposes of calculating the measured area, the deck areas shall be
excluded.
   (C)   Such expansion or enlargement shall not create new nonconformities.
   (D)   Such expansion or enlargement shall not cause an expansion or
encroachment into an existing or required setback.
   (E)   Such expansion or enlargement shall not exceed the floor area ratio
(see Section
155.7.17).
   (F)   The expansion or enlargement must maintain the following structural
elements as they existed prior to the expansion or enlargement:
      (1)   The existing exterior wall height. For the purposes of this
section, exterior wall height shall be measured from the top of the subfloor to
the top plate of the exterior wall;
      (2)   The existing exterior walls except as needed to change/add windows
and doors, to perform lateral additions or to correct code violations; and
      (3)   The original structural floor system except as needed to add new
ingress and egress or to correct code violations.
   (G)   If the expansion or enlargement is only into a side yard area, then
upon completion the combination of the two side yard setbacks shall be equal to
or exceed the total of the two side yard setbacks required under this
Ordinance. This provision is subject to subsection (K) below.
   (H)   If the enlargement or expansion is only into a front or rear yard
area, then upon completion the combination of the front yard and rear yard
setbacks shall be equal to or exceed the total of the front and rear yard
setbacks required under this Ordinance. This provision is subject to subsection
(K) below.
   (I)   If the expansion or enlargement is into one or more side yard areas
and into the front or rear yard areas, then upon completion the combination of
the two side yard setbacks shall be equal to or exceed the total of the two
side yard setbacks required under this Ordinance and the combination of the
front yard and rear yard setbacks shall be equal to or exceed the total of the
front and rear yard setbacks required under this Ordinance. This provision is
subject to subsection (K) below.
   (J)   Will comply in all respects with the off-street parking requirements
contained in
Article 155.9, Part I.
   (K)   If a nonconforming structure is located ten feet or less from an
adjoining structure (either on the same or an adjoining lot), then the
nonconforming structure may not be enlarged or expanded in any manner
whatsoever.
   (L)   An existing structure that is considered an accessory structure to a
single family structure located in a R-1 Residential District zoning district
and used solely for living, sleeping and sanitation purposes and contains no
provisions of any kind for eating or cooking may be reconstructed if the
following conditions are satisfied:
      (1)   The existing accessory structure was built prior to September 14,
2017.
      (2)   There is only one accessory structure on the lot on which the
single family structure is located.
      (3)   The reconstructed accessory structure will be connected to the
single family structure with an open or covered deck.
      (4)   The reconstructed accessory structure cannot be enlarged in any
manner whatsoever except as provided herein and with the additional exception
of an open or covered deck that must be constructed to attach the single family
structure to the accessory structure.
      (5)   The reconstructed accessory structure will meet all current
setbacks.
      (6)   The reconstructed accessory structure will meet all Flood
Ordinances.
      (7)   The combined areas of the single-family structure and the
reconstructed accessory structure shall not exceed the permitted floor area
ratio.
   (M)   Exception for compliance with regulatory flood protection elevation
requirements. Notwithstanding the foregoing requirements in subsections (A)
through (L) above, a nonconforming single-family residence or duplex may be
expanded or enlarged for purposes of complying with regulatory flood protection
elevation requirements as defined in this chapter, provided all of the
following criteria are satisfied:
      (1)   The single-family residence or duplex must be located upon a
"through lot" as defined in this chapter;
      (2)   The subject through lot shall be no greater than 5,000 square feet
in area;
      (3)   Such expansion or enlargement must bring the single-family
residence or duplex into full compliance with regulatory flood protection
elevation requirements;
      (4)   Such expansion or enlargement shall be permitted only where the
resulting separation between adjacent structures is no less than ten feet;
      (5)   Once the structure is expanded or enlarged, it must comply with the
floor area ratio as set forth in Section
155.7.17; and
      (6)   The extent of any building setback nonconformity shall not be
increased, subject to the following exception: One new staircase required for
access to the elevated single-family residence or duplex may be constructed
within and encroach into any applicable setback provided the new staircase is
located no closer than five feet to the property line.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1769, passed 9-14-17; Am. Ord. 1786,
passed 5-9-19; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
PART IV.
MULTI-FAMILY STRUCTURES
Section 155.8.10 Expansion or Enlargement.
   A residential structure having three or more residential units and a housing
development as defined in this Ordinance that is maintained as a nonconforming
structure may be enlarged or expanded to increase its square footage by an
amount no larger than 1% of the measured area of such structure so long as the
enlargement or expansion complies with the provisions of this paragraph. The
provisions of this paragraph shall apply only to nonconforming structures and a
structure which is maintained as a nonconforming use may not be enlarged or
expanded in any way under the provisions of this paragraph. The expansion or
enlargement shall comply with the following provisions:
   (A)   For purposes of calculating the permitted expansion or enlargement,
all expansion or enlargement permitted under the provisions of this section
within the five-year period preceding the date on which any work to enlarge or
expand the dwelling is started shall be included with the proposed expansion.
   (B)   In calculating the measured area of the building, deck areas, garage
areas, and parking areas shall be excluded.
   (C)   The expansion or enlargement shall be limited to nonresidential areas
only. No expansion of a residential area or a deck or porch associated
therewith shall be permitted.
   (D)   Such expansion or enlargement does not create new nonconformities.
   (E)   Such expansion or enlargement does not create an expansion or
encroachment into an existing or required setback.
   (F)   If the expansion or enlargement is only into a side yard area of the
existing structure, then upon completion the combination of the two side yard
setbacks shall be equal to or exceed the total of the two side yard setbacks
required under this Ordinance. This provision is subject to subsection (I)
below.
   (G)   If the enlargement or expansion is only into a front or rear yard
area, then upon completion the combination of the front yard and rear yard
setbacks shall be equal to or exceed the total of the front and rear yard
setbacks required under this Ordinance. This provision is subject to subsection
(I) below.
   (H)   If the expansion or enlargement is into one or more side yard areas
and into the front or rear yard areas, then upon completion the combination of
the two side yard setbacks shall be equal to or exceed the total of the two
side yard setbacks required under this Ordinance and the combination of front
yard and rear yard setbacks shall be equal to or exceed the total of the front
and rear yard setbacks required under this Ordinance. This provision is subject
to subsection (I) below.
   (I)   Notwithstanding the preceding provisions of this section, if a
nonconforming structure is located ten feet or less from an adjoining structure
(either on the same or adjoining lot), then the nonconforming structure may not
be enlarged or expanded in any manner whatsoever.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
PART V.
OCEANFRONT PIERS
Section 155.8.11 Expansion or Enlargement.
   For purposes of this section, an "oceanfront fishing pier" shall mean a pier
constructed wholly or in part east of the property line as established by
Chapter 246 of the Public Laws of North Carolina, Session 1939, as amended.
   An oceanfront fishing pier that is maintained as a nonconforming use or
nonconforming structure may be expanded or enlarged in accordance with the
provisions of this section as follows:
   (A)   Expansion or enlargement shall only be permitted if the oceanfront
fishing pier provides public access for fishing or other recreational purposes
whether on a commercial, public, or non-profit basis.
   (B)   Any pier house associated with an oceanfront fishing pier shall not be
expanded, except as follows:
      (1)   An expansion of the roof overhang shall be permitted if the area
does not exceed 400 square feet. Such area shall not be enclosed in any manner.
      (2)   An uncovered and unenclosed deck not to exceed 225 square feet in
size may be added to the northern side of the pier house to be used solely for
the installation of a freezer, heating and air conditioning equipment and any
required screening.
      (3)   A portion of a deck existing on the date of adoption of this
Ordinance, which date is February 14, 2013, not exceeding 198 square feet and
located at the northwest corner of the pier house may be enclosed with siding
matching the siding of the pier house not to exceed 12 feet and 10 inches in
height. Such enclosed area may be used solely for the purposes set forth in
subsection (2) above and for installation of a manufactured and enclosed trash
cooler unit. Except for the top of the manufactured trash cooler unit, this
area may not have a roof or cover of any kind.
      (4)   Enclosure of an area not exceeding 56 square feet at the southeast
corner of the pier house which is covered by an existing roof of the date of
adoption of this Ordinance, which date is February 14, 2013. Such enclosed
space may only be used as a vestibule and entrance area.
      (5)   Construction of an access ramp on the south side of the pier house
not to exceed 249 square feet in area. Such ramp must be constructed so as to
provide access to the pier house from ramps in existence on the date of
adoption of this Ordinance, which date is February 14, 2013. No new access ramp
may be constructed that would permit access to the pier house except from an
existing ramp as described in the preceding sentence.
   (C)   Use of any pier house associated with an oceanfront fishing pier shall
be limited to restaurants and retail services.
   (D)   The oceanfront pier located east of the pier house and excluding the
pier house may be expanded a total of 2,600 square feet (the "permitted
expansion area") subject to the following restrictions and provisions:
      (1)   Except as otherwise permitted in this section, the permitted
expansion area may only be used for open air seated dining service associated
with the restaurant operated in the pier house and access to the oceanfront
fishing pier. The use of the permitted expansion area for open air seated
dining service shall be limited to the hours of operation of the restaurant
located within the pier house.
      (2)   The permitted expansion area used for open air seated dining
service must not extend more than 120 feet seaward of the eastern wall of the
pier house. For purposes of this Ordinance, the "eastern wall of the pier
house" shall mean the primary wall of the eastern side of the pier house at the
location of such wall on the date of adoption of this Ordinance which date is
March 10, 2022. This area may be covered by removable fabric awnings, the
highest point of which shall not exceed a height of 12 feet above the deck of
the pier. Tables in this area may utilize table umbrellas. Except as otherwise
provided herein, no other roof or covering of any kind shall be permitted in
this expansion area. Removable fabric awnings may be extended another 25 feet
beyond the permitted expansion area (the "25 foot service area") to provide
cover for service facilities related to the open air seated dining service. For
purposes of this section, "service facilities" shall mean and be limited to
temporary facilities for serving persons seated at the tables within the
permitted expansion area and shall include mobile underbar cooler, beer station
cabinet, beer tap, freezer, mug chiller, wine dispenser, carbonated drink
dispenser, soda gun dispenser, blender station, dump sink, ice station,
underbar speed rail, POS station, and glass storage or other facilities as are
required by the New Hanover County Health Department. No permanently affixed
service facilities of any kind (except as provided below) shall be permitted
within this 25 foot service area and all such service facilities shall be
designed to be removable and shall be removed during the period November 1st
through March 31st. No tables for customers shall be permitted within this 25
foot service area. The use of permitted service facilities shall be limited to
serving persons who seated at the tables within the permitted expansion area.
Under no circumstances shall such service facilities be used as a bar for
customers of the fishing pier or to serve anyone except customers seated at the
tables within the permitted expansion area. All use of the service facilities
shall cease at 10:00 p.m. Permanent utilities may be installed in the 25 foot
service area to include power, water, and drain lines and two 42" high walls
20' in length running parallel to the eastern wall of the pier house.
      (3)   The width of any permitted expansion of the oceanfront fishing pier
shall be limited as follows:
         (a)   Any permitted expansion within the area that is located 30 feet
seaward of the eastern wall of the pier house shall be limited to the width of
the existing pier house.
         (b)   Any permitted expansion located beyond the 30 feet area
referenced in subparagraph (a) above, shall be limited so that the maximum
width of the oceanfront pier does not exceed 32 feet.
      (4)   Existing oceanfront piers which choose not to expand consistent
with authority granted in this subsection (D) may provide open air seating. The
use of any portion of the pier for open air seating shall be subject to any
limitations on open air seating set forth in this subsection (D).
   (E)   In addition, the fishing pier may be extended eastwardly for a maximum
distance of 1,000 feet from the eastern wall of the pier house provided that
any expansion to the fishing pier beyond 145 feet from the eastern wall of the
pier house shall not exceed 20 feet in width.
   (F)   No expansion or enlargement shall be permitted unless the owner first
acquires a special use permit in accordance with Section
155.4.5 of this UDO.
   (G)   All other applicable provisions of the UDO shall be complied with in
conjunction with such expansion or enlargement to include compliance with all
off-street parking requirements.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1699, passed 2-14-13; Am. Ord. 1713,
passed 6-13-13; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
PART VI.   COMMERCIAL STRUCTURES IN THE C-2 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT II,
C-3 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT III AND C-5 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT V ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 155.8.12 Expansion or Enlargement.
   Except as provided in this Part VI, no nonconforming use shall be enlarged
or expanded to occupy a greater area of land or floor area than was occupied on
the date construction of such use was completed in accordance with the then
existing ordinances and no additional accessory use shall be established on the
site of a nonconforming use.
   (A)   For purposes of this section, a structure that is "used solely for
commercial purposes" or a "commercial structure" shall mean a structure located
in the zoning districts specified above that is conforming as to use and is
used only for commercial purposes and no part of which is used for residential
purposes. Any structure that does not meet this definition shall not be
permitted to expand or enlarge as provided herein.
   (B)   A commercial structure may be expanded or enlarged to an extent that
does not exceed 50% of the commercial measured area of the structure as defined
in this Section
155.8.12. For purposes of calculating the permitted expansion or enlargement,
all expansion or enlargement permitted under the provisions of this section
within the five-year period preceding the date on which any work to enlarge or
expand the structure is started shall be included.
   (C)   For purposes of calculating the commercial measured area, any deck
area shall be excluded.
   (D)   Such expansion or enlargement shall not create new nonconformities.
   (E)   Such expansion or enlargement shall not encroach into an existing or
required setback.
   (F)   The expansion or enlargement must maintain the following structural
elements as they existed prior to the expansion or enlargement:
      (1)   The existing wall height. For the purposes of this section,
existing wall height shall be measured from the top of the subfloor to the top
plate of the exterior wall;
      (2)   The existing exterior walls except as needed to change/add windows
and doors, to perform lateral additions or to correct code violations; and
      (3)   The original structural floor system except as needed to add new
ingress and egress or to correct code violations.
   (G)   Upon completion of the expansion or enlargement, all requirements for
off-street parking contained in
Article 155.9, Part I must be satisfied.
   (H)   If the nonconforming structure is located ten feet or less from an
adjoining structure (either on the same or on an adjoining lot) then the
nonconforming structure may be not be enlarged or expanded in any manner
whatsoever.
   (I)   For purposes of this section "commercial measured area" shall mean the
following: all of the interior floor area of a building which is surrounded by
exterior walls and/or attic with or without a laid floor with structural
headroom of five feet or greater. Where a floor lies below a ceiling height of
greater than 15 feet (as in a vaulted ceiling), then that area of the floor
under the vertical height of greater than 15 feet shall be counted twice. One
access corridor in the attic of a structure may be excluded from the commercial
measured area so long as it:
      (1)   Runs parallel to the center roof ridge;
      (2)   Is no wider than three feet; and
      (3)   Does not exceed five feet in height.
(Ord. 1735, passed 11-13-14; Am. Ord. 1784, passed 4-11-19; Am. Ord. 1838,
passed 3-10-22)
PART VII.
NON-CONFORMING USES
Section 155.8.13 Expansion or Enlargement.
   Except as provided by this paragraph, no nonconforming use shall be enlarged
or expanded to occupy a greater area of land or floor area than was occupied on
the effective date of this Ordinance and no additional accessory use shall be
established on the site of a nonconforming use.
   (A)   A single-family residence or duplex maintained as a nonconforming use
may be expanded or enlarged by the addition of an uncovered deck subject to the
following requirements:
      (1)   The construction of such uncovered deck must comply in all respects
with all other provisions of this Ordinance and in addition, such uncovered
deck must meet the 15-foot setback requirements imposed on structures built on
conforming lots.
      (2)   Such deck must be constructed so as to be pervious and no
impervious surface shall be permitted below such deck unless impervious surface
is existing underneath the area of proposed deck expansion permitted by this
section.
      (3)   The total area of all decks, to include any new deck permitted by
this section and all other existing decks, shall not exceed the deck area
permitted by Section
155.7.17.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the preceding provisions of this section, if a
nonconforming use is located ten feet or less from an adjoining structure
(either on the same or an adjoining lot), then the nonconforming use may not be
enlarged or expanded in any manner whatsoever.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.8.13.1 Enlargement or Expansion of a Dry Stack Boat Storage
Facility.
A dry stack boat storage facility (a "dry stack facility") that is maintained
as a permitted nonconforming use may be enlarged or expanded so long as such
enlargement or expansion complies with all applicable provisions of the Code
and the following provisions:
   (A)   The dry stack facility must be located in a C-3 Commercial District
III zoning district.
   (B)   Such enlargement or expansion shall only be permitted when upon
completion of the enlargement or expansion the number of boat storage slips in
the dry stack facility is reduced below the number of such slips that existed
before the expansion or enlargement took place.
   (C)   Such enlargement or expansion shall only be permitted when upon
completion of the enlargement or expansion the foot print of the portion of the
dry stack facility that is enlarged or expanded does not exceed 2,400 square
feet.
   (D)   The permitted enlargement or expansion as described in this section
shall be approved by the Director of Planning and Parks. The application for
such enlargement or expansion shall be submitted in writing to the office of
the Director of Planning and Parks and shall include a site plan that meets the
requirements of subsection
155.5.3.1.
   (E)   Such enlargement or expansion shall comply with all other applicable
provisions of the Code to include, but not be limited to, setbacks and building
height.
   (F)   An enlargement or expansion permitted by this section shall be exempt
from the requirement of obtaining a special use permit or an amendment to an
existing special use permit.
(Ord. 1784, passed 4-11-19; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.8.14 Relocation of Nonconforming Use.
   No nonconforming use may be moved, in whole or in part, to any other portion
of such parcel nor to another lot unless the use will be in conformance with
the use regulations of the district into which it is moved.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.8.15 Change in Use.
   A nonconforming use may not be changed to another use unless the proposed
use is permitted in the district in which the land is located.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
PART VIII.
DAMAGE OR DESTRUCTION
Section 155.8.16 Reconstruction Damage Less Than 50%.
   Any nonconforming building or structure or any building or structure
containing a nonconforming use or any building or structure constituting a
nonconforming situation, which has been damaged by fire, acts of God, and other
causes beyond the control of the owner, may be reconstructed and used as before
subject to the conditions and restrictions of this Ordinance and further
subject to a determination by the UDO Administrator that the cost to repair
such damage or destruction is less than 50% of the assessed tax value of the
structure as listed by the New Hanover County Tax Office or that value (as
defined in Exhibit A) as determined by a certified appraisal. For purposes of
this section, "value" shall mean the value of the building before the damage or
destruction occurred. In addition, the property owner may be required to
provide other information as required by the UDO Administrator to substantiate
the cost of such repairs, reconstruction, improvements, or addition.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.8.17 Reconstruction Damage More Than 50%.
   If such building or structure as described in the preceding paragraph is
damaged to an extent equal to or greater than 50% of the value as specified in
the preceding paragraph, then such building may only be reconstructed if it is
brought into full compliance with
Article 155.11, Part I (Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance);
Article 155.9, Part I (Off-Street Parking and Off-Street Loading Requirements);
and the setback requirements contained in Section
155.6.5. In the event the number of units in the building that existed before
the damage cannot be rebuilt because of an inability to meet the requirements
of this paragraph, a building containing a lesser number of units (but more
than are permitted under the zoning applicable to the property) may be rebuilt
so long as all applicable requirements of the UDO, to include this paragraph,
are met. For example, a damaged quadraplex in a zoning district permitting only
single-family units cannot be rebuilt because the current parking requirements
cannot be met. However, a duplex can be built on the subject property that will
meet the requirements of the UDO and this section. In this situation, a duplex
may be constructed in this zoning district.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.8.18 Increase in Extent of Nonconformity.
   In no event shall the extent of nonconformity of a building or structure
repaired under the provisions of this Ordinance be increased or enlarged in any
manner except as permitted herein.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.8.19 Time for Carrying Out Reconstruction.
   Any owner wishing to repair a nonconforming building or structure under the
provisions of this Ordinance must acquire a building permit for such repairs
within 18 months of the date of the damage or destruction. The UDO
Administrator shall have the authority to extend such 18 month period for an
additional 90 days upon receipt of a written request to do so prior to the
expiration of the initial 18 month period. In the event the owner fails to meet
these time restrictions, the right to continue the nonconforming situation,
use, building or structure shall terminate and the property shall thereafter be
used only in a conforming manner.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
ARTICLE 155.9
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
PART I.
OFF-STREET PARKING AND OFF-STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS
Section 155.9.1 Off-Street Parking Requirements.
   There shall be provided at the time of the erection of any building, or at
the time any principal building is enlarged or increased in capacity by adding
dwelling units, guest rooms, seats, or floor area, permanent off-street parking
space in the amount specified by this section. Such parking space may be
provided in a parking garage or properly graded open space that complies with
the standards for parking established in this section.
   155.9.1.1 Certification of Minimum Parking Requirements. Each application
for a building permit or certificate of zoning compliance submitted to the UDO
Administrator as provided for in this Ordinance shall include information as to
the location and dimensions of off-street parking and the means of entrance and
exit to the space. This information shall be in sufficient detail to enable the
UDO Administrator to determine whether or not the requirements of this section
are met. In the case of mixed use developments, the total required off-street
parking or loading space shall be the sum of the requirements for the various
uses computed separately except for as provided below.
   (A)   Up to one-half of the parking spaces required for one use in a mixed
use development may be used to satisfy the parking requirements for a second
use within the proposed development, subject to certification by the Board of
Aldermen that such joint usage parking complies with the following provisions:
      (1)   The peak usage of the parking facility by one use will be at night
or on Sundays and the peak usage of the parking facility by the second use will
be at other times as provided in subsection
155.9.1.2; and
      (2)   The second use is ancillary to the first use, such as restaurants
and meeting rooms to hotels and motels.
   (B)   Minimum parking requirements for a mixed use development may be
reduced by the Board of Aldermen if a traffic/parking study is submitted to
demonstrate and the Board of Aldermen finds that:
      (1)   Sidewalks, bicycle facilities, transit service, and transit
amenities are in place such that together with the number of parking spaces
that are proposed, transportation is adequately served or the commercial
establishment(s) existing or previously existing on the subject property have
historically utilized on-street public parking for a significant portion of
customer parking and there is sufficient on-street public parking available
within a 400-foot radius of the mixed-use development to meet the demand for
the commercial component of the mixed-use development; and provided the
commercial component of the mixed use in the proposed project is equal to and
not less than 100% of the previous commercial use as determined by heated
square footage; and
      (2)   Reduction of the minimum parking requirements will not be injurious
to the general health, safety, and welfare.
   155.9.1.2 Combination of Required Parking Space. The required parking space
for any number of separate uses may be combined in one lot but the required
space assigned to one use may not be assigned to another use. However, one-half
of the parking space required for churches, theaters, or assembly halls whose
peak attendance will be at night or on Sundays may be assigned to a use which
will be closed at night or on Sunday mornings until 12:00 noon.
   155.9.1.3 Bicycle Rack Requirements. For all parking lots containing 20 or
more spaces, bicycle racks which accommodate at least five bicycles shall be
installed. The final location of the bicycle rack shall be determined by the
UDO Administrator or his/her designee.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6751.jpg]
 
1.   Parking lands shall be physically improved, landscaped, properly surfaced,
marked, or otherwise designated and shall conform to the town standards as the
parking area located on the lands on which the use is situated.
   (B)    Lighting. Any lighting shall be so arranged as to direct light and
glare away from streets and adjacent property (see
Article 155.9, Part III).
   (C)   Sidewalks. Paved sidewalks, per town specifications, shall be provided
at the owner's expense.
   (D)   All parking lots shall observe the following yard requirements:
      (1)   Minimum front yard - five feet
      (2)   Corner lots, minimum side yard - five feet
   (E)   Bumpers. The required yards shall be set off from parking areas by one
noncontinuous stationary bumper for each parking space abutting a yard; bumper
shall be not less than five inches or more than 12 inches high.
   (F)   Separation of Bumper and Walkways. In the event any parking stall
abuts a walkway, there shall be a space of 3.5 feet between the wheel bumper
and the edge of the walkway.
   (G)   Drainage. Parking lots shall not drain onto or across public sidewalks
or into adjacent property except into a drainage easement. Parking lots with 15
or more spaces shall require a six inch curb and gutter and/or best management
practice low impact development (LID) system designed by a licensed landscape
architect or professional engineer. In already developed areas where this
condition would be impossible to meet, the Board of Aldermen, upon review and
recommendation by the UDO Administrator, may exempt this requirement provided
that adequate provision is made of drainage.
   (H)   Twenty-five percent of all parking spaces may be established as
compact parking stalls. The dimensions for standard and compact parking stalls
are outlined in subsection
155.9.1.7.
   (I)   Paved parking areas shall have lines demarcating each parking space.
   (J)   On-street parking may be used to satisfy parking requirements on
streets.
   (K)   Landscaping shall be provided as specified in
Article 155.9, Part IV.
   (L)   Off-street parking areas shall be designed:
      (1)   To facilitate adequate movement and access by sanitation,
emergency, and other public service vehicles.
      (2)   So that parked vehicles do not encroach upon, extend into, or cause
vehicles to back into public rights-of-way, sidewalks, or strike against or
damage any wall, vegetation, utility, or other structure.
   (M)   Larger lots (15 or more spaces) shall be broken up through the
establishment of landscaped islands and buffers per the requirements of
Article 155.9, Part IV.
   (N)   Off-street parking area shall be properly maintained in all respects.
In particular, and without limiting the foregoing, off-street parking area
surfaces shall be kept in good condition (free from potholes, etc.) and parking
space lines or marking shall be kept clearly visible and distinct.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6753.jpg]
 
   (O)   Handicapped Parking Requirements
      (1)    Handicapped parking spaces shall be in accordance with the
regulations set forth by the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), NC
Department of Transportation (NCDOT), and NC Division of Motor Vehicles (NCDMV)
ADA requirements. All handicapped spaces shall be identified by pavement
markings and appropriate signage approved by the NCDOT. Handicapped parking
shall be required on all multi-family and non-residential sites.
      (2)   Handicapped parking spaces shall be located in closest proximity to
major building entrances, but in no event shall such spaces be located more
than 100 feet from a major building entrance.
      (3)   Handicapped parking spaces shall be a minimum of eight feet in
width by 20 feet in length and shall have an adjacent access aisle that has a
minimum width of five feet. Two accessible parking spaces may share a common
access aisle.
      (4)   The minimum number of accessible spaces to be provided for all
multi-family and nonresidential sites is as follows:
Total Number of Spaces in the Lot Minimum Number of Accessible Spaces
Total Number of Spaces in the Lot Minimum Number of Accessible Spaces
1 to 25                           1
26 to 50                          2
51 to 75                          3
76 to 100                         4
101 to 150                        5
151 to 200                        6
201 or more                       7 plus one for every 100 spaces over 100
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6755.jpg]
 
      (5)   The number of accessible spaces shall be in addition to those
required by the minimum parking ratios.
      (6)   All spaces for the disabled shall have access to a curb-ramp or
curb-cut when necessary to allow access to the building served, and shall be
located so that users will not be compelled to wheel behind parked vehicles.
      (7)   Parallel parking spaces for the disabled shall be located either at
the beginning or end of a block or adjacent to alley entrances. Elective curbs
adjacent to such spaces shall be of a height which will not interfere with the
opening and closing of motor vehicle doors.
      (8)   The first one out of every eight accessible parking spaces shall be
a van accessible space. Van parking spaces shall have an adjacent access aisle
a minimum of eight feet in width and a vertical clearance of at least eight
feet along the vehicular route to the parking space.
   155.9.1.5 Off-Street Parking Requirements Per Land Use. No certificates of
occupancy shall be issued for any units until the required number of parking
spaces, with ingress and egress, are fully constructed. If any required parking
spaces for units for which certificates of occupancy are requested are provided
on noncontiguous parking lands, then all applicable provisions of subsection
155.9.1.6 must be complied with. All such noncontiguous parking lands shall be
fully constructed and dedicated by recorded lease agreement or memorandum of
lease in accordance with all of the standards of this section before the
certificates of occupancy shall be issued. If the lease agreement is
terminated, then the special use permit or the permitted use becomes invalid.
The following off-street parking space shall be required and shall conform to
the standards contained in subsection
155.9.1.3.
Uses Required Off-Street Parking
Uses                        Required Off-Street Parking
                            Determined by the number of toilet fixtures in the
                            residence (single-family) or in the individual dwelling
                            unit (duplex/multi-family) in accordance with the
Residential                 following:
   Single-family         Toilet         Parking spaces per dwelling unit
   Duplexes/Multi-family 1-3               2
                            4-5               3
                            6-7               4
                            8 or more            5
Adult care home             One space per two beds.
Assisted living residence   One space per two bedrooms.
Auditoriums/meeting rooms   One parking space for each four persons as stated on the
and hotel or motel operated maximum posted occupancy placard except that hotels and
restaurants                 motels containing 50 or more rooms may be allowed to
                            reduce this requirement by 50%.
Automobile service station  Three spaces per service bay, plus one space per wrecker
                            or service vehicle and two spaces for each pump.
Barber shop                 Two spaces per operator plus one space for each
                            employee.
Beauty shop                 Three spaces per operator plus one space for each
                            employee.
Car washes                  One space for each employee.
                            One space per teacher or staff, plus space for one car
Child care center           drop off and pickup or stacking for one car per ten
                            children, whichever is greater.
Churches                    One parking space for each four seats in the sanctuary.
Dry cleaners or laundries   One space per four rental pieces of equipment.
Family care home            One space per four licensed beds.
Financial institution/bank  One space per 200 square feet of gross floor area.
                            A minimum of 25 parking spaces plus one additional space
Fishing piers               for each 175 square feet of gross floor area in pier
                            house and other covered areas, plus one parking space
                            for each two employees on the largest shift.
                            In addition to residence requirements, one parking space
Home occupation             per 175 square feet of floor space devoted to the home
                            occupation use.
Industrial uses             One parking space for each employee on the largest
                            shift.
Library, museum, and art    One space per 300 square feet.
galleries
Light construction/marina   One parking space per each two employees on the largest
                            shift.
Marina/boatominiums         One parking space for each two slips in the marina plus
                            one parking space for each six dry storage spaces.
                            One parking space for each room to be rented, 1.5
                            parking spaces for each two-room suite to be rented, two
Motels; hotels              parking spaces for any suite above two rooms to be
                            rented, plus one additional parking space for each two
                            employees.
Multi-unit assisted living  One space per two bedrooms.
with services
Nursing homes               One space per three beds, plus one space per staff
                            doctor or practitioner.
Offices, professional       One parking space for each 225 square feet of gross
businesses or public        floor area.
agencies
                            One parking space for each 100 square feet of gross
Public or private clubs     floor space plus one parking space for each two
                            employees.
Public or private indoor
recreation facility,        One space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area.
including community center
Residential child-care      One space for each staff member plus one space per five
facility                    children.
                            One parking space for each four persons as stated on the
Restaurants and places of   maximum posted occupancy placard plus one additional
entertainment               parking space for each two employees on the largest
                            shift.
Retail uses not otherwise   One parking space for each 225 square feet of gross
listed                      floor area.
Schools, public             One parking space for each classroom and administrative
                            office.
Shopping center complex     5.5 parking spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross
                            floor area.
Theaters                    One parking space for each three seats in the
                            auditorium.
Tourist and guest homes,    One parking space for each room to be rented plus one
including bed and           additional parking space for each three employees.
breakfasts
                            One parking space for each two persons. The total
                            required parking spaces shall be determined by dividing
Vessel for hire carrying    by two the number of persons that the vessel is
seven or more passengers    permitted to carry based on the Certificate of
                            Inspection issued for that vessel by the United States
                            Coast Guard. In addition, there shall be required one
                            parking space for each employee working on the vessel.
 
   155.9.1.6 Exception in Parking Requirements.
   (A)   Parking required for uses in districts zoned commercial or public or
semi-public (G-1) may be provided within 400 feet of the main entrance to the
principal use and located in any commercial zone if the required off-street
parking cannot be reasonably provided on the same lot on which the principal
use is located.
   (B)   If the off-street parking space required by this Ordinance for
districts zoned residential cannot be reasonably provided on the same lot on
which the principal use is located, such space may be provided on any land
within 400 feet of the main entrance to, and within the same zone as, such
principal use.
   (C)   The Board of Aldermen may grant an exception for off-street parking
requirements in the C-1, C-2 or C-3 zoning districts after a finding by the
Board of Aldermen that:
      (1)   The proposed use is directed primarily toward pedestrian trade
existing in the area;
      (2)   The character of existing development or properties within 400 feet
prohibit the acquisition of land for parking;
      (3)   The inability of the applicant to provide the required parking does
not result from actions of the applicant;
      (4)   Granting the requested exception will not impair public safety or
adversely impact adjacent property; and
      (5)   That one parking space for each two employees shall be provided. An
exception to this requirement may be granted if the applicant can satisfy the
Board of Aldermen that circumstances exist that prevent the applicant from
providing the required parking space(s) for each two employees.
   (D)   Small parking lot exception. For purposes of this section, a "small
parking lot" shall mean a parking lot in the C-3 Commercial District that is
located immediately adjacent to an existing C-3 business, is used in
conjunction with such business, and includes no more than a total of 12,000
square feet of parking area. Small parking lots meeting this definition shall
be exempt from the following requirements.
      (1)   Minimum front yard setback set out in subsection
155.9.1.4.4(a).
      (2)   The requirements set out in subsection
155.9.1.4.7.
      (3)   Landscaping requirements (Type B Bufferyard screening only) set out
in subsection
155.9.1.4.11.
      (4)   Requirement that vehicles do not back into public rights-of-way as
set out in subsection
155.9.1.4.12(b).
      (5)   Minimum depth of street yards and minimum number of trees and
shrubs set out in subsection 155.9.17.1.
      (6)   Requirement for landscaped islands set out in subsection
155.9.17.6(c).
      (7)   Requirement for Type A Bufferyard Screening set out in Section
155.9.18.
   (E)   Off-site parking lots in the Commercial District V Zoning District.
Off-site parking lots shall be permitted in the Commercial District V zoning
district on the condition that such parking lots comply with all of the
following requirements:
      (1)   The improved surface of the parking lot (whether by asphalt or any
other permitted surface) shall be no larger than 15,000 square feet and shall
have marked and delineated spaces that meet all requirements of subsection
155.9.1.8. The parking lot shall be surfaced with a material approved by the
Town Manager. The parking lot shall meet all town storm water requirements.
      (2)   Any lighting used in conjunction with a parking lot shall be so
arranged as to direct light and glare away from streets and adjacent property
and shall comply with all the requirements of Part III of
Article 155.9.
      (3)   All parking lots shall observe the following yard requirements:
         (a)   Minimum front yard - five feet.
         (b)   Corner lots, minimum side yard - five feet.
      (4)   In the event any parking stall abuts a walkway, there shall be a
space of three and one-half feet between the wheel bumper and the edge of the
walkway.
      (5)   Paved parking areas shall have lines demarcating each parking
space.
      (6)   Off-street parking areas shall be designed:
         (a)   To facilitate adequate movement and access by sanitation,
emergency, and other public service vehicles.
         (b)   So that parked vehicles do not encroach upon, extend into, or
cause vehicles to back into public rights-of-way, sidewalks, or strike against
or damage any wall, vegetation, utility, or other structure.
      (7)   Off-street parking area shall be properly maintained in all
respects. In particular, and without limiting the foregoing, off-street parking
area surfaces shall be kept in good condition (free from potholes, etc.) and
parking space lines or marking shall be kept clearly visible and distinct.
      (8)   Accessible parking spaces shall be installed and maintained in
accordance with the regulations set forth by the Americans with Disabilities
Act (ADA), NC Department of Transportation (NCDOT), NC Division of Motor
Vehicles (NCDMV) ADA requirements, the current version of the North Carolina
Building Code and any other applicable federal, state, county or local laws,
rules and regulations.
      (9)   Compliance with all requirements of subsection
155.9.1.8.
      (10)   Compliance with all requirements of Part II Driveway Construction
of
Article 155.9. If access to the parking lot is across a roadway that is part of
the state highway system and maintained by NCDOT all requirements for an
encroachment agreement from NCDOT shall be complied with.
      (11)   Compliance with all requirements of Section
155.2.6.
   155.9.1.7 Off-Street Parking Access to Paved Street. No building or land use
of any kind for which 75 or more off-street parking spaces are required under
the terms of this section shall be permitted in any zoning district unless the
lot on which the building or land use is located, adjoins and has access to a
paved street, as defined in this Ordinance, having at least two paved lanes for
traffic and one paved lane for parking. Where the street facility does not
exist at the time a project of land use is proposed, the developer shall be
required to provide such additional right-of-way as may be necessary for this
purpose.
   155.9.1.8 Parking Space Arrangements and Dimensions.
   Parallel Parking
   a.   Length   23 feet
   b.    Width   7 feet 5 inches
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6757.jpg]
 
   90 Degree Parking
   a.   Length    18 feet
   b.   Width    9 feet
   c.   Aisle Width   24 feet
   d.   Two Row
      Parking with
      Aisle   60 feet total
   Compact Cars
   e.   Length   16 feet
   f.   Width   8 feet
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6759.jpg]
   60 Degree Parking
   a.   Length   20 feet 1 inch - measured from the end of striping
perpendicular to the curb
   b.   Width   9 feet
   c.   One-Way Aisle   16 feet
      Two-Way Aisle   20 feet
   d.   Two Row Parking   56 feet 2 inches total
      with One-Way Aisle
      Two Row Parking   60 feet 2 inches total
      with Two-Way Aisle
   Compact Cars
   e.   Length      17 feet 6 inches - measured from the end of striping
perpendicular to the curb
   f.   Width      8 feet
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6761.jpg]
 
   45 Degree Parking
   a.   Length   19 feet, 1 inch - measured from the end of striping
perpendicular to the curb
   b.   Width      9 feet
   c.   One-Way Aisle   15 feet
      Two-Way Aisle   20 feet
   d.   Two Row Parking   53 feet 2 inches total
      with One-Way Aisle
      Two Row Parking   58 feet 2 inches total
      with Two-Way Aisle
   Compact Cars
   e.   Length   16 feet, 6 inches - measured from the end of striping
perpendicular to the curb
   f.   Width      8 feet
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6763.jpg]
 
   30 Degree Parking
   a.   Length   15 feet, 11 inches - measured from the end of striping
perpendicular to the curb
   b.   Width      9 feet
   c.   One-Way Aisle   14 feet
      Two-Way Aisle   19 feet
   d.   Two Row Parking   45 feet 10 inches total
      with One-Way Aisle
      Two Row Parking   50 feet 10 inches total
      with Two-Way Aisle
   Compact Cars
   e.   Length   14 feet, 6 inches - measured from the end of striping
perpendicular to the curb
   f.   Width      8 feet
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1716, passed 9- 12-13; Am. Ord. 1725,
passed 3-19-14; Am. Ord. 1760, passed 5-12-16; Am. Ord. 1770, passed 12-14-17;
Am. Ord. 1801, passed 7-9-20; Am. Ord. 1809, passed 10-8-20; Am. Ord. 1838,
passed 3- 10-22)
Section 155.9.2 Off-Street Loading for Commercial and Industrial Uses.
   (A)   The number of off-street loading spaces required by this section shall
be considered as the absolute minimum and the developer shall evaluate his own
needs to determine if they are greater than the minimum specified by this
section. For purposes of this section, an off-street loading berth shall have
minimum plan dimensions of 12 feet by 25 feet and 14 feet overhead clearance
with adequate means for entrance and exits. A loading space requirement may be
modified or waived by the Board of Aldermen on application in the case of a
bank, theater, assembly hall, or other building or similar limited loading
space requirements.
   (B)   Minimum Number of Required Off-Street Loading Berths.
 
Square Feet of Gross Floor Area Required Number of Berths
0 - 20,000                      0
20,001 - 40,000                 1
40,001 - 100,000                2
 
   Sec 155.9.2.1 Use of Church Parking Lots as Commercial Parking Lots. Church
parking lots permitted under the provisions of the Town Code may be used as
commercial parking lots subject to the following conditions:
   (A)   A church parking lot may be used as a commercial parking lot on the
following days:
      (1)   Saturday, Sunday and Monday of the Memorial Day weekend;
      (2)   The day on which July 4th falls;
      (3)   Saturday and Sunday before July 4th if July 4th falls on a Monday
or Tuesday;
      (4)   Saturday, Sunday and Monday of the July 4th weekend if July 4th
falls on a Saturday or Sunday;
      (5)   Saturday and Sunday after July 4th if July 4th falls on a
Wednesday, Thursday or Friday; and
      (6)   Saturday, Sunday and Monday of the Labor Day weekend.
   (B)   The use of such lots as commercial parking lots shall not begin before
10:00 a.m.
   (C)   The church shall provide an on-site parking attendant 21 years of age
or older at all times that the lot is used as a commercial parking lot.
   (D)   Trash containers shall be maintained on-site and shall be kept in a
clean and orderly fashion and emptied on a regular basis in order to prevent
the accumulation of trash and other debris.
   (E)   The parking lot shall be kept in a clean and orderly state. All trash
and debris shall be promptly picked up and deposited in appropriate
receptacles.
   (F)   No tailgating (to include, but not be limited to, eating and
picnicking), no partying, no outside activities except parking shall be
permitted in the parking lot.
   (G)   No persons using the parking lot shall violate the town's noise
ordinances.
   (H)   No signage of any kind advertising the availability of public parking
shall be permitted except for three temporary signs not exceeding 18 square
feet in size for a total of 18 square feet in size. Such signs may only be in
place during the days on which parking is permitted pursuant to this section.
   (I)   The signs permitted in division (H) above may state that the church is
accepting donations in return for parking but shall not indicate in any manner
that payment of a fee is required.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1759, passed 5-12-16; Am. Ord. 1838,
passed 3-10-22; Am. Ord. 1843, passed 3-15-23)
PART II.
DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION
Section 155.9.3 Permit to Construct Driveway Required.
   No person shall construct, reconstruct or repair any driveway within the
town without first obtaining from the Code Enforcement Official a zoning permit
to do so. Such person shall construct, reconstruct and repair such driveway
under the supervision of the Code Enforcement Official, and in accordance with
specifications as may be prepared by the Code Enforcement Official and adopted
by the Board of Aldermen. The specifications prepared by the Code Enforcement
Official for driveway construction shall include type of construction,
materials used, dimensions regarding width, spacing, location, and situation
with respect to street intersections and property lines as may be deemed
necessary by the Code Enforcement Official to promote safety and safeguard the
general public.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.9.4 Conformity of Surrounding Areas of Abutting Property Owners;
Refusal to Make Improvements.
   (A)   The Board of Aldermen may, without petition of abutting property
owners, require the construction, reconstruction, alteration or repair of
sidewalks, driveways, curbs, gutters or drains in conformity with the
provisions of the Wrightsville Beach UDO.
   (B)   If any such improvements are required of a property owner and the
property owner shall fail or refuse to make the same within 30 days after
notice thereof, the Board of Aldermen may cause such improvements to be made
and assess the cost thereof against the property abutting the improvement. In
making and collecting assessment for such improvements, the procedure as
outlined in the North Carolina General Statutes shall be followed.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.9.5 Costs Assessed Against Property Abutting Sidewalk.
   The cost of the construction, reconstruction or alteration of sidewalks,
including the cost of grading and the construction of retaining walls necessary
to provide lateral support for abutting property, shall be assessed against the
property abutting the sidewalk. The cost of relocation and construction of
driveways, steps, or other means or access to his or her property from the
streets as he or she may deem necessary, shall be borne by the property owner.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.9.6 Specifications for Driveway Construction.
   (A)   The specifications for driveway construction set forth herein are
intended to regulate access from public and private streets or public and
private rights-of-way to the adjoining property.
   (B)   All driveways lawfully permitted at the time of adoption of this UDO
shall be permitted to continue as currently constructed, provided that the
existing driveway is defined and/or improved in a manner that permits its
location to be determined without question. Any structure or vacant lot
existing at the date of adoption of this section and having fewer driveways on
the date of adoption of this section than are permitted in accordance with
subsection (E) below, may apply for additional driveways to the extent
permitted by subsection (E) below and other provisions of this section.
   (C)   If an existing structure does not have a defined driveway, then
driveway locations will be established by the town consistent with the
provisions of this section for new structures.
   (D)   All matters related to driveways shall be decided by the Director of
Planning and Parks or his or her designee. Any property owner dissatisfied with
a decision of the Director of Planning and Parks or his or her designee may
appeal such decision to the Town Manager by delivering written notice of appeal
to the Town Manager within 30 days of the decision of the Director of Planning
and Parks or his or her designee. The decision of the Town Manager in this
matter shall be final.
   (E)   The following requirements shall apply to the construction of new
driveways and the removal and replacement of existing driveways:
      (1)   Commercial properties, to include properties with combined
commercial and residential uses, shall be permitted one driveway not to exceed
26 feet in width and must be compliant with the North Carolina Fire Code. If in
the interest of the general public it is deemed necessary to construct a wider
driveway entrance for a commercial property, special permission to do so may be
granted by the Board of Aldermen. Notwithstanding the foregoing, mixed-use
developments approved by the Board of Aldermen pursuant to Section
155.7.6 may be permitted more than one driveway.
      (2)   Driveways on lots located within a residential district shall be
permitted as follows:
         (a)   A vacant lot may have one driveway not to exceed 12 feet in
width including flares.
         (b)   A single family residence may have one driveway not to exceed 24
feet in width including flares or two driveways not to exceed 12 feet each in
width including flares. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a single family
residence located on a lot that is a combination or recombination of two or
more contiguous lots having frontage on two public rights-of-way with frontage
on one of the rights-of-way equal to or exceeding 100 linear feet may have
three 12-foot driveways, two on one public right-of-way and one on the
remaining public right-of-way, provided said driveways do not adversely impact
paid on-street parking adjacent to said lot.
         (c)   A duplex may have one driveway not to exceed 30 feet in width
including flares or two driveways not to exceed 15 feet each in width including
flares.
         (d)   In the event driveways are separated, they shall be separated by
at least 16 feet of space. The use of an expansion joint no greater than two
inches in width shall not be considered separation of a driveway. Provided that
on any lot having a width adjoining a street right-of- way of less than 55
feet, driveways shall be separated by at least eight feet of space.
         (e)   A single family dwelling on a conforming lot with a minimum
front width of 100 feet may have two driveways not to exceed 18 feet in width
each, excluding maximum two-foot flare outs at their connection with the
adjacent paving of the street in front of the dwelling, providing there is
compliance with the following conditions:
            1)   The distance from the exterior flare outs at their connection
with the adjacent paving of the street in front of the dwelling to the adjacent
property lines shall be no less than 15 feet of space;
            2)   The distance between the interior flare outs at their
connection with the adjacent paving of the street in front of the dwelling
shall be no less than 16 feet of space; and
            3)   The public street at the location of the dwelling is not
designated for public parking along the said street adjacent to the property
line of the dwelling.
      (3)   Driveways shall not encroach into the required setback for the lot
in question. Provided that driveways may encroach into the required side yard
setback for lots if the following conditions are met:
         (a)   The driveway existed at the time of adoption of this subsection
(which date is March 10, 2022) and encroached into a required setback; the
driveway was legally permitted by the town at the time it was constructed; and
the following conditions are satisfied:
            1)   Any part of the driveway encroaching into the required side
yard setback that is repaired or replaced must be constructed of pervious
materials;
            2)   Such repair or replacement shall not create new
nonconformities or increase encroachments into the required setbacks;
            3)   Any part of the driveway that is located within the town's
right- of-way that is repaired or replaced shall comply with the provisions of
subsection (E) above; and
            4)   All other provisions of this chapter are complied with.
         (b)   For lots on which structures exist that have been determined to
be pre-FIRM (as defined in Exhibit A, Definitions) and the following conditions
are satisfied:
            1)   The driveway encroaching into the required side yard setback
must be constructed of pervious materials;
            2)   The total width of driveways, to include driveways encroaching
into the side yard setback as permitted by this subsection, may not exceed the
permitted width of driveways as set forth in this subsection (E).
            3)   No driveway may encroach into a required side yard setback
without the prior written consent of the Board of Aldermen if the creation of
such driveway causes a metered on-street parking space to be eliminated; and
            4)   The removal and replacement of a driveway that was legally
permitted prior to November 18, 2012 can occur if:
               a)   The lot is a legally conforming lot.
               b)   The replacement of the driveway is in the same location and
same size as it previously existed or if the driveway is enlarged or changed in
any way thos changes would have to meet the provisions of this Code.
               c)   The width of the driveway shall not exceed 40 feet; and
            5)   All other provisions of this section are complied with.
   (F)   If a structure has a driveway at the time of adoption of this section
that does not comply with the provisions of subsection (E) above, and such
structure is subsequently repaired, reconstructed, improved, or added to in
such a manner as to meet the definition of "substantial improvement" as set
forth in Exhibit A, Definitions, the owner of such structure shall be required
to bring the driveways into compliance with the provisions of subsection (E)
above.
   (G)   All driveway entrance construction shall be of 3,000 pound per square
inch, monolithic concrete, having a depth of not less than six inches
throughout and shall be given a float finish to assure an even surface having
suitable roughness. All driveway entrances and sidewalk surfaces shall be
screened and given a float finish to assure an even surface having suitable
roughness. Driveway entrances shall conform to the contour of the street
pavement, making provision for drainage flows and gutter continuity, and shall
rise not less than six inches above the gutter at the point at which the
driveway reaches the property lines in order to assure containment of drainage
flows and proper runoff. Expansion joints shall be placed at edges of driveways
where sidewalks abut, and in aprons not less than 24 feet apart.
   (H)   Where existing driveway entrances do not conform to these regulations
and constitute a hazard, obstruct drainage, or are in a dangerous state of
repair, and the owner is instructed by the Board of Aldermen to repair said
driveway entrance, or adjacent curbs and sidewalks as provided in this section,
the owner shall submit a drawing showing the proposed new driveway to be placed
in accordance with the Ordinance and these regulations.
   (I)   Where streets are widened or curb and gutter sections are placed after
driveways are installed, the owner of the property adjacent to the street where
such improvements take place shall be assessed all costs of modification of
said existing driveways in order to conform to the street improvements in
accordance with the provisions of
Article V of the Charter of the Town of Wrightsville Beach.
   (J)   All requests for a zoning permit to construct driveways shall be
accompanied by a sketch showing the location of the property involved, the
frontage concerned, and the location of any structures on the property. The
inclusions of this information on site plans for building permits for new
construction will be acceptable for the purpose of driveway permit issue.
   (K)   The street area immediately adjacent to a permitted driveway as
described in this section shall be painted and/or marked so as to indicate that
no-parking is permitted within the street right-of-way immediately adjacent to
the permitted driveway. Parking shall be permitted on all other areas of the
street except those portions of such street otherwise designated as no parking
areas by this Unified Development Ordinance or action of the Board of Aldermen.
Provided, that should the designation of no parking areas adjacent to permitted
driveways as described herein result in permitted parking areas of a length of
less than 15 feet, such area shall be designated as a no parking area.
   (L)   It shall be unlawful for any person except authorized employees of the
town to paint, mark or otherwise designate no parking areas on a public street.
Any person violating the provision of this section shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in subsection
155.1.12.9.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1700, passed 2-14-13; Am. Ord. 1753,
passed 12-10-15; Am. Ord. 1793, passed 1-15-20; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22;
Am. Ord. 1855, passed 1-11-24)
PART III.
OUTDOOR LIGHTING
Section 155.9.7 Purpose.
   This section sets forth criteria for the installation and acceptable levels
of exterior lighting in the town. The purposes of this section are as follows:
   (A)   Preserve and enhance public safety;
   (B)   Protect drivers from disabling glare and thereby enhance traffic
safety;
   (C)   Protect marine vessels from disabling glare on the waterways and
thereby enhance navigation safety;
   (D)   Enhance the town's nighttime character;
   (E)   Shield neighboring properties from nuisance glare;
   (F)   Reduce light pollution, light trespass and the brightening of the
night sky due to manmade lighting;
   (G)   Protect and not disrupt sea turtle nesting habitats; and
   (H)   Promote energy conservation through efficient light design and
operation.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.9.8 Commercial Exterior Lighting.
   (A)   Outdoor Parking Lots, Storage and Display Areas and Driveways.
Lighting for outdoor parking lots, outdoor storage and display areas, and
commercial driveways shall be designed to provide the minimum lighting
necessary to ensure adequate public safety, to control excessive glare onto
adjacent streets and properties, and to prevent light trespass onto adjoining
properties, public rights-of-way, and any public trust waters.
      (1)   General.
         (a)   All lighting fixtures used for the purpose of illuminating
parking lots and driveways shall be full cut-off fixtures that meet the
standards set forth in the definition as documented by the manufacturer's
specification or a qualified engineer.
         (b)   Directional floodlighting fixtures must be full-cutoff or
shielded and properly aimed so that the light source:
            1.   Does not produce glare;
            2.   Does not produce up-lighting; and
            3.   Contains light so that it does not trespass onto adjoining
properties, public rights-of-way, and any public trust waters.
         (c)   The maximum mounting height for pole-mounted fixtures intended
to illuminate parking lots is 30 feet measured from the base of the pole.
      (2)   Special Design Areas. Lighting fixtures of a particular period or
architectural style such as carriage lights and post lights, may be used in
special design areas. In such areas, fixtures that are not full cut-off are
permitted provided that:
         (a)   The maximum initial lumens generated by each lamp shall not
exceed 500 lumens, according to the manufacturer's specifications (the purpose
of this lumen cap is to avoid cumulative use of lights that may be too bright
or that may cause trespass); and
         (b)   Post top shall be fitted with a solid top to control up-lighting
and reduce glare; and
         (c)   Fixture mounting height is no more than 16 feet above grade
level.
      (3)   Standard. All illumination of parking lots, outdoor storage and
display areas and commercial driveways shall comply with the intensities and
uniformity ratios in Section
155.9.14 or by the standard within this section whichever is more stringent.
   (B)   Commercial Building Exteriors and Parking Garages. These provisions
apply to all buildings and uses within the town's Commercial and Public/Semi-
Public Zoning Districts and to any non-conforming nonresidential uses in other
zoning districts.
      (1)   General. Exterior building lights may be mounted in front, at
ground level, or wall mounted provided that:
         (a)   All light fixtures, wherever mounted, are properly aimed and
full cut-off or shielded to confine the light to the area of the building being
lighted and to prevent light trespass.
         (b)   Wall-mounted light fixtures may be mounted no higher than 20
feet above grade. The fixtures must be full cut-off or shielded and aimed to
avoid up-lighting.
         (c)   Ground mounted fixtures must restrict up-lighting.
         (d)   Bare light sources (including but not limited to festive light
strands, incandescent, fluorescent, high intensity discharge, and neon) used to
outline property lines, open sales areas, rooflines, doors, windows, the edges
of walls or any other area of the building or property visible from outside the
building are prohibited, except for holiday lighting permitted from
Thanksgiving through January 15th of the new year.
         (e)   The maximum illumination level on any vertical surface or roof
of a commercial building shall not exceed 3.0 average foot-candles of vertical
illuminance.
      (2)   Gas Station/Convenience Store Canopies.
         (a)   Light fixtures above 200 watts mounted on canopies shall be
recessed so that the lens cover is recessed or flush with the bottom surface of
the canopy and/or shielded by the fixture or the edge of the canopy so that
light is restricted to no more than 85 degrees from vertical.
         (b)   The illumination level for canopy lighting measured at the
pavement/ground level shall not exceed ten average maintained foot-candles.
      (3)   Parking Garages.
         (a)   Lighting located outside the structure shall comply with the
requirements of subsection (C)(1) below. Lighting located inside the structure
providing illumination that is visible from the exterior of the structure shall
be full cutoff or shielded by the structure, shield, visor, hood, or louvers in
a manner that contains light and glare within the structure and meets this
section's standards for light trespass.
         (b)   The illumination level of interior lighting that is visible from
the exterior of the structure shall comply with the intensities and uniformity
ratios in Section
155.9.14.
      (4)   Standard. All illumination of commercial building exteriors, gas
and convenience store canopies, and parking garages shall comply with the
intensities and uniformity ratios in Section
155.9.14 or by the standard within this section whichever is the more
stringent.
   (C)   Commercial Docks and Piers. Lighting for commercial docks and piers
shall minimize glare, trespass, and restrict up-lighting.
      (1)   All lighting fixtures must meet the following standards:
         (a)   Fixtures must be full cut-off or shielded and properly aimed so
that they control glare, do not produce up-lighting, and contain light to
prevent trespass on adjoining uplands, public rights-of-way and public trust
waters.
         (b)   Disabling glare that impairs the ability of boaters to safely
traverse public trust waters shall be prohibited.
         (c)   Mounting height shall be as low as practicable but in no case
shall the fixture be mounted higher than 25 feet above the lowest platform of
the dock or pier.
         (d)   Bare light sources (including but not limited to festive light
strands, incandescent, fluorescent, high intensity discharge, and neon) used to
outline commercial docks and piers are prohibited.
      (2)   Standard. All illumination of docks and piers shall comply with the
intensities and uniformity ratios in Section
155.9.14 or by the standard within this section whichever is the more
stringent.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.9.9 Residential Exterior Lighting.
   (A)   General. Fixtures using lamps (bulbs) of 60 watts/640 lumens or less
for incandescent bulbs (frosted) or 25 watts for clear lamps, such as typical
porch lights, may be installed at any location in residentially zoned areas.
   (B)   Security Lighting.
      (1)   Motion Activated Security Lighting. Unshielded flood and spot
lights, with lamps of 45 watts/520 lumens or less or their equivalent (this
information is specified on the retail packaging), installed for security and
activated by motion sensors are permitted. These unshielded lights must be
mounted and aimed in a manner that minimizes up-lighting and light trespass and
that is consistent with the security purposes of the lights.
      (2)   All other flood and spot light fixtures must have top and side
shields capable of containing light below the roof line of the house and
reducing light trespass on adjoining properties to the maximum extent feasible.
   (C)   Landscape and Decorative Lighting. Landscape and decorative lighting
using quarts halogen lamps of 36 watts/110 volt system or less is permitted (or
the equivalent low-voltage system rating), provided that the light is installed
and aimed to prevent up-lighting and light trespass and shielded to prevent
view of the bulb from the public right-of-way.
   (D)   Area lights or "dusk to dawn" lights are permitted, as follows:
      (1)   These lights must be full cut-off or shielded.
      (2)   If pole mounted on the ground, the fixture mounting height may be
no more than 16 feet above grade at the base of the pole.
      (3)   If wall mounted, the fixture mounting height may be no more than 16
feet above grade, or ten feet above any first floor of houses constructed on
pilings, measured from the level of the lowest habitable floor.
   (E)   Standard. All illumination of residential exteriors shall comply with
the intensities and uniformity ratios in Section
155.9.14 or by the standard within this section whichever is the more
stringent.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.9.10 Private Piers and Docks Including Residential.
   (A)   All lighting fixtures must meet the following standards:
      (1)   Fixtures must be full cut-off or shielded and properly aimed so
that they control glare, do not produce up-lighting, and contain light to
prevent trespass on adjoining uplands, public rights-of-way and public trust
waters.
      (2)   Disabling glare that impairs the ability of boaters to safely
traverse public trust waters shall be prohibited.
      (3)   Mounting height shall be as low as practicable but in no case shall
the fixture be mounted higher than 25 feet above the lowest platform of the
dock or pier.
      (4)   Bare light sources (including but not limited to festive light
strands, incandescent, fluorescent, high intensity discharge, and neon) used to
outline private piers and docks are prohibited.
   (B)   Standard. All illumination of parking lots, outdoor storage and
display areas and commercial driveways shall comply with the intensities and
uniformity ratios in Section 155.9.14 or by the standard within this section
whichever is the more stringent.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.9.11 Signs.
   Lighting of signs shall comply with the provisions of
Article 155.10. In addition, the following requirements apply:
   (A)   Lighting fixtures used to illuminate on-premise commercial signs must
be mounted at the top of the sign structure.
   (B)   The sign lighting fixture(s) must be fully-shielded to control glare,
to prevent encroachment on neighboring properties and rights-of-way and to
contain light so that it is projected below an horizontal plane extending
through the fixture.
   (C)   The height of the sign lighting fixture shall be no greater than the
maximum permitted height of the sign.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.9.12 Other Requirements.
   (A)   No lighting fixture or device may be operated in such a manner as to
constitute a hazard or danger to persons, or to the safe operation and
navigation of vehicles or watercraft.
   (B)   The following are exempt from the requirements of this section:
      (1)   Situations where federal and state laws, rules and regulations take
precedence;
      (2)   Location and operation of traffic control devices;
      (3)   Situations where there are special requirements, such as public
monuments and flag lighting, provided, however, that such lighting shall be
selected and installed to shield the lamp(s) from direct view to the greatest
extent possible and to minimize upward lighting and trespass; and
      (4)   Up lighting and security lighting owned by the town and installed
in order to illuminate trees, foliage and other structures located within a
public right-of-way or on public property.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1730, passed 6-12-14; Am. Ord. 1838,
passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.9.13 Nonconformities.
   (A)   This section shall be effective immediately upon adoption by the Board
of Aldermen of the town and shall supersede and replace all previous ordinances
pertaining to outdoor lighting.
   (B)   Any outdoor lighting not in conformity with the requirements of this
Ordinance and lawfully in place prior to the effective date of this Ordinance
shall be removed or rendered in compliance with this Ordinance within three
years of its effective date.
   (C)   After the effective date of this Ordinance, any lighting system that
replaces a lighting system not in conformity, or any lighting system that is
moved, must meet the standards of this Ordinance.
   (D)   Non-conforming lighting systems that cause disability glare to
motorists or cyclists or that directs light toward public waters so as to cause
disability glare to operators of watercraft shall be either fully-shielded as
directed in this section or re-directed within 90 days of notification so that
the lighting system does not cause a potential hazard to motorists, cyclists or
watercraft operators.
   (E)   Non-conforming lighting systems that cause light trespass or up-
lighting which can be corrected by redirecting the fixture shall be re-directed
to eliminate the trespass or up-lighting within 90 days of notification.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.9.14 Maximum Illumination Standards.
   The figures in this table represent maximum levels of illumination for
roadways, parking lots, and building exteriors.
 
                                                                       Horizontal
                                                                       Illuminance     Uniformity
                                                                       (Foot-candles)  Ratio
Type of Land Use                                                                       (Average
                                                                                       to
                                                                       Average Minimum Minimum)


Roadways                                                               0.6 -
   Major road                                                       1.6             3:1
   Local road                                                       0.3 -           6:1
                                                                       0.8
Parking Lots                                                           3.6     0.9     4:1
   High activity (i.e., fast food facilities)                       2.4     0.6     4:1
   Medium activity (i.e., office, residential complex, or hotel)    0.8     0.2     4:1
   Low activity (i.e., neighborhood shopping, schools, or churches)
Building Exteriors                                                     5
   Entrances, active (pedestrian, conveyances)                      1
   Entrances, inactive (locked doors)                               5
   Vital locations or structures                                    1
   Surroundings
Commercial Docks and Piers                                             5
 
   Note: Where conflict is found between the standards set forth in Sections
155.9.7 through
155.9.13 and this section, the more conservative, lower illuminance standard
will be the standard of choice.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
PART IV.
LANDSCAPE, BUFFERING, AND SCREENING
Section 155.9.15 Purpose.
   The purpose of this section is to establish minimum requirements to provide
adequate visual buffering and screening of structures, parking areas, and other
uses. The intention of these requirements is to satisfy the following
objectives:
   (A)   To provide attractive visual buffering between different land uses and
enhance town beautification.
   (B)   To safeguard and enhance property values and to protect public and
private investment by providing standards for the protection of existing
vegetation and root zones and the installation of new vegetation.
   (C)   To mitigate stormwater runoff and erosion, enhance air quality,
conserve energy, and aid in abating noise, glare and heat.
   (D)   To encourage the use of the recommended plants in this section as well
as native species and related cultivars of trees and shrubs.
   (E)   To promote long term plant health through proper installation methods.
   (F)   To promote visibility and safety.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.9.16 Applicability.
   (A)   
Article 155.9, Part IV shall be applicable when the following situations apply:
      (1)   Residential Development. When eight or greater parking spaces are
required for all phases of development excluding all residential developments
which contain solely detached single-family dwelling units.
      (2)   Nonresidential Development.
         (a)   New Construction. When a permitted use, a use or combination of
uses contained within a special use permit require ten or greater parking
spaces.
         (b)   Existing Development. When there is a change from an existing
use to a new use which requires additional parking and the new use requires ten
or greater parking spaces.
         (c)   Expansion of Structure. When there is an expansion of an
existing structure by greater than 10% of the gross floor area and that use
requires ten or greater parking spaces.
         (d)   Reconstruction of Structure. When there is damage or destruction
to an existing structure beyond 50% of its assessed value, the reconstruction
must conform to the new construction standards of this section.
         (e)   Expansion of Parking Facility. When there is an expansion of the
parking facility by a minimum of 10% of the parking with a minimum of ten total
spaces.
   (B)   This section shall become effective on all applicable conditions that
are met during a five-year cumulative period.
   (C)   This section shall not apply under any circumstance to properties in
the C-1, Commercial District.
   (D)   Bufferyards which abut a natural water feature shall be exempt from
the requirements of that bufferyard.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.9.17 Landscaping Requirements.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6767.jpg]
 
   Street Yard Requirements
      (1)    Minimum Standards: The minimum depth of all street yards shall be
7.5 feet. For every 50 linear feet of frontage, or fraction thereof, the street
yard shall contain a minimum of three shade trees and six intermediate shrubs.
Newly installed plant material shall be evenly distributed where possible.
      (2)   If there are existing trees in the proposed street yard area, the
UDO Administrator may grant credit toward the requirement for preservation of
those trees, provided their caliper is at least two inches or more.
      (3)   No planting material will be allowed which, at planting or
maturity, will impede vision between a height of three feet and ten feet in a
triangular area formed by a diagonal line between two points on a driveway or
public right-of-way, 20 feet from where they intersect.
   (B)   Parking Facility Requirements
      (1)   Minimum Standards: For parking facilities having 15 or more parking
spaces, at least 8% of the gross paved area shall be landscaped and located in
the interior of the facility.
      (2)   Planting islands shall include at least one shade tree or one small
tree and six small shrubs. At least 50% of the trees planted shall be shade
trees.
      (3)   In support of the above, the following standard shall apply to
interior plantings:
         (a)   All planting shall be evenly distributed throughout the parking
facility.
         (b)   All interior plantings shall be curbed or otherwise physically
protected.
         (c)   Consecutive parking spaces shall incorporate landscaped islands
no more than 15 spaces apart and at the ends of all parking rows. Landscaped
islands shall contain at least 100 square feet in area and be at least eight
feet in width, measured from back of curb to back of curb.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.9.18 Bufferyards.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6769.jpg]
 
   (A)   Type A Bufferyard Screening. This is a medium density screen intended
to block visual contact between uses and to create special separation. Type A
Bufferyard Screening shall be required between adjacent non-residential
properties.
      (1)   Type A1: Minimum of 7.5 feet wide. For every linear 100 feet, or
fraction thereof, the screen shall consist of a combination of a minimum of two
shade trees planted evenly at 40 feet on center, and ten evergreen intermediate
shrubs planted eight feet on center.
   -or-
      (2)   Type A2: Minimum of five feet wide. For every linear 100 feet, or
fraction thereof, the screen shall consist of a combination of at least three
shade trees planted evenly at 40 feet on center, and 15 evergreen intermediate
shrubs six feet on center.
   (B)   Type B Bufferyard Screening. This is a high density screen intended to
exclude virtually all visual contact between uses and to create a special
separation. Type B Bufferyard Screening shall be required when a non-
residential property is adjacent to a residential district or use.
      (1)   Type B1: Minimum width of 15 feet, except for the C-2 and C-
3 Districts which shall have a minimum of 7.5 feet. For every linear 100 feet,
or fraction thereof, the screen shall consist of a combination of a minimum of
three shade trees planted evenly at 30 feet on center, and 15 evergreen large
shrubs planted six feet on center.
   -or-
      (2)   Type B2: Minimum width of ten feet, except for the C-2 and C-
3 Districts which shall have a minimum of five feet. For every linear 100 feet,
or fraction thereof, the screen shall consist of a minimum of four shade trees
planted 30 feet on center, and 20 evergreen large shrubs five feet on center.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6771.jpg]
 
   (C)   Type C Bufferyard Screening. An opaque fence or opaque wall may be
used in place of 50% of required bufferyard screening plants.
      (1)   The design, color and material of any fence or screen used to meet
bufferyard requirements shall be approved by the Zoning Official. The side of
the fence facing the affected property owner shall be the finished side of the
fence. All planted screening required to be used in conjunction with a fence
shall be planted on the finished side of the fence facing the affected use, and
the remaining plantings shall be equally distributed in the bufferyard.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6773.jpg]
 
   (D)   Type D Bufferyard Screening. A combination earthen berm with
vegetation may be used as follows:
      (1)   An earthen berm may be used in conjunction with planted vegetation
provided that the combined height of the berm and planted vegetation shall be
an installed minimum height of six feet.
      (2)   The slope of the berm shall be stabilized with vegetation and no
steeper than 3:1. The height of the berm shall be a maximum of six feet, with a
level or rounded area on top of the berm. The berm shall be constructed of
compacted earth.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6776.jpg]
 
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3- 10-22)
Section 155.9.19 Additional Requirements for Buffers and for Yards in Which
Buffers Are Required.
   (A)   Existing Trees and Shrubs. Any existing trees or shrubs within
required bufferyards shall be encouraged to be utilized and supplemented as
necessary to meet bufferyard screening requirements. Existing trees and shrubs
intended to meet bufferyard screening requirements shall be protected from
detrimental actions such as vehicle or equipment movement, excavating and
grading, and installation of storage or structured elements.
   (B)   Uses in the Bufferyard. No activities shall occur in the bufferyard
except for maintenance of the bufferyard, required ingress and egress and the
installation and maintenance of water, sewer, electrical, and other utility
systems where the installation causes minimal disturbance of existing
vegetation.
   (C)   Uses in the Rear Yard and Side Yards Abutting a Residential Use. The
following uses shall be shielded from view from the property line of the
residential use by means of an opaque fence or opaque wall:
      (1)   Dumpsters or other trash holding areas.
      (2)   Outside storage areas.
      (3)   Loading/unloading areas.
   (D)   Encroachment into Setbacks.
      (1)   If an existing structure is located within a setback where the
implementation of the streetyard and/or bufferyard requirements are physically
impossible and the encroachment into the yard (streetyard bufferyard) allows
for a minimum of three feet of planting area, only the required shrubs shall be
planted.
      (2)   If the encroachment into the yard (streetyard or bufferyard) allows
for less than three feet of planting area, no planting will be required in that
yard; and
         (a)   For every yard (streetyard or bufferyard) in which the situation
exists, one additional small tree shall be planted in each streetyard or
bufferyard not encroached upon; or
         (b)   For every yard (streetyard or bufferyard) in which the situation
exists, five feet of additional yard width shall be added to a yard (streetyard
or bufferyard); or
         (c)   If all four yards (streetyard and three bufferyards) allow less
than three feet of planting area, no planting shall be required.
   (E)   It is recommended and encouraged that native species and related
cultivars be planted.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.9.20 Installation.
   (A)   Plants shall meet the standards for plant quality and size as defined
in the most recent version of the "American Standard for Nursery Stock" manual.
   (B)   Plants shall be installed per the installation details included in
Exhibit B of this Ordinance.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.9.21 Maintenance.
   (A)   All existing vegetation that is used to meet landscaping requirements,
all required plants, and all required berms shall be maintained by the owner of
the property on a continuing basis for the life of the development.
   (B)   Opaque fences or opaque walls shall be maintained, cleaned and
repaired by the owner of the property on a continuing basis for the life of the
development. Such fencing shall be kept free of litter and advertising.
   (C)   A new certificate of occupancy/building permit or a complaint will
result in an inspection for compliance.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.9.22 Landscape Plan.
   (A)   Landscaping plans shall be submitted at the time of application for
the building permit or special use permit, if a special use permit is required.
These plans shall contain the following information:
      (1)   Date of plan preparation.
      (2)   Project name and description of land use.
      (3)   Project owner and mailing address.
      (4)   A map at a scale of 1" = 50' or less showing:
         (a)   North arrow.
         (b)   Scale.
         (c)   Locations, dimensions and square footages of required
bufferyards and parking lot landscaping.
         (d)   Details of required landscaping showing species, dimensions, and
spacing of planted materials and the use and protection of existing vegetation.
         (e)   Location and square footage of structures and parking lots.
         (f)   Approximate locations of all trees greater than two-inches
caliper within required buffers and of all areas of natural vegetation to be
used as part of the buffer.
         (g)   Setbacks of all structures and specifications and shielding of
certain uses, as required.
         (h)   Proposed schedule for landscaping.
   (B)   No certificate of occupancy for any construction or renovation shall
be approved by the UDO Administrator until the required landscaping is
completed in accordance with the approved plan.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.9.23 Tree Preservation.
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   The purpose of this section is to protect important trees located
at Wrightsville Beach, to provide wildlife habitat, to provide stabilization of
sand and soil, and to provide a vital link in natural stormwater management
through absorption. Trees act as a filter helpful to maintaining the health and
quality of waters.
      (2)   The objectives of this section are as follows:
         (a)   Maintain and enhance property values;
         (b)   Preserve and enhance the visual appearance of the Town of
Wrightsville Beach;
         (c)   Preserve unique and productive coastal habitats;
         (d)   Reduce impacts of development on the town's stormwater system;
         (e)   Assist the town in preserving and enhancing the quality of its
estuarine waters; and
         (f)   Increase tree canopy.
   (B)   Tree Protection Permit Required.
      (1)   No protected tree shall be removed or be caused to be removed,
through injury or damage, from public or private property without first
obtaining and having an approved tree removal permit. Removal of any protected
tree is prohibited except in accordance with an approved tree protection plan.
The following tree removal activities may be undertaken without an approved
tree protection plan and that is consistent with good horticultural practices:
         (a)   Clearing or maintenance of town rights-of-way.
         (b)   Clearing or maintenance required by the town in accordance with
Section
155.2.6 (Site Visibility Triangle).
         (c)   Emergencies. During the period of an emergency such as a
hurricane, tropical storm, flood, ice storm or any other act of nature that
causes damage to a tree such that it imperils life, property, or other trees.
         (d)   A permit shall not be required in order to remove minor tree
limbs or to do other minor pruning.
         (e)   Hazardous trees. In the event that any tree shall be determined
to be in a hazardous or dangerous condition so as to endanger the public
health, welfare or safety, and requires immediate removal without delay, verbal
authorization may be given by the Planning and Inspections Department and the
trees removed without obtaining a written permit as herein required.
      (2)   Public utilities removing trees or cutting trees in conjunction
with construction, maintenance or repair of utility lines shall be subject to
the following requirements:
         (a)   A public utility shall submit a tree protection plan and shall
acquire a tree protection permit before removing any protected tree within a
utility easement or right-of-way. There shall be no charge for such permit.
         (b)   A public utility shall submit a tree protection plan and shall
acquire a tree protection permit before undertaking any tree trimming or
pruning activities in connection with the construction, maintenance or repair
of utility lines within a utility easement or right-of-way. There shall be no
charge for such permit.
   (C)   Tree Protection Permit Application and Procedure. A tree removal
application and tree protection plan must be filed with the town and approved
by the UDO Administrator or their designee prior to protected tree removal.
Requests for multiple tree removal shall be specified on the application. A
permit will be issued for any approved plan. The fee for submission of a plan
is set forth in the schedule of fees.
      (1)   Tree protection plans submitted in connection with applications for
permits for the removal, relocation or replacement of trees shall include the
following information and details which shall be summarized on the plan:
         (a)   Name of property owner.
         (b)   Date, including the month, day, and year that the original
drawing was completed and the month, day, and year for each revision to the
original drawing.
         (c)   Location of all existing or proposed structures, improvements
and site uses, property dimensions and referenced property lines, setback and
yard requirements as they apply to tree removal.
         (d)   The common names, sizes and location of all protected trees on
the site, designating the trees which are respectfully to be retained, removed,
relocated, or replaced. Trees proposed for removal shall be marked with an "X"
through the tree symbol in the document. Trees not marked shall be conserved.
         (e)   The location and type of trees that will be planted after
development or construction and the time frame for completion of such planting.
      (2)   The UDO Administrator or his or her designee will review the tree
protection plan according to the requirements in this section.
   (D)   Standards for Plan Approval or Denial. Protected trees are to be
retained and protected to the maximum extent feasible. The UDO Administrator or
his or her designee shall issue or deny a tree permit within five business days
of receiving application for such. No permit shall be issued for the removal of
protected trees unless one of the following conditions exists:
      (1)   The tree is located in the buildable area of a yard area where a
structure or improvements may be placed and it unreasonably restricts the
permitted use of the property and such trees cannot reasonably be relocated
elsewhere on the property. Necessity to remove trees in order to construct
proposed improvements as a result of the following:
         (a)   Need for access to the building site for construction equipment;
         (b)   Essential grade changes for surface water drainage and utility
installations;
         (c)   Location of proposed structure and required driveway(s); and
         (d)   Location of proposed parking spaces and associated circulation
required to be installed by
Article 155.9, Part I.
      (2)   The tree cannot be relocated on or off the site because of the age,
type, or size of the tree.
      (3)   The tree is diseased, injured, in danger of falling, too close to
existing or proposed structures, interferes with existing utility service,
creates unsafe vision clearance, or conflicts with other ordinances or
regulations.
      (4)   Where tree removal is consistent with an approved subdivision plat
or site plan.
      (5)   It is in the welfare of the general public that the tree be removed
for a reason other than set forth above.
      (6)   If a plan is approved that allows the removal of protected trees,
the approval shall be conditioned upon compliance with a mitigation plan
meeting the standards of the mitigation policy in subsection
155.9.23(F).
   (E)   Tree Protection During Construction. Tree preservation is a pre-
planning activity and will be thoroughly considered prior to development of
engineering and/or architectural plans and prior to initiation of construction
projects. Protected trees shall be guarded during development against the
following:
      (1)   Unnecessary cutting, breaking or skinning of roots.
      (2)   Skinning and bruising of bark.
      (3)   Excessive vehicular and foot traffic within drip lines.
      (4)   Parking vehicles within drip lines.
      (5)   During the land clearing and construction stage of development, the
developer shall erect and maintain protective barriers (to the Building
Inspector's specifications consistent with good management practices) around
all trees or groups of trees to be protected. The developer shall not allow the
movement of equipment or the storage of equipment, materials, debris or fill to
be placed within the protective barrier.
      (6)   During the construction stage of development, the developer shall
not allow the cleaning of equipment or material within the drip line of any
tree or groups of trees to be protected. Neither shall the developer allow the
disposal of waste materials such as paint, oil solvents, asphalt, concrete,
mortar and so on within the drip line of any tree or groups of trees.
      (7)   No attachments or wires other than those of a protective nature
shall be attached to any tree.
      (8)   Soil disturbances within the drip line of a protected tree shall be
limited to two inches in depth removed or two inches in depth added. Any soil
added under the drip line of the tree shall be a loamy soil mix to ensure
minimal compaction.
      (9)   During land clearing and construction stage of development, the UDO
Administrator shall periodically inspect the site to insure compliance with the
provisions of this section.
      (10)   Tree location and replacement activity permitted or required under
this section shall be done in accordance with standard forestry practices and
procedures, and all such plantings shall be reasonably maintained and attended
to promote successful establishment thereof.
   (F)   Tree Loss Mitigation Policy. To offset negative impacts to natural
environment, aesthetics, and property values of Wrightsville Beach and to
uphold the intent of this section, the following tree replacement schedule
shall be followed, which shall be in addition to any and all fees and/or fines
paid or incurred by a party that removes or alters a tree, the effect of which
is to eliminate it.
      (1)   All protected trees removed shall be replaced in accordance with
the following criteria:
         (a)   All trees required by this section, all trees on town-owned
property and other protected trees, excluding specimen trees, shall be replaced
in a one-to-one ratio with trees that at maturity will be of comparable DBH and
height of the tree removed. All replacement trees shall have a DBH of at least
three inches when planted.
         (b)   Specimen trees shall be replaced on a two-to-one ratio with
trees of the same species. All replacement trees shall have a DBH of at least
three inches when planted.
         (c)   All mitigation shall occur on the property where the tree was
removed. Mitigation in connection with construction shall be completed prior to
issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
      (2)   Tree loss mitigation shall not take effect when a tree removed is
that lost to natural causes, such as age, disease, or storm, or other causes
beyond the control of the landowner and property developer, such as a car crash
or fire for which no party is found responsible. Tree loss mitigation shall
take effect for all other trees allowed to be removed by permit from the UDO
Administrator or by variance from the Board of Adjustment as well as for those
trees altered or removed in violation of this section.
      (3)   A developer or property owner may be excused from the requirement
to install new required trees that would cause the lot in question to contain
more than five total protected trees, to include new and existing trees, if the
UDO Administrator determines that the size of a given property and presence of
existing vegetation is such that the introduction of a significant number of
new trees may be detrimental to both existing vegetation and proposed trees.
The decision of the UDO Administrator in such matter shall be final.
   (G)   Penalties.
      (1)   Any person who violates the provisions of Section
155.9.23, Tree Preservation, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor or
infraction punishable as provided in N.C.G.S. § 14-4 and shall be subject to a
maximum fine upon conviction of up to $2,500. Additionally, conviction thereof
shall be grounds for the revocation or suspension of any permit granted for the
construction or remodeling of any building or structure on the site so
involved.
      (2)   The violation of the provisions of Section
155.9.23, Tree Preservation, shall subject the offender to a civil penalty for
each violation as follows:
         (a)   The removal of each protected tree, excluding specimen trees,
without first obtaining an approved tree removal permit, shall subject the
offender to a civil penalty in the amount of $500.
         (b)   The removal of each specimen tree without first obtaining an
approved tree removal permit shall subject the offender to a civil penalty in
the amount of $1,000.
         (c)   The violation of any other provision of Section
155.9.23, Tree Preservation, shall subject the offender to a civil penalty of
$50 for each violation.
         (d)   Each day that a violation of Section
155.9.23, Tree Preservation, as described in subsection (G)(2)(c) above
continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense and shall be subject
to a fine of $50 per day.
      (3)   No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for
any improvements upon a property where the provisions of Section
155.9.23, Tree Preservation, have not been complied with. A stop work order
shall be issued until violations of the provisions of Section
155.9.23, Tree Preservation, are corrected and until all fines and penalties
are paid.
      (4)   The UDO Administrator may defer any civil penalty levied under the
provisions of Section
155.9.23, Tree Preservation, if the offender obtains an approved tree permit
and if the offender replants the disturbed area in accordance with an approved
tree protection plan meeting the requirements of Section
155.9.23, Tree Preservation.
      (5)   Damages to protected trees shall be repaired to the maximum extent
possible. Each tree removed, destroyed, or damaged in violation of Section
155.9.23, Tree Preservation, shall be considered a separate offense.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.9.24 Recommended Plant List.
   The following is a recommended plant list to be utilized in the preparation
of landscape plans to meet vegetation requirements. NOTE: Native vegetation is
preferred. Plants not listed may be accepted by the UDO Administrator if they
meet the standards defined by this section. Some plants are listed under
multiple categories as many of these plants are offered in numerous varieties.
Mature height and spread of each plant is contingent on the variety. It is
highly recommended that landscape plans be prepared by or in consultation with
a registered landscape architect or qualified landscape design professional.
   Key:
   E = EVERGREEN N = NATIVE
   D = DROUGHT TOLERANT
   S = SALT TOLERANT (MODERATE TO HIGH)
Botanical Name Common Name
Botanical Name               Common Name
Shade Tree - installed at 12-14 foot height and 2-inch caliper, mature height
greater than 30 feet
Fagus grandifolia            American Beech        N
Ginkgo biloba (male only)    Ginkgo                D, S
Gleditsia tricanthos inermis Thornless Honeylocust N, S
Liquidambar styraciflua      American Sweetgum     N, D
Magnolia grandiflora         Southern Magnolia     E, N, D, S
Nyssa sylvatica              Black Gum             N, S
Quercus nigra                Water Oak             N, D, S
Quercus shumardii            Shumard Oak           N, D, S
Quercus phellos              Willow Oak            N, D, S
Quercus virginiana           Live Oak              E, N, D, S
Taxodium distichum           Bald Cypress          N, D
Ulmus parvifolia             Lacebark Elm          D, S
 
Botanical Name Common Name
Botanical Name                     Common Name
Small Tree - installed at 8-10 foot height and 1-inch caliper, mature height
less than 30 feet
Acer buergerianum                  Trident Maple         D, S
Amelanchier canadensis             Shadblow Serviceberry N
Cercis canadensis                  Eastern Redbud        N, D
Cornus florida                     Dogwood               N
Fraximus americana                 White Ash             N
Ilex cassine                       Dahoon Holly          E, S
Ilex latifolia                     Lusterleaf Holly      E, D
Ilex opaca                         American Holly        E, N, D,
Ilex vomitoria                     Yaupon Holly          E, N, D,
Ilex x attenuate 'Fosters'         Foster's Holly        E, D, S
Ilex x 'Nellie Stevens'            Nellie Stevens Holly  E, D
Koelreuteria paniculata            Goldenraintree        D
Lagerstromia                       Crapemyrtle           D, S
Magnnolia grandiflora 'Little Gem' Little Gem Magnolia   E, N, D,
Magnolia virginiana                Sweetbay Magnolia     N
Magnolia x souangiana              Saucer Magnolia       D
Osmanthus americanus               Devilwood             E, N, S
Oxydendrum arboretum               Sourwood              N, S
Persea borbonia                    Redbay                E, N, S
Prunus caroliniana                 Carolina Cherrylaurel E, D, S
Quercus geminate                   Sand Live Oak         E, N, S
Vitex angus-castus                 Chastetree            D, S
Large Shrub - installed at 5-foot height, maintained height at 6-10 feet
Berberis julianae                  Wintergreen Barberry  E, D, S
Cleyera japonica                   Japanese Cleyera      E
Elaeagnus pungens                  Thorny Elaeagnus      E, S
Euonymous japonicas                Japanese Euonymus     E, S
 
Botanical Name Common Name
Botanical Name          Common Name
Ilex cornuta            Holly                 E, D, S
Ilex vomitoria          Yaupon Holly          E, N, D,
Ligustrum japonicum     Wax Leaf Privet       E, D, S
Ligustrum lucidum       Glossy Privet         E, D
Mahonia bealei          Leatherleaf Mahonia   E
Myrica cerifera         Southern Waxmyrtle    E, N, D,
Nerium oleander         Oleander              E, S
Osmanthus x fortunei    Fortunes Osmanthus    E, D
Photina serulata        Chinese Photina       E
Pittosporum tobira      Japanese Pittosporum  E, D, S
Podocarpus macrophyllus Chinese Podocarpus    E, D, S
Rhaphiolepis umbellata  Indian Hawthorn       E, S
Intermediate Shrub - installed at 36-inch height, maintained height at 4-
6 feet
Abelia x grandiflora    Glossy Abelia         E, D
Acuba japonica          Japanese Acuba        E, D, S
Clethera alnifolia      Sweet Pepperbush      N, S
Hydrangea macrophylla   Bigleaf Hydrangea     D, S
Ilex cornuta            Chinese Holly         E, D, S
Ilex crenata            Japanese Holly        E, D, S
Ilex glabra             Inkberry Holly        E, N, D
Juinperus chinensis     Chinese Juniper       E
Loropetalum chinensis   Chinese Fringe-Flower E
Nerium oleander         Oleander              E
Raphiolepis indica      Indian Hawthorn       E, S
Sabal minor             Dwarf Pametto         E, N, D
Viburnum suspensum      Sandwanka Viburnum    E, S
Yucca filamentosa       Yucca                 E, N, D, S
 
Botanical Name Common Name
Botanical Name                               Common Name
Small Shrub - installed at 18-inch height, maintained height at 3-4 feet
Abelia x grandiflora (dwarf var.)            Glossy Abelia         E, D
Acuba japonica (dwarf var.)                  Japanese Acuba        E, D
Berberis thunbergii                          Japanese Barberry     D
Buxus microphylla var. koreana               Korean Boxwood        E, D
Euonymus japonicus 'Microphyllus Variegatus' Var. Boxleaf Euonymus E
Gardenia jasminoides 'Radicans'              Cape Jasmine          E, D
Ilex crenata 'Soft Touch'                    Japanese Holly        E, D, S
Ilex cornuta 'Carissa'                       Carissa Holly         E, D, S
Ilex vomitoria 'Nana"                        Dwarf Yaupon Holly    E, N, D, S
Itea virginica                               Virginia Sweetspire   N, D
Jasminium nudiflorum                         Winter Jasmine        E, D
Juniperus chinensis                          Chinese Juniper       E, S
Nandina domestica                            Dwarf Nandina         E, D
Pieris japonica                              Japanese Pieris       E
Pittosporum tobira                           Japanese Pittosporum  E, S
Raphiolepis indica                           Indian Hawthorn       E, D, S
Spirea japonica                              Japanese Spirea       D
Spirea nipponica                             Snowmound Spirea      D
Yucca filamentosa                            Yucca                 E, N, D, S
 
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
ARTICLE 155.10
SIGN REGULATIONS
NOTE: PLEASE REFER TO
EXHIBIT A FOR DEFINITIONS
Section 155.10.1 Prohibited Signs.
   (A)   Spectacular signs which are flashing or intermittently illuminated or
moving signs are prohibited in all districts. No strings of electric light
bulbs shall be permitted in any district.
   (B)   No signs shall be permitted advertising or directing persons to
services, places, or products not in the town limits. Exception: "For Rent" or
"For Sale" signs, located on specific places for rent or for sale, of real
estate agents located outside the town limits.
   (C)   No roof signs, as defined in Exhibit A, shall be permitted in any
district.
   (D)   No billboard signs, as defined in Exhibit A, shall be permitted in any
district.
   (E)   Any sign existing prior to adoption of this Ordinance, which under the
terms of this section would be nonconforming, shall be considered a conforming
sign for the purposes of this section, until/unless said sign is altered.
   (F)   Portable signs as defined in Exhibit A, except as otherwise permitted
herein, shall not be permitted in any district.
   (G)   No sign shall make use of the words "STOP," "SLOW," "CAUTION,"
"DANGER," or any other word, phrase, symbol, or character in such manner as is
reasonably likely to be confused with traffic directional and regulatory signs.
   (H)   No sign shall be erected so that by its location, color, nature, or
message is likely to be confused with or obstruct the view of traffic signals
or signs, or is likely to be confused with the warning lights of an emergency
or public safety vehicle.
   (I)   No flags, festoons, balloons or banners shall be allowed in any
district except as may be allowed as exempt signs under Section
155.10.2.
   (J)   No sign shall be permitted within the rights-of-way of streets or
roads except those designated for the regulations of vehicular and pedestrian
traffic and which are approved by the "Manual of Uniform Traffic Control
Devices for Streets and Highways."
   (K)   No mobile signs, as defined in Exhibit A, shall be permitted in any
district.
   (L)   No snipe signs, as defined in Exhibit A, shall be permitted in any
district.
   (M)   No wind signs, as defined in Exhibit A, shall be permitted in any
district.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1788, passed 11-14-19; Am. Ord. 1838,
passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.10.2 Exempt Signs.
   The following signs are exempt from regulation and permit requirements under
this section, provided such signs comply with the provisions of Section
155.10.1.
   (A)   Signs bearing only property identification numbers and names, post
office box numbers, names of occupants of the premises on which the signs are
located, or other identification of premises not of a commercial nature,
provided such signs are not illuminated and do not exceed two signs per zoning
lot nor two square feet in area per display surface.
   (B)   Official government flags and insignia of a government, when flown or
displayed in accordance with the patriotic customs set forth in 4 USC Section
510, as amended, with the consent of either the owner of the property on which
such flags or insignia are flown or displayed or any person having lawful
control of such property and where such flags and insignia do not exceed 100
square feet in area.
   (C)   Legal notices, identification and informational signs, and traffic
directional or regulatory signs erected by or on behalf of a governmental body.
   (D)   Memorial signs or tablets, and names and construction dates of
buildings when cut into any masonry surface.
   (E)   For all properties zoned R-1 or R-2 Residential District the following
signs shall be considered exempt:
      (1)   Up to a maximum of two signs of no more than four square feet each.
All such signs shall be non-illuminated or indirectly illuminated. Examples
include but are not limited to:
         (a)   Directional or instructional signs directing and guiding traffic
and parking on private property on which the signs are located;
         (b)   Signs advertising yard or garage sales; or
         (c)   Signs stating the property on which they are located is for sale
or rent.
      (2)   For those permitted non-conforming properties located in a R-
2 Residential District and containing more than two residential units, the
identification sign(s) for the property that is/are in existence as of November
14, 2019 shall be permitted to continue in existence and may be repaired or
replaced so long as the size and location of the sign(s) and display on the
sign(s) is not altered.
   (F)   (1)   For all properties zoned non-residential (except properties
zoned S-1 Shore Zone and P-1 Conservation Zone), each property is allowed no
more than two signs of no more than four square feet each. The design of such
signs shall be limited to menu and sandwich board signs, sidewalk or curb
signs, A-frame signs and yard signs. Signs may be illuminated. Examples
include, but are not limited to:
         (a)   Real estate signs advertising the sale, rental, or lease of the
premises on which said signs are located;
         (b)   Public event announcements;
         (c)   Signs announcing grand openings; or
         (d)   Directional signs.
      (2)   Nothing contained in this subsection (F) shall be deemed to limit
or restrict other signs permitted for properties zoned non-residential and
found elsewhere in this
Article 155.10.
   (G)   Fence wraps displaying signage when affixed to a perimeter fence at a
construction site are exempt from zoning regulations pertaining to signage
until the earlier of (i) a certificate of occupancy is issued for the final
portion of any construction at the site or (ii) 24 months from the date of
installation of the fence wrap. If construction is not completed at the end of
24 months from the time the fence wrap was installed, the fence wrap may
continue to be affixed to the perimeter fence but the town may regulate said
signage. (See N.C.G.S. § 160D-908)
   (H)   Information bulletin boards erected by or on behalf of a governmental
body on public property or rights-of-way in the Town Center districts for the
display of handbills or posters of community interest, provided such bulletin
boards contain no more than six square feet in area per sign display surface,
and a maximum of 72 square feet per bulletin board.
   (I)   Signs, banners, flags, and pennants used in connection with a group
activity function as approved by the Board of Aldermen provided that display of
the signage shall not exceed 60 days and the signage is only used on property
owned by the town or in the public right-of-way. The Board of Aldermen shall
review and approve the signage display as part of the special event permit
review process.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1788, passed 11-14-19; Am. Ord. 1838,
passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.10.3 Marquee Signs.
   Marquee signs shall be constructed entirely of metal or noncombustible
material and may be attached to, or hung from a marquee. Such signs, when hung
from a marquee, shall be at least eight feet at its lowest level above the
sidewalk or ground level. Further, no such sign shall extend outside the line
of the marquee, though the sign may extend the entire length and width of the
marquee, provided the sign does not have a vertical dimension greater than two
feet on a marquee up to 40 feet in length, nor a vertical dimension greater
than three feet on a marquee 40 feet or more in length.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.10.4 Shore Zone and Conservation Zone Signs Permitted.
   (A)   One sign not exceeding four square feet in size shall be permitted on
properties zoned S-1 Shore Zone without a permit.
   (B)   One sign not exceeding four square feet in size shall be permitted on
the water side end of piers located on property zoned P-1 Conservation Zone.
(Ord. 1788, passed 11-14-19; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.10.5 Signs Permitted in All Districts Except the S-1 Shore Zone and
P-1 Conservation Zone.
   (A)   The following signs shall be permitted in all districts except the S-
1 Shore Zone and P-1 Conservation Zone:
      (1)   Directional and Informational Signs. Directional and informational
signs erected and maintained by public agencies and governmental bodies.
      (2)   Construction Signs. During the construction, repair, or alteration
of a structure, one temporary construction sign may be placed within the lot
side of the required yard setback as a ground or a wall sign. The dimensions of
the sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in area. All construction site signs
shall be removed when the building has been approved for occupancy by the UDO
Administrator.
      (3)   Political Signs.
         (a)   Compliant political signs are permitted during the period
beginning on the thirtieth day before the beginning date of "one-stop" early
voting under N.C.G.S. § 163-227.2 and ending on the tenth day after the primary
or election day. Persons may place political signs in the right-of-way of the
state highway system and town streets as provided in this section. The
permittee must obtain the permission of any property owner of a residence,
business, or religious institution fronting the right-of-way where a sign would
be erected. Signs must be placed in accordance with the following and must be
removed by the end of the period prescribed above.
            1)   No sign shall be permitted in the right-of-way of a fully
controlled access highway;
            2)   No sign shall be closer than three feet from the edge of the
pavement of the road;
            3)   No sign shall obscure motorist visibility at an intersection;
            4)   No sign shall be higher than 42 inches above the edge of the
pavement of the road;
            5)   No sign shall be larger than 864 square inches; and
            6)   No sign shall obscure or replace another sign.
         (b)   Any political sign remaining in the right-of-way of the state
highway system or in the right-of-way of town streets more than 30 days after
the end of the period described hereinabove shall be deemed unlawfully placed
and abandoned property and a person may remove and dispose of such political
sign without penalty.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1788, passed 11-14-19; Am. Ord. 1838,
passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.10.6 Business and Name Signs.
   Business signs and name signs shall be permitted on the premises of the
business in districts in which the principal use is permitted subject to the
following limitations:
   (A)   One permanent free-standing sign one-half square foot to each linear
foot of lot frontage, not to exceed a maximum of 64 square feet on a lot with
single street frontage. Two permanent free-standing signs one-half square foot
to each linear foot of lot frontage, not to exceed a maximum of 64 square feet
on a lot with double street frontage. Freestanding signs shall not exceed eight
feet in height above the centerline elevation of the adjacent street right-of-
way. It shall be the responsibility of the person applying for the sign permit
to determine and verify sign, ground and street right-of-way centerline
elevations. Such free-standing sign, for churches only, may be located on a lot
within 300 feet of the main entrance of the church and on a lot owned, used and
occupied solely by the church.
   (B)   Individual uses shall be allowed canopy, wall, window, pedestrian, and
awning signs, in the total aggregate area per building front of one square foot
per linear foot of building frontage, not to exceed a maximum combined sign
area of 32 square feet per each individual use. This shall be in addition to
sign area allowed for a free-standing signs(s).
   (C)   Wall signs attached to walls of solid masonry, concrete, or stone,
shall be safely and securely attached by means of hot dipped galvanized or
stainless steel metal anchors, bolts, or expansion screws of not less than 3/
8 inch in diameter and shall be embedded at least five inches. No wooden blocks
shall be used for anchorage, except in the case of wall signs attached to
buildings with walls of wood. No wall sign shall be supported by anchorages
secured to an unbraced parapet wall.
   (D)   All projecting signs, whether they project from any building wall,
canopy, or similar structure shall be positioned so that the farthest extended
part of a sign shall be at least three feet from the existing curb line
measured from the building side of the curb line. All projecting signs shall be
constructed entirely of metal or other noncombustible material and securely
attached to a building, canopy or similar structure by hot dipped galvanized or
stainless steel metal supports such as bolts, anchors, supports, chains, guys,
or steel rods.
   (E)   If suspended the sign shall be placed no higher than one building
story and shall hang at least eight feet above the sidewalk levels. Marquees,
canopies and other similar type structures shall be placed no higher than one
building story nor shall they hang closer than ten feet to any sidewalk level.
Marquee signs shall be constructed entirely of metal or noncombustible material
and may be attached to, or hung from a marquee, and the signs when hung from a
marquee shall be at least eight feet at its lowest level above the sidewalk or
ground level, and further, no sign shall extend outside the line of the
marquee. Marquee signs may be attached to the sides and front of a marquee, and
the sign may extend the entire length and width of the marquee; provided, that
the sign does not have a vertical dimension greater than two feet, on a marquee
up to 40 feet in length, nor a vertical dimension greater than three feet on a
marquee 40 feet or more in length.
   (F)   Display lighting shall be shielded so as to prevent a direct view of
the light source from a residence in a residential district. No intermittent
lighting effects may be utilized. A lighted wall sign shall not be located
closer than 50 feet to residentially zoned property. No sign within 150 feet of
residentially zoned property shall be illuminated between 1:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m. Eastern Standard Time.
   (G)   Free-standing signs shall not be located less than ten feet from the
street lot line. No freestanding sign shall be located in a required side yard
or within ten feet of the side property line (refer to State Building Code for
construction standards which apply).
   (H)   Temporary signs, banners, placards, decorations, and the like,
constructed of light materials for promotion of civic, political, or charitable
enterprises or events may be displayed in any business district for periods not
exceeding ten days continuously and totaling not more than 30 days in any one
year, except for public holiday decorations. However, no signs may be erected
on or affixed to public property.
   (I)   Where a lot contains more than one principal use or establishment, the
provisions of this section shall apply to the lot as a whole, and the owner of
the lot shall be responsible for allocating permitted signs and display surface
areas among the individual uses or establishments. A sign plan shall be
submitted to the UDO Administrator for such lot to show all signs located or
proposed thereon and shall be designed so that all signs are in harmony and
consistent with each other.
   (J)   In the C-1 Zoning District, only wall, marquee, window, awning, and
canopy signs shall be allowed.
   (K)   Service stations or any business selling gasoline are allowed
additional signs listed below:
      (1)   Gasoline price and/or self-service signs located at and secured to
each pump island and not exceeding nine square feet per sign side.
      (2)   Each gasoline pump shall be allowed to display only the brand name
or emblem of the gasoline and shall not exceed the limits on the face of the
pump.
      (3)   A North Carolina inspections sign shall be permitted on the
business site provided said sign does not exceed four square feet per side.
   (L)   Additional provisions for signs in shopping centers.
      (1)   All free-standing signs in shopping centers shall have a landscaped
area located at the base of the sign. The landscaped area shall equal at least
twice the area of the sign. The landscaped material shall be a planting of
shrubs and flowers not over three feet in height and covering 50% of the
landscaped area. All landscaped areas shall be continually maintained.
      (2)   Window signs in shopping centers may not exceed 30% of the window
or door on which the signs are located and may not be internally lighted.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1715, passed 8-8-13; Am. Ord. 1838, passed
3-10-22)
Section 155.10.7 Permits.
   (A)   No sign shall be erected, constructed, altered, or maintained except
as provided in this section until after a permit for the same has been issued
by the UDO Administrator and the fee paid.
   (B)   No permit fee shall be required for a single sign over a show window
or door of a store or business establishment, announcing without display or
elaboration, only the name of the proprietor and nature of business; provided,
that the sign is not over six feet square in area.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.10.8 Unsafe Signs.
   Should any sign become insecure or in danger of falling or otherwise unsafe
in the opinion of the UDO Administrator, the owner thereof, or the person or
firm maintaining the sign, shall, upon written notice from the UDO
Administrator, forthwith in the case of immediate danger and in any case within
ten days, secure the sign in a manner to be approved by the UDO Administrator,
in conformity with the provisions of this Article or remove the sign. If the
order is not complied with within ten days, the UDO Administrator shall remove
the sign at the expense of the owner or lessee thereof.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.10.9 Maintenance.
   All signs for which a permit is required, together with all their supports,
braces, guys, and anchors shall be kept in repair and unless of galvanized or
noncorroding metal shall be thoroughly painted at least once every two years.
The UDO Administrator may order the removal of any sign that is not maintained
in accordance with the provisions of this section. The removal shall be at the
expense of the owner or lessee.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.10.10 Removal of Unlawful Signs.
   In case any sign shall be installed, erected, or constructed in violation of
any of the terms of this Article, the UDO Administrator shall notify by
registered mail or written notice served personally, the owner or lessee
thereof to alter the sign so as to comply with these zoning regulations and to
secure the necessary permit therefor, or to remove the sign. If the order is
not complied with within ten days, the UDO Administrator shall remove the sign
at the expense of the owner or lessee thereof.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.10.11 Location Restriction.
   (A)   No outdoor advertising display sign shall be erected, constructed, or
maintained so as to obstruct any fire escape or any window or door or opening
used as a means of egress or so as to prevent free passage from one part of a
roof to any other part thereof. No sign shall be attached in any form, shape,
or manner to a fire escape, nor be placed in a manner as to interfere with any
opening required for legal ventilation.
   (B)   Combustible freestanding signs and roof signs, as defined in the North
Carolina Building Code Sections 2301.2(B) and (C), shall not be permitted in
Fire District No. I and Fire District No. II.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)   
Section 155.10.12 Structural Requirements.
   Structural requirements for signs shall be those requirements found in the
North Carolina State Building Code Sections 2302.1, 2302.2, and 2302.3.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.10.13 Construction of Freestanding Signs.
   The following construction requirements shall apply to freestanding signs:
   (A)   Lighting reflectors may project beyond the face of the sign.
   (B)   Any person or persons, partnership, firm, or corporation occupying any
vacant lot or premises by means of a ground sign, shall be subject to the same
duties and responsibilities as the owner of the lot or premises, with respect
to keeping the same clean, sanitary, inoffensive, free and clear of all
obnoxious substances and unsightly conditions on the ground in the vicinity of
the ground sign on the premises for which they may be responsible.
   (C)   Wherever anchors or supports consist of wood embedded in the soil, the
wood shall be pressure-treated with an approved preservative.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.10.14 Exterior Lights and Signs.
   (A)   No exterior electric, gas, neon, or other illuminated advertising
sign, whether by reflection or otherwise, shall remain burning between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
   (B)   The illuminating parts of lighting signs or advertisements, where
their rays or beams fall upon a residence, shall be so low in power and
intensity as not to create a glare or offensive light on the residence. If a
business house or boardinghouse desires to have an illumination which would
ordinarily create a glare or be a disturbance to a residence of the town, the
illumination on the signs or advertising shall be directed, hooded, or shaded
so that the full force of the beams or rays from them shall not fall upon any
residence within 200 feet of the sign.
   (C)   All lighted signs shall comply with the provisions of
Article 155.9, Part III, Outdoor Lighting Ordinance.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.10.15 Nonconforming Signs.
   Any sign existing prior to the date of adoption of this Ordinance, which
under the terms of this Article would be nonconforming, shall be considered a
conforming sign for the purposes of this Article. Nothing in this section shall
be construed in any way that will allow the continued existence of any signs
found to be unsafe under the provisions of Section
155.10.8 of this Article.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
ARTICLE 155.11
ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS
PART I.
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION ORDINANCE
Section 155.11.1 Statutory Authorization.
   The Legislature of the State of North Carolina has in Part 6, Article 21 of
N.C.G.S. Ch. 143; Articles 7 and 11, Part 2 of Article 9 and Parts 2 and 3 of
Article 13 of N.G.C.S. Ch. 160D; and Article 8 of N.C.G.S. Ch. 160A, delegated
to local governmental units the responsibility to adopt regulations designed to
promote the public health, safety, and general welfare. Therefore, the Board of
Alderman of Town of Wrightsville Beach, North Carolina, does ordain as follows.
(Ord. 1780, passed 7-10-18; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.11.2 Findings of Fact.
   (A)   The flood prone areas within the jurisdiction of the Town of
Wrightsville Beach are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of
life, property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and
governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures of flood protection
and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the
public health, safety, and general welfare.
   (B)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions
in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities and by the
occupancy in flood prone areas of uses vulnerable to floods or other hazards.
(Ord. 1780, passed 7-10-18; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.11.3 Statement of Purpose.
   It is the purpose of this Ordinance to promote public health, safety, and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions within flood prone areas by provisions designed to:
   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety, and
property due to water or erosion hazards or that result in damaging increases
in erosion, flood heights or velocities;
   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities that
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging, and all other development that may
increase erosion or flood damage; and
   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers that will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands.
(Ord. 1780, passed 7-10-18; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.11.4 Objectives.
   The objectives of this Ordinance are to:
   (A)   Protect human life, safety, and health;
   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (D)   Minimize prolonged business losses and interruptions;
   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities (i.e. water and gas
mains, electric, telephone, cable and sewer lines, streets, and bridges) that
are located in flood prone areas;
   (F)   Minimize damage to private and public property due to flooding;
   (G)   Make flood insurance available to the community through the National
Flood Insurance Program;
   (H)   Maintain the natural and beneficial functions of floodplains;
   (I)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood prone areas; and
   (J)   Ensure that potential buyers are aware that property is in a special
flood hazard area.
(Ord. 1780, passed 7-10-18; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.11.4.1 Definitions.
   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this Ordinance
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this Ordinance it's most reasonable application.
Accessory Structure (Appurtenant Structure)
   A structure located on the same parcel of property as the principal
structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal
structure. Garages, carports and storage sheds are common urban accessory
structures. Pole barns, hay sheds and the like qualify as accessory structures
on farms, and may or may not be located on the same parcel as the farm dwelling
or shop building.
Addition (to an existing building)
   An extension or increase in the floor area or height of a building or
structure.
Alteration of a Watercourse
   A dam, impoundment, channel relocation, change in channel alignment,
channelization, or change in cross-sectional area of the channel or the channel
capacity, or any other form of modification which may alter, impede, retard or
change the direction and/or velocity of the riverine flow of water during
conditions of the base flood.
Appeal
   A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator's interpretation of
any provision of this Ordinance.
Area of Shallow Flooding
   A designated Zone AO or AH on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM)
with base flood depths determined to be from one to three feet. These areas are
located where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of
flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be
evident.
Area of Special Flood Hazard
   See Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA).
Base Flood
   The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Base Flood Elevation (BFE)
   A determination of the water surface elevations of the base flood as
published in the flood insurance study. When the BFE has not been provided in a
special flood hazard area, it may be obtained from engineering studies
available from a federal, state, or other source using FEMA approved
engineering methodologies. This elevation, when combined with the freeboard,
establishes the regulatory flood protection elevation.
Basement
   Any area of the building having its floor sub grade (below ground level) on
all sides.
Breakaway Wall
   A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is
intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral
loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building
or the supporting foundation system.
Building
   See Structure.
Chemical Storage Facility
   A building, portion of a building, or exterior area adjacent to a building
used for the storage of any chemical or chemically reactive products.
Coastal Area Management Act (CAMA)
   North Carolina's Coastal Area Management Act, this act, along with the
Dredge and Fill Law and the Federal Coastal Zone Management Act, is managed
through North Carolina Department of Environmental Quality (NCDEQ) Division of
Coastal Management (DCM).
Coastal A Zone (CAZ)
   An area within a special flood hazard area, landward of a V zone or landward
of an open coast without mapped V zones; in a Coastal A Zone, the principal
source of flooding must be astronomical tides, storm surges, seiches, or
tsunamis, not riverine flooding. During the base flood conditions, the
potential for wave heights shall be greater than or equal to 1.5 feet. Coastal
A Zones are not normally designated on FIRMs. (See Limit of Moderate Wave
Action (LiMWA))
Coastal Barrier Resources System (CBRS)
   Consists of undeveloped portions of coastal and adjoining areas established
by the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (CoBRA) of 1982, the Coastal Barrier
Improvement Act (CBIA) of 1990, and subsequent revisions, and includes areas
owned by federal or state governments or private conservation organizations
identified as otherwise protected areas (OPA).
Coastal High Hazard Area
   A special flood hazard area extending from offshore to the inland limit of a
primary frontal dune along an open coast and any other area subject to high
velocity wave action from storms or seismic sources. The area is designated on
a FIRM, or other adopted flood map as determined in Article 3, Section B of
this Ordinance, as Zone VE.
Design Flood
   See Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation.
Development
   Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but
not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling,
grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or
materials.
Development Activity
   Any activity defined as development which will necessitate a floodplain
development permit. This includes buildings, structures, and non-structural
items, including (but not limited to) fill, bulkheads, piers, pools, docks,
landings, ramps, and erosion control/stabilization measures.
Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM)
   The digital official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA), on which both the special flood hazard areas and the
risk premium zones applicable to the community are delineated.
Disposal
   As defined in N.C.G.S. § 130A-290(a)(6), the discharge, deposit, injection,
dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing of any solid waste into or on any land
or water so that the solid waste or any constituent part of the solid waste may
enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters,
including groundwaters.
Elevated Building
   A non-basement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above
ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or
columns.
Encroachment
   The advance or infringement of uses, fill, excavation, buildings, structures
or development into a special flood hazard area, which may impede or alter the
flow capacity of a floodplain.
Existing Building and Existing Structure
   Means any building and/or structure for which the start of construction
commenced before June 12, 1970.
Existing Manufactured Home Park or Manufactured Home Subdivision
   A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) was completed before the initial effective date of the
floodplain management regulations adopted by the community.
Flood or Flooding
   A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from:
   (A)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
   (B)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM)
   An official map of a community, issued by the FEMA, on which the special
flood hazard areas and the floodways are delineated. This official map is a
supplement to and shall be used in conjunction with the flood insurance rate
map (FIRM).
Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM)
   An official map of a community, issued by the FEMA, where the boundaries of
the special flood hazard areas have been defined as Zone A.
Flood Insurance
   The insurance coverage provided under the National Flood Insurance Program.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)
   An official map of a community, issued by the FEMA, on which both the
special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community are delineated, (see also DFIRM).
Flood Insurance Study (FIS)
   An examination, evaluation, and determination of flood hazards,
corresponding water surface elevations (if appropriate), flood hazard risk
zones, and other flood data in a community issued by the FEMA. The flood
insurance study report includes flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs) and flood
boundary and floodway maps (FBFMs), if published.
Flood Prone Area
   See Floodplain.
Flood Zone
   A geographical area shown on a flood hazard boundary map or flood insurance
rate map that reflects the severity or type of flooding in the area.
Floodplain
   Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source.
Floodplain Administrator
   The individual appointed to administer and enforce the floodplain management
regulations.
Floodplain Development Permit
   Any type of permit that is required in conformance with the provisions of
this Ordinance, prior to the commencement of any development activity.
Floodplain Management
   The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures
for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural
resources in the floodplain, including, but not limited to, emergency
preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and
open space plans.
Floodplain Management Regulations
   This Ordinance and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations,
building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances, and other
applications of police power. This term describes federal, state or local
regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for preventing
and reducing flood loss and damage.
Floodproofing
   Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or
adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate
or improved real property, water and sanitation facilities, structures, and
their contents.
Flood-resistant Material
   Any building product [material, component or system] capable of withstanding
direct and prolonged contact (minimum 72 hours) with floodwaters without
sustaining damage that requires more than low-cost cosmetic repair. Any
material that is water-soluble or is not resistant to alkali or acid in water,
including normal adhesives for above-grade use, is not flood-resistant.
Pressure-treated lumber or naturally decay-resistant lumbers are acceptable
flooring materials. Sheet-type flooring coverings that restrict evaporation
from below and materials that are impervious, but dimensionally unstable are
not acceptable. Materials that absorb or retain water excessively after
submergence are not flood-resistant. Please refer to Technical Bulletin 2,
Flood Damage-Resistant Materials Requirements, and available from the FEMA.
Class 4 and 5 materials, referenced therein, are acceptable flood- resistant
materials.
Floodway
   The channel of a river or other watercourse, including the area above a
bridge or culvert when applicable, and the adjacent land areas that must be
reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing
the water surface elevation more than one foot.
Floodway Encroachment Analysis
   An engineering analysis of the impact that a proposed encroachment into a
floodway or non-encroachment area is expected to have on the floodway
boundaries and flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
The evaluation shall be prepared by a qualified North Carolina licensed
engineer using standard engineering methods and models.
Freeboard
   The height added to the BFE to account for the many unknown factors that
could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a
selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, blockage of
bridge or culvert openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the
watershed. The BFE plus the freeboard establishes the regulatory flood
protection elevation.
Functionally Dependent Facility
   A facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is
located in close proximity to water, limited to a docking or port facility
necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding,
or ship repair. The term does not include long-term storage, manufacture,
sales, or service facilities.
Hazardous Waste Management Facility
   As defined in N.C.G.S. Ch. 130A, Article 9, a facility for the collection,
storage, processing, treatment, recycling, recovery, or disposal of hazardous
waste.
Highest Adjacent Grade (HAG)
   The highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction,
immediately next to the proposed walls of the structure.
Historic Structure
   Any structure that is:
   (A)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
   (B)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of Interior as
contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district
or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a
registered historic district;
   (C)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic landmarks in
communities with a "Certified Local Government (CLG) Program"; or
   (D)   Certified as contributing to the historical significance of a historic
district designated by a community with a "Certified Local Government (CLG)
Program."
   Certified Local Government (CLG) Programs are approved by the U.S.
Department of the Interior in cooperation with the North Carolina Department of
Cultural Resources through the State Historic Preservation Officer as having
met the requirements of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 as
amended in 1980.
Letter of Map Change (LOMC)
   An official determination issued by FEMA that amends or revises an effective
flood insurance rate map or flood insurance study. Letters of map change
include:
   (A)   Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA): An official amendment, by letter, to
an effective National Flood Insurance Program map. A LOMA is based on technical
data showing that a property had been inadvertently mapped as being in the
floodplain, but is actually on natural high ground above the base flood
elevation. A LOMA amends the current effective flood insurance rate map and
establishes that a specific property, portion of a property, or structure is
not located in a special flood hazard area.
   (B)   Letter of Map Revision (LOMR): A revision based on technical data that
may show changes to flood zones, flood elevations, special flood hazard area
boundaries and floodway delineations, and other planimetric features.
   (C)   Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F): A determination that a
structure or parcel of land has been elevated by fill above the BFE and is,
therefore, no longer located within the special flood hazard area. In order to
qualify for this determination, the fill must have been permitted and placed in
accordance with the community's floodplain management regulations.
   (D)   Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR): A formal review and
comment as to whether a proposed project complies with the minimum NFIP
requirements for such projects with respect to delineation of special flood
hazard areas. A CLOMR does not revise the effective flood insurance rate map or
flood insurance study; upon submission and approval of certified as-built
documentation, a letter of map revision may be issued by FEMA to revise the
effective FIRM.
Light Duty Truck
   Any motor vehicle rated at 8,500 pounds gross vehicular weight rating or
less which has a vehicular curb weight of 6,000 pounds or less and which has a
basic vehicle frontal area of 45 square feet or less as defined in 40 CFR
86.082-2 and is:
   (A)   Designed primarily for purposes of transportation of property or is a
derivation of such a vehicle;
   (B)   Designed primarily for transportation of persons and has a capacity of
more than 12 persons; or
   (C)   Available with special features enabling off-street or off-highway
operation and use.
Limit of Moderate Wave Action (LiMWA)
   The boundary line given by FEMA on coastal map studies marking the extents
of Coastal A Zones (CAZ).
Lowest Adjacent Grade (LAG)
   The lowest elevation of the ground, sidewalk or patio slab immediately next
to the building, or deck support, after completion of the building.
Lowest Floor
   The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An
unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles,
building access, or limited storage in an area other than a basement area is
not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such an enclosure is
not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-
elevation design requirements of this Ordinance.
Manufactured Home
   A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a
permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent
foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured
home" does not include a recreational vehicle.
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision
   A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Market Value
   The building value, not including the land value and that of any accessory
structures or other improvements on the lot. Market value may be established by
calculating: replacement cost depreciated for age of building and quality of
construction (actual cash value) by a certified appraiser; or adjusted tax
assessed values.
New Construction
   Structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the
effective date of the initial floodplain management regulations and includes
any subsequent improvements to such structures.
Non-Conversion Agreement
   A document stating that the owner will not convert or alter what has been
constructed and approved. Violation of the agreement is considered a violation
of the Ordinance and, therefore, subject to the same enforcement procedures and
penalties. The agreement must be filed with the recorded deed for the property.
The agreement must show the clerk's or recorder's stamps and/or notations that
the filing has been completed.
Otherwise Protected Area (OPA)
   See Coastal Barrier Resources System (CBRS).
Post-FIRM
   Construction or other development for which the start of construction
occurred on or after June 12, 1970, the effective date of the initial flood
insurance rate map.
Pre-FIRM
   Construction or other development for which the start of construction
occurred before June 12, 1970, the effective date of the initial flood
insurance rate map.
Primary Frontal Dune (PFD)
   A continuous or nearly continuous mound or ridge of sand with relatively
steep seaward and landward slopes immediately landward and adjacent to the
beach and subject to erosion and overtopping from high tides and waves during
major coastal storms. The inland limit of the primary frontal dune occurs at
the point where there is a distinct change from a relatively steep slope to a
relatively mild slope.
Principally Above Ground
   At least 51% of the actual cash value of the structure is above ground.
Public Safety and/or Nuisance
   Anything which is injurious to the safety or health of an entire community
or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs
the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or
river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.
Recreational Vehicle (RV)
   A vehicle, which is:
   (A)   Built on a single chassis;
   (B)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
   (C)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck;
   (D)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use;
and
   (E)   Is fully licensed and ready for highway use.
Reference Level
   The top of the lowest floor for structures within special flood hazard areas
designated as Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A99. The reference level is the bottom of
the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor for structures
within special flood hazard areas designated as Zone VE. (Alternative
acceptable language for Reference Level) "Reference Level" is the bottom of the
lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor for structures within
all special flood hazard areas.
Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation
   The base flood elevation plus the freeboard. In special flood hazard areas
where base flood elevations (BFEs) have been determined, this elevation shall
be the BFE plus two feet freeboard. In special flood hazard areas where no BFE
has been established, this elevation shall be at least two feet above the
highest adjacent grade.
Remedy a Violation
   To bring the structure or other development into compliance with state and
community floodplain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to
reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced
include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood
damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the Ordinance or otherwise
deterring future similar violations, or reducing federal financial exposure
with regard to the structure or other development.
Riverine
   Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries),
stream, brook, etc.
Salvage Yard
   Any non-residential property used for the storage, collection, and/or
recycling of any type of equipment, and including but not limited to vehicles,
appliances and related machinery.
Sand Dunes
   Naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or mounds landward of
the beach.
Shear Wall
   Walls used for structural support but not structurally joined or enclosed at
the end (except by breakaway walls). Shear walls are parallel or nearly
parallel to the flow of the water.
Solid Waste Disposal Facility
   Any facility involved in the disposal of solid waste, as defined in N.C.G.S.
§ 130A-290(a)(35).
Solid Waste Disposal Site
   As defined in N.C.G.S. § 130A-290(a)(36), any place at which solid wastes
are disposed of by incineration, sanitary landfill, or any other method.
Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA)
   The land in the floodplain subject to a 1% or greater chance of being
flooded in any given year, as determined in Section
155.11.6.
Start of Construction
   Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was
issued provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of
the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
building.
Structure
   A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a gas, liquid, or
liquefied gas storage tank that is principally above ground.
Substantial Damage
   Damage of any origin sustained by a structure during any one-year period
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to it's before damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred. See definition of Substantial Improvement.
Substantial Improvement
   Any combination of repairs, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
other improvement of a structure, taking place during any one-year period for
which the cost equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure
before the start of construction of the improvement. This term includes
structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual
repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
   (A)   Any correction of existing violations of state or community health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the
community code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
   (B)   Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure
and the alteration is approved by variance issued pursuant to Article 4 Section
E of this Ordinance.
Technical Bulletin and Technical Fact Sheet
   A FEMA publication that provides guidance concerning the building
performance standards of the NFIP, which are contained in Title 44 of the U.S.
Code of Federal Regulations at § 60.3. The bulletins and fact sheets are
intended for use primarily by state and local officials responsible for
interpreting and enforcing NFIP regulations and by members of the development
community, such as design professionals and builders. New bulletins, as well as
updates of existing bulletins, are issued periodically as needed. The bulletins
do not create regulations; rather they provide specific guidance for complying
with the minimum requirements of existing NFIP regulations.
   It should be noted that technical bulletins and technical fact sheets
provide guidance on the minimum requirements of the NFIP regulations. State or
community requirements that exceed those of the NFIP take precedence. Design
professionals should contact the community officials to determine whether more
restrictive state or local regulations apply to the building or site in
question. All applicable standards of the state or local building code must
also be met for any building in a flood hazard area.
Temperature Controlled
   Having the temperature regulated by a heating and/or cooling system, built-
in or appliance.
Variance
   A grant of relief from the requirements of this Ordinance.
Violation
   The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with
the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other
development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other
evidence of compliance required in Articles 4 and 5 is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
Water Surface Elevation (WSE)
   The height, in relation to NAVD 1988, of floods of various magnitudes and
frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
Watercourse
   A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other topographic feature on
or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes
specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur.
(Ord. 1780, passed 7-10-18; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.11.5 Lands to Which this Section Applies.
   This article shall apply to all special flood hazard areas within the
jurisdiction, including extra-territorial jurisdictions (ETJs), of the Town of
Wrightsville Beach.
(Ord. 1780, passed 7-10-18; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.11.6 Basis for Establishing the Special Flood Hazard Areas.
   The special flood hazard areas are those identified under the Cooperating
Technical State (CTS) agreement between the State of North Carolina and FEMA in
its FIS dated August 28, 2018 for New Hanover County and associated DFIRM
panels, including any digital data developed as part of the FIS, which are
adopted by reference and declared a part of this Ordinance. Future revisions to
the FIS and DFIRM panels that do not change flood hazard data within the
jurisdictional authority of the Town of Wrightsville Beach are also adopted by
reference and declared a part of this Ordinance. Subsequent letter of map
revisions (LOMRs) and/or physical map revisions (PMRs) shall be adopted within
three months.
(Ord. 1780, passed 7-10-18; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.11.7 Establishment of Floodplain Development Permit.
   A floodplain development permit shall be required in conformance with the
provisions of this Ordinance prior to the commencement of any development
activities within special flood hazard areas determined in accordance with the
provisions of Section
155.11.6.
(Ord. 1780, passed 7-10-18; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.11.8 Compliance.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted,
altered, or developed in any way without full compliance with the terms of this
article and other applicable regulations.
(Ord. 1780, passed 7-10-18; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.11.9 Abrogation and Greater Restrictions.
   This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and
another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions
shall prevail.
(Ord. 1780, passed 7-10-18; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.11.10 Interpretation.
   In the interpretation and application of this Ordinance, all provisions
shall be:
   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(Ord. 1780, passed 7-10-18; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.11.11 Warning and Disclaimer of Liability.
   The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
consideration. Larger floods can and will occur. Actual flood heights may be
increased by man-made or natural causes. This article does not imply that land
outside the special flood hazard areas or uses permitted within such areas will
be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability
on the part of the Town of Wrightsville Beach or by any officer or employee
thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Ordinance or
any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
(Ord. 1780, passed 7-10-18; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.11.11.1 Penalties for Violation.
   Violation of the provisions of this Ordinance or failure to comply with any
of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with the grant of a variance, shall constitute a
Class 1 misdemeanor pursuant to N.C.G.S. § 143-215.58. Any person who violates
this Ordinance or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon
conviction thereof, be fined not more than $100 or imprisoned for not more than
30 days, or both. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Town of
Wrightsville Beach from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to
prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. 1780, passed 7-10-18; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.11.12 Designation of Floodplain Administrator.
   The Director of Planning, hereinafter referred to as the "Floodplain
Administrator", is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions
of this Ordinance. In instances where the Floodplain Administrator receives
assistance from others to complete tasks to administer and implement this
Ordinance, the Floodplain Administrator shall be responsible for the
coordination and community's overall compliance with the National Flood
Insurance Program and the provisions of this Ordinance.
(Ord. 1780, passed 7-10-18; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.11.13 Floodplain Development Application/Permit/Certification
Requirements.
   (A)   Application Requirements. Application for a floodplain development
permit shall be made to the Floodplain Administrator prior to any development
activities located within special flood hazard areas. The following items shall
be presented to the Floodplain Administrator to apply for a floodplain
development permit:
      (1)   A plot plan drawn to scale which shall include, but shall not be
limited to, the following specific details of the proposed floodplain
development:
         (a)   The nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area of
development/disturbance; existing and proposed structures, utility systems,
grading/pavement areas, fill materials, storage areas, drainage facilities, and
other development;
         (b)   The boundary of the special flood hazard area as delineated on
the FIRM or other flood map as determined in Section
155.11.6, or a statement that the entire lot is within the special flood hazard
area;
         (c)   Flood zone(s) designation of the proposed development area as
determined on the FIRM or other flood map as determined in Section
155.11.6;
         (d)   The boundary of the floodway(s) or non-encroachment area(s) as
determined in Section
155.11.6;
         (e)   The base flood elevation (BFE) where provided as set forth in
Section
155.11.6; Section
155.11.14; or Section
155.11.19;
         (f)   The old and new location of any watercourse that will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development;
         (g)   The boundary and designation date of the Coastal Barrier
Resource System (CBRS) area or Otherwise Protected Areas (OPA), if applicable;
and
         (h)   The certification of the plot plan by a registered land surveyor
or professional engineer.
      (2)   Proposed elevation, and method thereof, of all development within a
special flood hazard area including but not limited to:
         (a)   Elevation in relation to NAVD 1988 of the proposed reference
level (including basement) of all structures;
         (b)   Elevation in relation to NAVD 1988 to which any non-residential
structure in Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A99 will be floodproofed; and
         (c)   Elevation in relation to NAVD 1988 to which any proposed utility
systems will be elevated or floodproofed.
      (3)   If floodproofing, a floodproofing certificate (FEMA Form 086-0-34)
with supporting data, an operational plan, and an inspection and maintenance
plan that include, but are not limited to, installation, exercise, and
maintenance of floodproofing measures.
      (4)   A foundation plan, drawn to scale, which shall include details of
the proposed foundation system to ensure all provisions of this Ordinance are
met. These details include but are not limited to:
         (a)   The proposed method of elevation, if applicable (i.e., fill,
solid foundation perimeter wall, solid backfilled foundation, open foundation
on columns/posts/piers/piles/shear walls); and
         (b)   Openings to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic
flood forces on walls in accordance with Section
155.11.18(D)(4) when solid foundation perimeter walls are used in Zones A, AE,
AH, AO, and A99.
         (c)   The following, in coastal high hazard areas, in accordance with
the provisions of Section
155.11.18(D)(5) and Section
155.11.19 and (Section
155.11.20 if applicable):
            1.   V-Zone certification with accompanying plans and
specifications verifying the engineered structure and any breakaway wall
designs; in addition, prior to the certificate of compliance/occupancy
issuance, a registered professional engineer or architect shall certify the
finished construction is compliant with the design, specifications and plans
for VE Zone construction.
            2.   Plans for open wood latticework or insect screening, if
applicable; and
            3.   Plans for non-structural fill, if applicable. If non-
structural fill is proposed, it must be demonstrated through coastal
engineering analysis that the proposed fill would not result in any increase in
the BFE or otherwise cause adverse impacts by wave ramping and deflection on to
the subject structure or adjacent properties.
      (5)   Usage details of any enclosed areas below the lowest floor.
      (6)   Plans and/or details for the protection of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems to be located and
constructed to minimize flood damage.
      (7)   Certification that all other local, state and federal permits
required prior to floodplain development permit issuance have been received.
      (8)   Documentation for placement of recreational vehicles and/or
temporary structures, when applicable, to ensure that the provisions of Section
155.11.18(F) and (G) are met.
      (9)   A description of proposed watercourse alteration or relocation,
when applicable, including an engineering report on the effects of the proposed
project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the effects to
properties located both upstream and downstream; and a map (if not shown on
plot plan) showing the location of the proposed watercourse alteration or
relocation.
   (B)   Permit Requirements. The floodplain development permit shall include,
but not be limited to:
      (1)   A complete description of all the development to be permitted under
the floodplain development permit (e.g. house, garage, pool, septic, bulkhead,
cabana, pier, bridge, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or
drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials, etc.).
      (2)   The special flood hazard area determination for the proposed
development in accordance with available data specified in Section
155.11.6.
      (3)   The regulatory flood protection elevation required for the
reference level and all attendant utilities.
      (4)   The regulatory flood protection elevation required for the
protection of all public utilities.
      (5)   All certification submittal requirements with timelines.
      (6)   A statement that no fill material or other development shall
encroach into the floodway or non-encroachment area of any watercourse unless
the requirements of Section
155.11.19 have been met.
      (7)   The flood openings requirements, if in Zones A, AE, AH, AO, and
A99.
      (8)   A statement, if in Zone VE, that there shall be no fill used for
structural support.
      (9)   A statement, that all materials below BFE/RFPE must be flood
resistant materials.
   (C)   Certification Requirements.
      (1)   Elevation certificates.
         (a)   An elevation certificate (FEMA Form 086-0-33) is required prior
to the actual start of any new construction. It shall be the duty of the permit
holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the
elevation of the reference level, in relation to NAVD 1988. The Floodplain
Administrator shall review the certificate data submitted. Deficiencies
detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder prior to the
beginning of construction. Failure to submit the certification or failure to
make required corrections shall be cause to deny a floodplain development
permit.
         (b)   An elevation certificate (FEMA Form 086-0-33) is required after
the reference level is established. Within seven calendar days of establishment
of the reference level elevation, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to
submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the elevation of the
reference level, in relation to NAVD 1988. Any work done within the seven day
calendar period and prior to submission of the certification shall be at the
permit holder's risk. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate
data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the
permit holder immediately and prior to further work being permitted to proceed.
Failure to submit the certification or failure to make required corrections
shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project.
         (c)   A final finished construction elevation certificate (FEMA Form
086-0-33) is required after construction is completed and prior to certificate
of compliance/occupancy issuance. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to
submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of final as-built
construction of the elevation of the reference level and all attendant
utilities. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data
submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the
permit holder immediately and prior to certificate of compliance/occupancy
issuance. In some instances, another certification may be required to certify
corrected as-built construction. Failure to submit the certification or failure
to make required corrections shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a
certificate of compliance/occupancy. The finished construction elevation
certificate certifier shall provide at least two photographs showing the front
and rear of the building taken within 90 days from the date of certification.
The photographs must be taken with views confirming the building description
and diagram number provided in subsection (A). To the extent possible, these
photographs should show the entire building including foundation. If the
building has split-level or multi-level areas, provide at least two additional
photographs showing side views of the building. In addition, when applicable,
provide a photograph of the foundation showing a representative example of the
flood openings or vents. All photographs must be in color and measure at least
3" x 3". Digital photographs are acceptable.
      (2)   Floodproofing certificate.
         (a)   If non-residential floodproofing is used to meet the regulatory
flood protection elevation requirements, a floodproofing certificate (FEMA Form
086-0-34), with supporting data, an operational plan, and an inspection and
maintenance plan are required prior to the actual start of any new
construction. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the
Floodplain Administrator a certification of the floodproofed design elevation
of the reference level and all attendant utilities, in relation to NAVD 1988.
Floodproofing certification shall be prepared by or under the direct
supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. The
Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data, the operational
plan, and the inspection and maintenance plan. Deficiencies detected by such
review shall be corrected by the applicant prior to permit approval. Failure to
submit the certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause
to deny a floodplain development permit. Failure to construct in accordance
with the certified design shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a
certificate of compliance/occupancy.
         (b)   A final finished construction floodproofing certificate (FEMA
Form 086-0-34), with supporting data, an operational plan, and an inspection
and maintenance plan are required prior to the issuance of a certificate of
compliance/occupancy. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to
the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the floodproofed design
elevation of the reference level and all attendant utilities, in relation to
NAVD 1988. Floodproofing certificate shall be prepared by or under the direct
supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. The
Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data, the operational
plan, and the inspection and maintenance plan. Deficiencies detected by such
review shall be corrected by the applicant prior to certificate of occupancy.
Failure to submit the certification or failure to make required corrections
shall be cause to deny a floodplain development permit. Failure to construct in
accordance with the certified design shall be cause to deny a certificate of
compliance/occupancy.
      (3)   If a manufactured home is placed within Zones A, AE, AH, AO, and
A99 and the elevation of the chassis is more than 36 inches in height above
grade, an engineered foundation certification is required in accordance with
the provisions of Section
155.11.18(C)(2).
      (4)   If a watercourse is to be altered or relocated, a description of
the extent of watercourse alteration or relocation; a professional engineer's
certified report on the effects of the proposed project on the flood-carrying
capacity of the watercourse and the effects to properties located both upstream
and downstream; and a map showing the location of the proposed watercourse
alteration or relocation shall all be submitted by the permit applicant prior
to issuance of a floodplain development permit.
      (5)   Certification exemptions. The following structures, if located
within Zones A, AE, AH, AO, and A99, are exempt from the elevation/
floodproofing certification requirements specified in items (C)(1) and (2) of
this subsection:
         (a)   Recreational vehicles meeting requirements of Section
155.11.18(F)(1);
         (b)   Temporary structures meeting requirements of Section
155.11.18(G); and
         (c)   Accessory structures that are 150 square feet or less or $3,000
or less and meeting requirements of Section
155.11.18(H).
      (6)   AV-Zone Certification with accompanying design plans and
specifications is required prior to issuance of a floodplain development permit
within coastal high hazard areas. It shall be the duty of the permit applicant
to submit to the Floodplain Administrator said certification to ensure the
design standards of this Ordinance are met. A registered professional engineer
or architect shall develop or review the structural design, plans, and
specifications for construction and certify that the design and methods of
construction to be used are in accordance with accepted standards of practice
for meeting the provisions of this Ordinance. This certification is not a
substitute for an elevation certificate. In addition, prior to the certificate
of compliance/occupancy issuance, a registered professional engineer or
architect shall certify the finished construction is compliant with the design,
specifications and plans for VE Zone construction.
   (D)   Determinations for Existing Buildings and Structures. For applications
for building permits to improve buildings and structures, including
alterations, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, change of occupancy,
additions, rehabilitations, renovations, substantial improvements, repairs of
substantial damage, and any other improvement of or work on such buildings and
structures, the Floodplain Administrator, in coordination with the Building
Official, shall:
      (1)   Estimate the market value, or require the applicant to obtain an
appraisal of the market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser, of
the building or structure before the start of construction of the proposed
work; in the case of repair, the market value of the building or structure
shall be the market value before the damage occurred and before any repairs are
made;
      (2)   Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair a
damaged building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs of
improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building or
structure;
      (3)   Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes
substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; and
      (4)   Notify the applicant if it is determined that the work constitutes
substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage and that compliance
with the flood resistant construction requirements of the NC Building Code and
this Ordinance is required.
(Ord. 1780, passed 7-10-18; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.11.14 Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator.
   The Floodplain Administrator shall perform, but not be limited to, the
following duties:
   (A)   Review all floodplain development applications and issue permits for
all proposed development within special flood hazard areas to assure that the
requirements of this Ordinance have been satisfied.
   (B)   Review all proposed development within special flood hazard areas to
assure that all necessary local, state and federal permits have been received,
including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of
1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334.
   (C)   Notify adjacent communities and the North Carolina Department of
Public Safety, Division of Emergency Management, State Coordinator for the
National Flood Insurance Program prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA).
   (D)   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is maintained.
   (E)   Prevent encroachments into floodways and non-encroachment areas unless
the certification and flood hazard reduction provisions of Section
155.11.19 are met.
   (F)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to NAVD 1988) of the reference
level (including basement) and all attendant utilities of all new and
substantially improved structures, in accordance with the provisions of Section
155.11.13(C).
   (G)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to NAVD 1988) to which all new
and substantially improved structures and utilities have been floodproofed, in
accordance with the provisions of Section
155.11.13(C).
   (H)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to NAVD 1988) of all public
utilities in accordance with the provisions of Section
155.11.13(C).
   (I)   When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, obtain
certifications from a registered professional engineer or architect in
accordance with the provisions of Section
155.11.13(C) and Section
155.11.18(B).
   (J)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries
of the special flood hazard areas, floodways, or non-encroachment areas (for
example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions), make the necessary interpretation. The person
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity
to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article.
   (K)   When BFE data has not been provided in accordance with the provisions
of Section
155.11.6, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any BFE data, along with
floodway data or non-encroachment area data available from a federal, state, or
other source, including data developed pursuant to Article 5, Section D(2)(c),
in order to administer the provisions of this Ordinance.
   (L)   When BFE data is provided but no floodway or non-encroachment area
data has been provided in accordance with the provisions of Section
155.11.6, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any floodway data or non-
encroachment area data available from a federal, state, or other source in
order to administer the provisions of this Ordinance.
   (M)   When the lowest floor and the lowest adjacent grade of a structure or
the lowest ground elevation of a parcel in a special flood hazard area is above
the BFE, advise the property owner of the option to apply for a letter of map
amendment (LOMA) from FEMA. However, if the property is to be removed from the
V Zone it must not be located seaward of the landward toe of the primary
frontal dune. Maintain a copy of the LOMA issued by FEMA in the floodplain
development permit file.
   (N)   Permanently maintain all records that pertain to the administration of
this Ordinance and make these records available for public inspection,
recognizing that such information may be subject to the Privacy Act of 197 4,
as amended.
   (O)   Make on-site inspections of work in progress. As the work pursuant to
a floodplain development permit progresses, the Floodplain Administrator shall
make as many inspections of the work as may be necessary to ensure that the
work is being done according to the provisions of the local ordinance and the
terms of the permit. In exercising this power, the Floodplain Administrator has
a right, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises
within the jurisdiction of the community at any reasonable hour for the
purposes of inspection or other enforcement action.
   (P)   Issue stop-work orders as required. Whenever a building or part
thereof is being constructed, reconstructed, altered, or repaired in violation
of this Ordinance, the Floodplain Administrator may order the work to be
immediately stopped. The stop-work order shall be in writing and directed to
the person doing or in charge of the work. The stop-work order shall state the
specific work to be stopped, the specific reason(s) for the stoppage, and the
condition(s) under which the work may be resumed. Violation of a stop-work
order constitutes a misdemeanor.
   (Q)   Revoke floodplain development permits as required. The Floodplain
Administrator may revoke and require the return of the floodplain development
permit by notifying the permit holder in writing stating the reason(s) for the
revocation. Permits shall be revoked for any substantial departure from the
approved application, plans, and specifications; for refusal or failure to
comply with the requirements of state or local laws; or for false statements or
misrepresentations made in securing the permit. Any floodplain development
permit mistakenly issued in violation of an applicable state or local law may
also be revoked.
   (R)   Make periodic inspections throughout the special flood hazard areas
within the jurisdiction of the community. The Floodplain Administrator and each
member of his or her inspections department shall have a right, upon
presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the
territorial jurisdiction of the department at any reasonable hour for the
purposes of inspection or other enforcement action.
   (S)   Follow through with corrective procedures of Section
155.11.15.
   (T)   Review, provide input, and make recommendations for variance requests.
   (U)   Maintain a current map repository to include, but not limited to,
historical and effective FIS Report, historical and effective FIRM and other
official flood maps and studies adopted in accordance with the provisions of
Section
155.11.6, including any revisions thereto including letters of map change,
issued by FEMA. Notify state and FEMA of mapping needs.
   (V)   Coordinate revisions to FIS reports and FIRMs, including letters of
map revision based on fill (LOMR-Fs) and letters of map revision (LOMRs).
(Ord. 1780, passed 7-10-18; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.11.15 Corrective Procedures.
   (A)   Violations to be Corrected. When the Floodplain Administrator finds
violations of applicable state and local laws; it shall be his or her duty to
notify the owner or occupant of the building of the violation. The owner or
occupant shall immediately remedy each of the violations of law cited in such
notification.
   (B)   Actions in Event of Failure to Take Corrective Action. If the owner of
a building or property shall fail to take prompt corrective action, the
Floodplain Administrator shall give the owner written notice, by certified or
registered mail to the owner's last known address or by personal service,
stating:
      (1)   That the building or property is in violation of the floodplain
management regulations;
      (2)   That a hearing will be held before the Floodplain Administrator at
a designated place and time, not later than ten days after the date of the
notice, at which time the owner shall be entitled to be heard in person or by
counsel and to present arguments and evidence pertaining to the matter; and
      (3)   That following the hearing, the Floodplain Administrator may issue
an order to alter, vacate, or demolish the building; or to remove fill as
applicable.
   (C)   Order to Take Corrective Action. If, upon a hearing held pursuant to
the notice prescribed above, the Floodplain Administrator shall find that the
building or development is in violation of the Flood Damage Prevention
Ordinance, he or she shall issue an order in writing to the owner, requiring
the owner to remedy the violation within a specified time period, not less than
60 calendar days, nor more than least 180 calendar days or less. Where the
Floodplain Administrator finds that there is imminent danger to life or other
property, he or she may order that corrective action be taken in such lesser
period as may be feasible.
   (D)   Appeal. Any owner who has received an order to take corrective action
may appeal the order to the local elected governing body by giving notice of
appeal in writing to the Floodplain Administrator and the clerk within ten days
following issuance of the final order. In the absence of an appeal, the order
of the Floodplain Administrator shall be final. The local governing body shall
hear an appeal within a reasonable time and may affirm, modify and affirm, or
revoke the order.
   (E)   Failure to Comply with Order. If the owner of a building or property
fails to comply with an order to take corrective action for which no appeal has
been made or fails to comply with an order of the governing body following an
appeal, the owner shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor pursuant to N.C.G.S.
§ 143-215.58 and shall be punished at the discretion of the court.
(Ord. 1780, passed 7-10-18; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.11.16 Variance Procedures.
   (A)   The Board of Alderman, plus alternates, as established by the Town of
Wrightsville Beach, hereinafter referred to as the "appeal board", shall hear
and decide requests for variances from the requirements of this Ordinance.
   (B)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal
such decision to the court, as provided in Chapter 7A of the North Carolina
General Statutes.
   (C)   Variances may be issued for:
      (1)   The repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon the
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a historic structure and that the variance
is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure;
      (2)   Functionally dependent facilities if determined to meet the
definition as stated in Section
155.4.4, provided provisions of Section
155.11.16(I)(2), (3), and (5) have been satisfied, and such facilities are
protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and
create no additional threats to public safety; or
      (3)   Any other type of development provided it meets the requirements of
this section.
   (D)   In passing upon variances, the appeal board shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other
sections of this Ordinance, and:
      (1)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      (2)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
      (5)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location as defined
under Article 2 of this Ordinance as a functionally dependent facility, where
applicable;
      (6)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
      (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (8)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
      (9)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      (10)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
      (11)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
   (E)   A written report addressing each of the above factors shall be
submitted with the application for a variance.
   (F)   Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of
this Ordinance, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this
Ordinance.
   (G)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice specifying the difference between the BFE and the elevation to which the
structure is to be built and that such construction below the BFE increases
risks to life and property, and that the issuance of a variance to construct a
structure below the BFE may result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to $25 per $100 of insurance coverage. Such notification shall be
maintained with a record of all variance actions, including justification for
their issuance.
   (H)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions and report any variances to the FEMA and the State of North Carolina
upon request.
   (I)   Conditions for variances:
      (1)   Variances shall not be issued when the variance will make the
structure in violation of other federal, state, or local laws, regulations, or
ordinances.
      (2)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway or
non-encroachment area if the variance would result in any increase in flood
levels during the base flood discharge.
      (3)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      (4)   Variances shall only be issued prior to development permit
approval.
      (5)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship; and
         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
   (J)   A variance may be issued for solid waste disposal facilities or sites,
hazardous waste management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage
facilities that are located in special flood hazard areas provided that all of
the following conditions are met.
      (1)   The use serves a critical need in the community.
      (2)   No feasible location exists for the use outside the special flood
hazard area.
      (3)   The reference level of any structure is elevated or floodproofed to
at least the regulatory flood protection elevation.
      (4)   The use complies with all other applicable federal, state and local
laws.
      (5)   The Town of Wrightsville Beach has notified the Secretary of the
North Carolina Department of Public Safety of its intention to grant a variance
at least 30 calendar days prior to granting the variance.
(Ord. 1780, passed 7-10-18; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.11.17 General Standards for Flood Hazard Reduction.
   In all special flood hazard areas the following provisions are required:
   (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be designed
(or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement of the structure.
   (B)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage in accordance
with the FEMA Technical Bulletin 2, Flood Damage-Resistant Materials
Requirements.
   (C)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
by methods and practices that minimize flood damages.
   (D)   All new electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, and other service equipment shall be located at or above the RFPE or
designed and installed to prevent water from entering or accumulating within
the components during the occurrence of the base flood. These include, but are
not limited to, HVAC equipment, water softener units, bath/kitchen fixtures,
ductwork, electric/gas meter panels/boxes, utility/cable boxes, water heaters,
and electric outlets/switches.
      (1)   Replacements part of a substantial improvement, electrical,
heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service
equipment shall also meet the above provisions.
      (2)   Replacements that are for maintenance and not part of a substantial
improvement, may be installed at the original location provided the addition
and/or improvements only comply with the standards for new construction
consistent with the code and requirements for the original structure.
   (E)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
   (F)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into flood waters.
   (G)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to
avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
   (H)   Nothing in this article shall prevent the repair, reconstruction, or
replacement of a building or structure existing on the effective date of this
Ordinance and located totally or partially within the floodway, non-
encroachment area, or stream setback, provided there is no additional
encroachment below the regulatory flood protection elevation in the floodway,
non-encroachment area, or stream setback, and provided that such repair,
reconstruction, or replacement meets all of the other requirements of this
Ordinance.
   (I)   New solid waste disposal facilities and sites, hazardous waste
management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage facilities shall not
be permitted, except by variance as specified in Section
155.11.16(J). A structure or tank for chemical or fuel storage incidental to an
allowed use or to the operation of a water treatment plant or wastewater
treatment facility may be located in a special flood hazard area only if the
structure or tank is either elevated or floodproofed to at least the regulatory
flood protection elevation and certified in accordance with the provisions of
Section
155.11.13(C).
   (J)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall be
consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
   (K)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
   (L)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have
adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
   (M)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have
received all necessary permits from those governmental agencies for which
approval is required by federal or state law, including Section 404 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334.
   (N)   When a structure is partially located in a special flood hazard area,
the entire structure shall meet the requirements for new construction and
substantial improvements.
   (O)   When a structure is located in multiple flood hazard zones or in a
flood hazard risk zone with multiple base flood elevations, the provisions for
the more restrictive flood hazard risk zone and the highest BFE shall apply.
(Ord. 1780, passed 7-10-18; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.11.18 Specific Standards for Flood Hazard Reduction.
   In all special flood hazard areas where BFE data has been provided, as set
forth in Section
155.11.6, or Section
155.11.20, the following provisions, in addition to the provisions of Section
155.11.17, are required:
   (A)   Residential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement
of any residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall have the
reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the regulatory
flood protection elevation, as defined in subsection
155.11.4.1.
   (B)   Non-residential Construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other non-residential structure
shall have the reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the
regulatory flood protection elevation, as defined in subsection
155.11.4.1. Structures located in Zones A, AE, AH, AO, and A99 may be
floodproofed to the regulatory flood protection elevation in lieu of elevation
provided that all areas of the structure, together with attendant utility and
sanitary facilities, below the regulatory flood protection elevation are
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, using
structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. For AO Zones, the floodproofing
elevation shall be in accordance with Article 5, Section I (2). A registered
professional engineer or architect shall certify that the floodproofing
standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be
provided to the Floodplain Administrator as set forth in Section
155.11.13(C), along with the operational plan and the inspection and
maintenance plan.
   (C)   Manufactured Homes.
      (1)   New and replacement manufactured homes shall be elevated so that
the reference level of the manufactured home is no lower than the regulatory
flood protection elevation, as defined in subsection
155.11.4.1.
      (2)   Manufactured homes shall be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, either
by certified engineered foundation system, or in accordance with the most
current edition of the State of North Carolina Regulations for Manufactured
Homes adopted by the Commissioner of Insurance pursuant to N.C.G.S. § 143-
143.15. Additionally, when the elevation would be met by an elevation of the
chassis 36 inches or less above the grade at the site, the chassis shall be
supported by reinforced piers or engineered foundation. When the elevation of
the chassis is above 36 inches in height, an engineering certification is
required.
      (3)   All enclosures or skirting below the lowest floor shall meet the
requirements of Section
155.11.18(D).
      (4)   An evacuation plan must be developed for evacuation of all
residents of all new, substantially improved or substantially damaged
manufactured home parks or subdivisions located within flood prone areas. This
plan shall be filed with and approved by the Floodplain Administrator and the
local Emergency Management Coordinator.
   (D)   Elevated Buildings. Fully enclosed area, of new construction and
substantially improved structures, which is below the lowest floor or below the
lowest horizontal structural member in VE zones:
      (1)   Shall not be designed or used for human habitation, but shall only
be used for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage of
maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises. Access to the
enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles
(garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment (standard exterior
door), or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). The interior portion
of such enclosed area shall not be finished or partitioned into separate rooms,
except to enclose storage areas;
      (2)   Shall be constructed entirely of flood resistant materials at least
to the regulatory flood protection elevation; and
      (3)   Shall include, in Zones A, AE, AH, AO, and A99 flood openings to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on walls by allowing for the
entry and exit of floodwaters. To meet this requirement, the openings must
either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed
the following minimum design criteria:
         (a)   A minimum of two flood openings on different sides of each
enclosed area subject to flooding;
         (b)   The total net area of all flood openings must be at least one
square inch for each square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
         (c)   If a building has more than one enclosed area, each enclosed
area must have flood openings to allow floodwaters to automatically enter and
exit;
         (d)   The bottom of all required flood openings shall be no higher
than one foot above the higher of the interior or exterior adjacent grade;
         (e)   Flood openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in
both directions; and
         (f)   Enclosures made of flexible skirting are not considered
enclosures for regulatory purposes, and, therefore, do not require flood
openings. Masonry or wood underpinning, regardless of structural status, is
considered an enclosure and requires flood openings as outlined above.
      (4)   Shall, in coastal high hazard areas (Zone VE), either be free of
obstruction or constructed with breakaway walls, open wood latticework or
insect screening, provided they are not part of the structural support of the
building and are designed so as to breakaway, under abnormally high tides or
wave action without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or
supporting foundation system or otherwise jeopardizing the structural integrity
of the building. The following design specifications shall be met:
         (a)   Material shall consist of open wood or plastic lattice, or
insect screening; or
         (b)   Breakaway walls shall meet the following design specifications:
            1.   Design safe loading resistance shall be not less than ten nor
more than 20 pounds per square foot; or
            2.   Breakaway walls that exceed a design safe loading resistance
of 20 pounds per square foot (either by design or when so required by state or
local codes) shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect that the breakaway wall will collapse from a water load less than
that which would occur during the base flood event, and the elevated portion of
the building and supporting foundation system shall not be subject to collapse,
displacement, or other structural damage due to the effects of wind and water
loads acting simultaneously on all building components (structural and
nonstructural). The water loading values used shall be those associated with
the base flood. The wind loading values used shall be those required by the
North Carolina State Building Code.
         (c)   Concrete pads, including patios, decks, parking pads, walkways,
driveways, pool decks, etc. the following is required:
            1.   Shall be structurally independent of the primary structural
foundation system of the structure and shall not adversely affect structures
through redirection of floodwaters or debris; and
            2.   Shall be constructed to breakaway cleanly during design flood
conditions, shall be frangible, and shall not produce debris capable of causing
damage to any structure. (The installation of concrete in small segments
(approximately four feet x four feet) that will easily break up during the base
flood event, or score concrete in four feet x four feet maximum segments is
acceptable to meet this standard); and
            3.   Reinforcing, including welded wire fabric, shall not be used
in order to minimize the potential for concreted pads being a source of debris;
and
            4.   Pad thickness shall not exceed four inches; or
            5.   Provide a design professional's certification stating the
design and method of construction to be used meet the applicable criteria of
this section.
            6.   The provisions above shall not apply to non-residential or
multi-family construction that is designed by a professional engineer and
constructed with self- supporting structural slabs capable of remaining intact
and functional under base flood conditions, including expected erosion.
      (5)   Fill/grading.
         (a)   Minor grading and the placement of minor quantities of
nonstructural fill may be permitted for landscaping and for drainage purposes
under and around buildings and for support of parking slabs, pool decks, patios
and walkways.
         (b)   The fill material must be similar and consistent with the
natural soils in the area.
         (c)   The placement of site-compatible, non-structural fill under or
around an elevated building is limited to two feet. Fill greater than two feet
must include an analysis prepared by a qualified registered design professional
demonstrating no harmful diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave
reflection that would increase damage to adjacent elevated buildings and
structures.
         (d)   Nonstructural fill with finished slopes that are steeper than
five units horizontal to one unit vertical shall be permitted only if an
analysis prepared by a qualified registered design professional demonstrates no
harmful diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave reflection that would
increase damage to adjacent elevated buildings and structures.
      (6)   Property owners shall be required to execute and record a non-
conversion agreement prior to issuance of a building permit declaring that the
area below the lowest floor shall not be improved, finished or otherwise
converted to habitable space; the Town of Wrightsville Beach will have the
right to inspect the enclosed area. This agreement shall be recorded with the
New Hanover County Register of Deeds and shall transfer with the property in
perpetuity.
      (7)   Release of restrictive covenant. If a property which is bound by a
non-conversion agreement is modified to remove enclosed areas below BFE, then
the owner may request release of restrictive covenant after staff inspection
and submittal of confirming documentation.
   (E)   Additions/Improvements.
      (1)   Additions and/or improvements to pre-FIRM structures when the
addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to
the existing structure are:
         (a)   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or improvements
must be designed to minimize flood damages and must not be any more non-
conforming than the existing structure.
         (b)   A substantial improvement, with modifications/rehabilitations/
improvements to the existing structure or the common wall is structurally
modified more than installing a doorway, both the existing structure and the
addition must comply with the standards for new construction.
      (2)   Additions to pre-FIRM or post-FIRM structures that are a
substantial improvement with no modifications/rehabilitations/improvements to
the existing structure other than a standard door in the common wall, shall
require only the addition to comply with the standards for new construction.
      (3)   Additions and/or improvements to post-FIRM structures when the
addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to
the existing structure are:
         (a)   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or improvements
only must comply with the standards for new construction consistent with the
code and requirements for the original structure.
         (b)   A substantial improvement, both the existing structure and the
addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new
construction.
      (4)   Any combination of repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition
or improvement of a building or structure taking place during a one-year
period, the cumulative cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value
of the structure before the improvement or repair is started must comply with
the standards for new construction. For each building or structure, the one-
year period begins on the date of the first improvement or repair of that
building or structure subsequent to the effective date of this Ordinance. If
the structure has sustained substantial damage, any repairs are considered
substantial improvement regardless of the actual repair work performed. The
requirement does not, however, include either:
         (a)   Any project for improvement of a building required to correct
existing health, sanitary or safety code violations identified by the building
official and that are the minimum necessary to assume safe living conditions.
         (b)   Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
historic structure.
   (F)   Recreational Vehicles. Recreational vehicles shall either:
      (1)   Temporary Placement.
         (a)   Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or
         (b)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. (A recreational
vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is
attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities, and has no
permanently attached additions.)
      (2)   Permanent Placement. Recreational vehicles that do not meet the
limitations of temporary placement shall meet all the requirements for new
construction.
   (G)   Temporary Non-residential Structures. Prior to the issuance of a
floodplain development permit for a temporary structure, the applicant must
submit to the Floodplain Administrator a plan for the removal of such structure
(s) in the event of a hurricane, flash flood or other type of flood warning
notification. The following information shall be submitted in writing to the
Floodplain Administrator for review and written approval:
      (1)   A specified time period for which the temporary use will be
permitted. Time specified may not exceed three months, renewable up to one
year;
      (2)   The name, address, and phone number of the individual responsible
for the removal of the temporary structure;
      (3)   The time frame prior to the event at which a structure will be
removed (i.e., minimum of 72 hours before landfall of a hurricane or
immediately upon flood warning notification);
      (4)   A copy of the contract or other suitable instrument with the entity
responsible for physical removal of the structure; and
      (5)   Designation, accompanied by documentation, of a location outside
the special flood hazard area, to which the temporary structure will be moved.
   (H)   Accessory Structures. When accessory structures (sheds, detached
garages, etc.) are to be placed within a special flood hazard area, the
following criteria shall be met:
      (1)   Accessory structures shall not be used for human habitation
(including working, sleeping, living, cooking or restroom areas);
      (2)   Accessory structures shall not be temperature-controlled;
      (3)   Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood damage
potential;
      (4)   Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the
building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters;
      (5)   Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with
the provisions of Section
155.11.17(A);
      (6)   All service facilities such as electrical shall be installed in
accordance with the provisions of Section
155.11.17(D); and
      (7)   Flood openings to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic
flood forces shall be provided below regulatory flood protection elevation in
conformance with the provisions of Section
155.11.18(D)(4).
         An accessory structure with a footprint less than 150 square foot or
that is a minimal investment of $3,000 or less and satisfies the criteria
outlined above is not required to meet the elevation or floodproofing standards
of Section
155.11.18(B). Elevation or floodproofing certifications are required for all
other accessory structures in accordance with Section
155.11.13(C).
   (I)   Tanks. When gas and liquid storage tanks are to be placed within a
special flood hazard area, the following criteria shall be met:
      (1)   Underground Tanks. Underground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood,
including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty;
      (2)   Above-ground Tanks, Elevated. Above-ground tanks in flood hazard
areas shall be elevated to or above the regulatory flood. Protection elevation
on a supporting structure that is designed to prevent flotation, collapse or
lateral movement during conditions of the design flood. Tank-supporting
structures shall meet the foundation requirements of the applicable flood
hazard area;
      (3)   Above-ground Tanks, Not Elevated. Above-ground tanks that do not
meet the elevation requirements of Section
155.11.18(B) shall be permitted in flood hazard areas provided the tanks are
designed, constructed, installed, and anchored to resist all flood-related and
other loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design
flood and without release of contents in the floodwaters or infiltration by
floodwaters into the tanks. Tanks shall be designed, constructed, installed,
and anchored to resist the potential buoyant and other flood forces acting on
an empty tank during design flood conditions.
      (4)   Tank Inlets and Vents. Tank inlets, fill openings, outlets and
vents shall be:
         (a)   At or above the regulatory flood protection elevation or fitted
with covers designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the
contents of the tanks during conditions of the design flood; and
         (b)   Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic
and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of
the design flood.
   (J)   Other Development.
      (1)   Fences in regulated floodways and NEAs that have the potential to
block the passage of floodwaters, such as stockade fences and wire mesh fences,
shall meet the limitations of Section
155.11.19.
      (2)   Retaining walls, sidewalks and driveways in regulated floodways and
NEAs. Retaining walls and sidewalks and driveways that involve the placement of
fill in regulated flood ways shall meet the limitations of Article 5, Section F
of this Ordinance.
      (3)   Roads and watercourse crossings in regulated floodways and NEAs.
Roads and watercourse crossings, including roads, bridges, culverts, low-water
crossings and similar means for vehicles or pedestrians to travel from one side
of a watercourse to the other side, that encroach into regulated floodways
shall meet the limitations of Section
155.11.19.
(Ord. 1780, passed 7-10-18; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.11.19 Coastal High Hazard Area (Zone VE).
   Coastal high hazard areas are special flood hazard areas - established in
Section
155.11.6, and designated as Zones VE. These areas have special flood hazards
associated with high velocity waters from storm surges or seismic activity and,
therefore, all new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the
following provisions in addition to the provisions of Sections
155.11.17 and
155.11.18:
   (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall:
      (1)   Be located landward of the reach of mean high tide;
      (2)   Comply with all applicable CAMA setback requirements.
   (B)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be elevated so
that the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor
(excluding pilings or columns) is no lower than the regulatory flood protection
elevation. Floodproofing shall not be utilized on any structures in coastal
high hazard areas to satisfy the regulatory flood protection elevation
requirements.
   (C)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall have the space
below the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor
free of obstruction so as not to impede the flow of flood waters, with the
following exceptions:
      (1)   Open wood or plastic latticework or insect screening may be
permitted below the lowest floor for aesthetic purposes only and must be
designed to wash away in the event of wave impact and in accordance with the
provisions of Section
155.11.18(D)(5)(a). Design plans shall be submitted in accordance with the
provisions of Section
155.11.13(A)(4)(c)2.; or
      (2)   Breakaway walls may be permitted provided they meet the criteria
set forth in Section
155.11.18(D)(1), (2), (3), and (5)(b). Design plans shall be submitted in
accordance with the provisions of Section
155.11.13(A)(4)(c)1.
   (D)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be securely
anchored to pile or column foundations. All pilings and columns and the
structure attached thereto shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement due to the effect of wind and water loads acting
simultaneously on all building components.
      (1)   Water loading values used shall be those associated with the base
flood.
      (2)   Wind loading values used shall be those required by the current
edition of the North Carolina State Building Code.
   (E)   For concrete pads, including patios, decks, parking pads, walkways,
driveways, pool decks, etc. the following is required:
      (1)   Shall be structurally independent of the primary structural
foundation system of the structure and shall not adversely affect structures
through redirection of floodwaters or debris; and
      (2)   Shall be constructed to breakaway cleanly during design flood
conditions, shall be frangible, and shall not produce debris capable of causing
damage to any structure. (The installation of concrete in small segments
(approximately four feet x four feet) that will easily break up during the base
flood event, or score concrete in four feet x four feet maximum segments is
acceptable to meet this standard); and
      (3)   Reinforcing, including welded wire fabric, shall not be used in
order to minimize the potential for concreted pads being a source of debris;
and
      (4)   Pad thickness shall not exceed four inches; or
      (5)   Provide a design professional's certification stating the design
and method of construction to be used meet the applicable criteria of this
section.
      (6)   The provisions above shall not apply to non-residential or multi-
family construction that is designed by a professional engineer and constructed
with self-supporting structural slabs capable of remaining intact and
functional under base flood conditions, including expected erosion.
   (F)   For swimming pools and spas, the following is required:
      (1)   Be designed to withstand all flood-related loads and load
combinations;
      (2)   Be elevated so that the lowest horizontal structural member is
elevated above the RFPE;
      (3)   Be designed and constructed to break away during design flood
conditions without producing debris capable of causing damage to any structure;
or
      (4)   Be sited to remain in the ground during design flood conditions
without obstructing flow that results in damage to any structure.
      (5)   Registered design professionals must certify to local officials
that a pool or spa beneath or near a VE Zone building will not be subject to
flotation or displacement that will damage building foundations or elevated
portions of the building or any nearby buildings during a coastal flood.
      (6)   Pool equipment shall be located above the RFPE whenever
practicable. Pool equipment shall not be located beneath an elevated structure.
   (G)   All elevators, vertical platform lifts, chair lifts, etc., the
following is required:
      (1)   Elevator enclosures must be designed to resist hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic forces as well as erosion, scour, and waves.
      (2)   Utility equipment in coastal high hazard areas (VE Zones) must not
be mounted on, pass through, or be located along breakaway walls.
      (3)   The cab, machine/equipment room, hydraulic pump, hydraulic
reservoir, counter weight and roller guides, hoist cable, limit switches,
electric hoist motor, electrical junction box, circuit panel, and electrical
control panel are all required to be above RFPE. When this equipment cannot be
located above the RFPE, it must be constructed using flood damage- resistant
components.
      (4)   Elevator shafts/enclosures that extend below the RFPE shall be
constructed of reinforced masonry block or reinforced concrete walls and
located on the landward side of the building to provide increased protection
from flood damage. Drainage must be provided for the elevator pit.
      (5)   Flood damage-resistant materials can also be used inside and
outside the elevator cab to reduce flood damage. Use only stainless steel doors
and door frames below the BFE. Grouting in of doorframes and sills is
recommended.
      (6)   If an elevator is designed to provide access to areas below the
BFE, it shall be equipped with a float switch system that will activate during
a flood and send the elevator cab to a floor above the RFPE.
   (H)   Property owners shall be required to execute and record a non-
conversion agreement prior to issuance of a building permit declaring that the
area below the lowest floor, or the detached accessory building shall not be
improved, or otherwise converted; the Town of Wrightsville Beach will have the
right to inspect the enclosed area. This agreement shall be recorded with the
New Hanover County Register of Deeds and shall transfer with the property in
perpetuity.
   (I)   Release of restrictive covenant. If a property which is bound by a
non-conversion agreement is modified to remove enclosed areas below BFE, then
the owner may request release of restrictive covenant after staff inspection
and submittal of confirming documentation.
   (J)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the
design, specifications and plans for construction are in compliance with the
provisions of Section
155.11.13 and Section
155.11.19(C) and (D), on the current version of the North Carolina V-Zone
Certification form or equivalent local version. In addition, prior to the
certificate of compliance/occupancy issuance, a registered professional
engineer or architect shall certify the finished construction is compliant with
the design, specifications and plans for VE Zone construction.
   (K)   Fill/grading.
      (1)   Minor grading and the placement of minor quantities of
nonstructural fill may be permitted for landscaping and for drainage purposes
under and around buildings and for support of parking slabs, pool decks, patios
and walkways.
      (2)   The fill material must be similar and consistent with the natural
soils in the area.
      (3)   The placement of site-compatible, non-structural fill under or
around an elevated building is limited to two feet. Fill greater than two feet
must include an analysis prepared by a qualified registered design professional
demonstrating no harmful diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave
reflection that would increase damage to adjacent elevated buildings and
structures.
      (4)   Nonstructural fill with finished slopes that are steeper than five
units horizontal to one unit vertical shall be permitted only if an analysis
prepared by a qualified registered design professional demonstrates no harmful
diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave reflection that would increase
damage to adjacent elevated buildings and structures.
   (L)   There shall be no alteration of sand dunes or mangrove stands which
would increase potential flood damage.
   (M)   No manufactured homes shall be permitted except in an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision. A replacement manufactured home may be
placed on a lot in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision provided
the anchoring and elevation standards of this section have been satisfied.
   (N)   Recreational vehicles may be permitted in coastal high hazard areas
provided that they meet the recreational vehicle criteria of Section
155.11.18(F)(1).
   (O)   A deck that is structurally attached to a building or structure shall
have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member at or above the
regulatory flood protection elevation and any supporting members that extend
below the regulatory flood protection elevation shall comply with the
foundation requirements that apply to the building or structure, which shall be
designed to accommodate any increased loads resulting from the attached deck.
The increased loads must be considered in the design of the primary structure
and included in the V-Zone Certification required under Section
155.11.13(C)(6).
   (P)   A deck or patio that is located below the regulatory flood protection
elevation shall be structurally independent from buildings or structures and
their foundation systems, and shall be designed and constructed either to
remain intact and in place during design flood conditions or to break apart
into small pieces to minimize debris during flooding that is capable of causing
structural damage to the building or structure or to adjacent buildings and
structures.
   (Q)   In coastal high hazard areas, development activities other than
buildings and structures shall be permitted only if also authorized by the
appropriate state or local authority; if located outside the footprint of, and
not structurally attached to, buildings and structures; and if analyses
prepared by qualified registered design professionals demonstrate no harmful
diversion of floodwaters or wave run up and wave reflection that would increase
damage to adjacent buildings and structures. Such other development activities
include but are not limited to:
      (1)   Bulkheads, seawalls, retaining walls, revetments, and similar
erosion control structures;
      (2)   Solid fences and privacy walls, and fences prone to trapping
debris, unless designed and constructed to fail under flood conditions less
than the design flood or otherwise function to avoid obstruction of
floodwaters.
(Ord. 1780, passed 7-10-18; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.11.20 Standards for Coastal A Zones (Zone CAZ) LiMWA.
   Non-residential structures in CAZs shall be designed and constructed to meet
V Zone requirements, including requirements for breakaway walls. However, the
NFIP regulations also require flood openings in walls surrounding enclosures
below elevated buildings in CAZs (see Technical Bulletin 1, Openings in
Foundation Walls and Walls of Enclosures). Breakaway walls used in CAZs must
have flood openings that allow for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters
to minimize damage caused by hydrostatic loads. Openings also function during
smaller storms or if anticipated wave loading does not occur with the base
flood.
   (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be elevated so
that the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor
(excluding pilings or columns) is no lower than the regulatory flood protection
elevation. Floodproofing shall not be utilized on any structures in Coastal A
Zones to satisfy the regulatory flood protection elevation requirements.
   (B)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall have the space
below the lowest horizontal structural member free of obstruction so as not to
impede the flow of flood waters, with the following exceptions:
      (1)   Open wood latticework or insect screening may be permitted below
the lowest floor for aesthetic purposes only and must be designed to wash away
in the event of wave impact and in accordance with the provisions of Section
155.11.18(D)(4)(a). Design plans shall be submitted in accordance with the
provisions of Section
155.11.13(A)(4)(c)2.; or
      (2)   Breakaway walls may be permitted provided they meet the criteria
set forth in Section
155.11.18(D)(4)(b). Design plans shall be submitted in accordance with the
provisions of Section
155.11.13(A)(4)(c)1.
   (C)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall include, in
Zones CAZ, flood openings to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. To meet this
requirement, the openings must either be certified by a professional engineer
or architect or meet or exceed the design criteria in Section
155.11.18(D)(4).
   (D)   Concrete pads, including patios, decks, parking pads, walkways,
driveways, etc. must meet the provisions of Section
155.11.19(E).
   (E)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the
provisions of Section
155.11.19(C).
   (F)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the
design, specifications and plans for construction are in compliance with the
provisions of Section
155.11.13 and Section
155.11.19(C) and (D), on the current version of the North Carolina V-Zone
Certification form or a locally developed V-Zone Certification form.
   (G)   Recreational vehicles may be permitted in Coastal A Zones provided
that they meet the recreational vehicle criteria of Section
155.11.18(F)(1).
   (H)   Fill/grading must meet the provisions of Section
155.11.19(K).
   (I)   Decks and patios must meet the provisions of Section
155.11.19(O) and (P).
   (J)   In coastal high hazard areas, development activities other than
buildings and structures must meet the provisions of Section
155.11.19(Q).
(Ord. 1780, passed 7-10-18; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.11.21 Effect on Rights and Liabilities Under the Existing Flood
Damage Prevention Ordinance.
   (A)   This Ordinance in part comes forward by re-enactment of some of the
provisions of the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance enacted November 21, 1974
as amended, and it is not the intention to repeal but rather to re-enact and
continue to enforce without interruption of such existing provisions, so that
all rights and liabilities that have accrued thereunder are reserved and may be
enforced. The enactment of this Ordinance shall not affect any action, suit or
proceeding instituted or pending. All provisions of the Flood Damage Prevention
Ordinance of the Town of Wrightsville Beach enacted on November 21, 1974 as
amended, which are not reenacted herein are repealed.
   (B)   The date of the initial Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance for New
Hanover County is July 17, 1978.
(Ord. 1780, passed 7-10-18; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.11.22 Effect Upon Outstanding Floodplain Development Permits.
   Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans,
construction, size, or designated use of any development or any part thereof
for which a floodplain development permit has been granted by the Floodplain
Administrator or his or her authorized agents before the time of passage of
this Ordinance; provided, however, that when construction is not begun under
such outstanding permit within a period of six months subsequent to the date of
issuance of the outstanding permit, construction or use shall be in conformity
with the provisions of this Ordinance.
(Ord. 1780, passed 7-10-18; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.11.23 Reserved.
Section 155.11.24 Reserved.
PART II.
SEDIMENTATION AND SOIL EROSION CONTROL
Section 155.11.25 General Regulations.
   (A)   Adoption of County Ordinance. The county "Ordinance to Provide for the
Control of Soil Erosion and Sedimentation," as revised and amended, is adopted
by the town, and it shall be complied with in those terms and as it has been
revised and amended and adopted by the County Commissioners.
   (B)   Obstruction of Public Streams, Channels, and Detention/Retention
Basins Prohibited.
      (1)   No person shall place or cause to be placed in any public stream,
channel, detention/retention basin or drainage way any material of any type or
nature, the placement of which tends to alter, impede, block or otherwise
restrict or impair the flow of drainage or the retention capacity of such
public stream, channel, detention/retention basin or drainage way.
      (2)   The Building Inspector or his designated representative shall be
responsible for enforcement of this section.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
PART III.
OCEANFRONT PROPERTY
Section 155.11.26 Oceanfront Policies.
   (A)   This section is adopted to preserve and promote the protection of the
oceanfront area of environmental concern by maintaining the existence of
vegetation and natural or constructed dunes, which provide a protective barrier
from the actions of the Atlantic Ocean, other surrounding waters, sand, wind,
and pedestrians. The past practice of destroying this barrier system
constitutes a serious threat to the safety of oceanfront properties and the
public. These requirements are therefore adopted for the health, safety, and
welfare of persons living and visiting in the town and for the protection of
public and private property. Section 160A-174 of the North Carolina General
Statutes authorizes and empowers the town under general ordinance-making powers
to regulate the protection of natural or constructed dunes within the town. The
2018 CAMA Land Use Plan Update for the town includes management goals, planning
objectives, and implementation actions that support the purpose and intent of
these ordinances. The applicable policies are listed below:
      (1)   Land Use Compatibility Implement Action 12: "suitable land uses in
ocean hazard areas include ocean shoreline erosion control activities and dune
establishment and stabilization."
      (2)   Public Access Implementing Action 17: "Public pedestrian access is
limited to designated crossover areas in order to minimize damage to dunes and
vegetation."
      (3)   Water Quality Implementing Action 80: "the Town shall avoid
'approving of any activity which would destroy remaining habitat for loggerhead
turtle nesting’.”
      (4)   Water Quality Implementing Action 81: "tree cover at Wrightsville
Beach, whether maritime or otherwise, is a highly valued asset."
   (B)   When this section conflicts with Coastal Resources Commission
regulations and provisions of the Coastal Area Management Act, the more
restrictive rule shall apply.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.11.27 Shoreline Development Boundary Prohibition.
   Access structures are prohibited east of the established Shoreline
Development Boundary on the oceanfront provided, however, that town-owned
public access structures are exempted from this Section
155.11.27.
(Ord. 1814, passed 10-8-20; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.11.28 Maintenance of Oceanfront Systems and Structures.
   (A)   Each owner shall be responsible for the proper and satisfactory
maintenance of any presently existing structure privately erected east of the
Shoreline Development Boundary. All such structures shall be subject to
inspection by the Code Enforcement Official or his designee, in accordance with
Section
155.11.33, and where faulty maintenance is found, the Code Enforcement Official
shall confer with the Building Inspector and the owner notified in writing as
to the remedy required. Provisions of the North Carolina Building Code shall be
applied. The owner shall promptly apply for a permit to accomplish all
requirements and shall proceed within 90 days of the written notice. Non-
compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance shall result in the removal of
the structure as per Section
155.11.29, and the assessment of civil penalties as per Section
155.1.12.9.
   (B)   All presently existing structures east of the Shore Line Development
Boundary must be maintained in an operable condition, and within standards
promoting health, safety and welfare. Commercial fishing piers shall be
maintained in accordance with Chapter 95, Garbage, Trash and Rubbish of the
Wrightsville Beach Code of Ordinances and in compliance with the following
additional provisions:
      (1)   Commercial piers must provide a trash barrel every 50 feet along
the length of the pier. Trash barrels must also be located near the tackle shop
and on the approach ramp thereto.
      (2)   Signs notifying patrons of the penalty for littering, including the
depositing of litter in the water, shall be posted every 50 feet along both
sides of the pier.
      (3)   Pier owners, proprietors or employees are required to notify the
police in the event that any person shall litter on the pier or from the pier
into the water or shoreline surrounding the pier.
      (4)   Pier owners or proprietors shall insure that trash barrels are
emptied into the regular refuse receptacle to be collected by the town's
Sanitation Department.
   (C)   Failure to properly maintain or utilize a presently existing structure
located east of the Shore Line Development Boundary in accordance with this
section, or failure to satisfy the objectives of this section, may result in a
penalty as provided in subsection
155.1.12.9.
   (D)   The removal of an approved dune stabilization device such as sand
fencing or pedestrian control mechanisms in a manner constituting a willful
destruction of private or town property shall be a violation punishable as
provided pursued under the enforcement provisions as set forth in Section
155.11.35.
(Ord. 1814, passed 10-8-20; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.11.29 Authority to Remove Structures.
   In the event that a structure now exists and the owner of the structure has
failed to repair or bring the structure into compliance as per Section
155.11.28 after notification by the Code Enforcement Official or his designee,
the town may require the property owner to remove the structure. In the case
that the structure is not removed, the town may remove the structure and its
appurtenances and dispose of all materials, refuse, and wreckage therefrom. The
town may assess civil penalties in accordance with subsection
155.1.12.9, and all costs of the removal against the property owner, which
shall become a lien upon his property payable immediately. After a period of 60
days there shall be assessed an additional interest rate of 6% until the cost
is paid.
(Ord. 1814, passed 10-8-20; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.11.30 Reserved.
Section 155.11.31 Reserved.
Section 155.11.32 Reserved.
Section 155.11.33 Damaging Dunes or Vegetation.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation in any manner to
damage, destroy, or remove any sand dune or part thereof, or to kill, destroy,
or remove any trees, shrubbery, or other vegetation growing east of the Shore
Line Development Boundary without having first obtained a zoning permit and
mitigation plan approval from Planning and Inspections Department as specified
in this section for the proposed damage, destruction, or removal.
   (A)   Removal of sand/soil prior to construction or lot clearing for
marketing or other purpose will not be permitted and is subject to a civil
penalty as identified in Sections
155.1.12.9 and
155.11.35.
   (B)   Private vehicles authorized through the Town of Wrightsville Beach
Police Department and public vehicles are allowed to access the public beach by
way of designated, improved vehicular accessways.
   (C)   Exempted from provisions of this section:
      (1)   Removal for personal use only of sand, seashells or similar small
materials of souvenir value in such amounts as may be carried easily upon the
person, so long as such act does not involve and is not for commercial or
business and does not provide monetary gain to the person removing such
materials.
      (2)   The normal, non-impacting maintenance of lawns, commercial, office,
and institutional tracts which are already developed. Maintenance shall include
lawn maintenance, the relocating and replacement of shrubs, the cutting and
removal of poisonous or harmful plants, briers, and dead foliage. In
accomplishing the foregoing, the use of equipment which limits damage to
surrounding vegetation is encouraged; the use of heavy commercial equipment is
discouraged. The removal or destruction of vegetation referenced in subsection
155.11.28(B)(3) is prohibited.
      (3)   Nothing in this section shall be deemed to allow any acts which
shall willfully damage or destroy vegetation as an exemption. It is
specifically the intention of this subsection that any such action shall be
considered a violation and pursued under the enforcement provisions as set
forth in Section
155.11.35.
   (D)   Signage less than one square foot instructing persons to avoid
trespassing into the dunes, and rope fence for pedestrian traffic control may
be placed east of the Shore Line Development Boundary. Construction of such
devices shall only be permitted with the prior written consent of the Code
Enforcement Official. Willful removal or damage to any public or private
approved dune stabilization device such as sand fencing or pedestrian control
mechanisms shall constitute a violation of the provisions of this section.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.11.34 Compliance, Non-Conformities, Exceptions, and Exemptions.
   (A)   Nonconforming Structures. Except as otherwise provided in this
subsection (A), access structures and beach walkovers that are damaged or
destroyed greater than 50% of their replacement value may only be built back in
conformance with current requirements as set forth in this section. Access
structures and beach walkovers for single-family and duplex lots that are
damaged or destroyed greater than 50% of their replacement value may not be
built back. All determinations of replacement value under this section shall be
made by the Building Inspector.
   (B)   Exception for Handicapped Accessible Beach Access Structures. The
Board of Aldermen or their designee may grant an exception for private
residential beach access structures regarding horizontal and vertical
development for purposes of allowing a handicapped accessible structure to be
built. These structures must meet the provisions of the NC Building Code.
   (C)   Exception for Hotels and Housing Development Located in Commercial
District IV Zoning District. The provisions regulating construction east of the
Shore Line Development Boundary and found in
Article 155.11, Part III, shall not apply to any hotel or housing development
(as defined in Exhibit A) located adjacent to the Atlantic Ocean and in a
Commercial District IV zoning district, provided, that such hotel or housing
development shall comply with any and all provisions of any special use permit
issued for such property and all other applicable local, state and federal
rules, regulations, ordinances, statutes and laws.
   (D)   Shared Beach Access Structures. The town encourages adjoining property
owners to construct centrally located shared beach access structures where
appropriate in order to reduce the overall number of structures on the beach.
In cases where shared structures are proposed, the property owners must submit
a site plan and restrictive covenants that indicate the location of the
proposed structure and the proper restrictions against construction of
additional individual structures.
   (E)   Reconstruction of Beach Access Structures as the Dune System Develops.
The Code Enforcement Official will annually identify existing access structures
and beach walkovers and identify those as non-compliant with the provisions of
this section. Walkovers and accesses that are being covered by sand due to a
growing dune system will be encouraged to reconstruct those sections of the
structure to bring them into compliance with the provisions of applicable
ordinances. The Code Enforcement Official will notify the property owner by
certified mail, including photos of the structure and a recommended
stabilization plan.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.11.35 Enforcement Provisions.
   (A)   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall, in addition
to the penalties set forth in
Article 155.1, Section
155.1.12.9, Penalties and Remedies for Violations, immediately undertake
restoration or replacement of such items in accordance with requirements of the
Code Enforcement Official. In the event such restoration or replacement is not
completed within 30 days of the initial violation, the town is authorized to
undertake such restoration. All costs of such restoration or repair incurred by
the town shall be deemed an additional civil penalty to be collected from the
violator as specified in Section
155.1.12.9.
   (B)   In the event that an individual fails to comply with the requirements
set forth in this subsection, the town shall have the authority to revoke all
issued permits and issue stop work orders on the real property on which the
offense occurred until such time as the offender has come into compliance with
the provisions of this section.
   (C)   Failure of an applicant and/or owner to comply with the provisions of
this section may result in penalty as provided in Section
155.1.12.9. First time offenders of subsection
155.11.28(B) are granted the option of attending a two-hour class sponsored by
the North Carolina Cooperative Extension Services on Dune Ecology and
Protection in lieu of fine.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
ARTICLE 155.12
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
PART I.
SUBDIVISION PLATS
Section 155.12.1 Plat Required for Land Subdivision.
   Parcels may not be subdivided by deed alone. All subdivision of parcels
requires recordation of a plat.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.12.2 Approval of Subdivision Plats Required.
   No subdivision plat of land within the platting jurisdiction shall be filed
or recorded until it has been submitted to and approved by the Board of
Aldermen, and the approval has been entered in writing on the plat by the Town
Clerk. The Register of Deeds, upon receipt of a copy of this Ordinance, shall
not file or record a plat of a subdivision of land located within the platting
jurisdiction without the approval of the plat as required in this section.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.12.3 Plat Approval Required for Building Permit.
   No building permit may be issued for any construction on any proposed lot
shown on a plat until a final plat has been approved and recorded, except that
a building permit may be issued for one structure on one lot shown on any
approved preliminary plat prior to recordation of a final plat. The Building
Inspector shall deny building permits for subdivision lots created in violation
of the terms and conditions of this Ordinance.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.12.4 Plat Approval Not to Constitute Acceptance of Dedication.
   The approval of a plat by the Board of Aldermen shall not be deemed to
constitute or affect the acceptance by the town or the public of the dedication
of any street or other ground, public utility line, or other public facility
shown upon the plat.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)   
Section 155.12.5 Expedited Review.
   The town may only require a plat for recordation for the division of land in
single ownership if all of the following are met:
   (A)   The tract or parcel to be divided is not exempted as a division of
land into parcels greater than ten acres where no street of right-of-way is
involved.
   (B)   No part of the tract or parcel to be divided has been divided under
this subsection in the ten years prior to division.
   (C)   The entire area of the tract or parcel to be divided is greater than
five acres.
   (D)   After division, no more than three lots result from the division.
   (E)   After division, all resultant lots comply with all of the following:
      (1)   All lot dimension size requirements of the applicable land-use
regulations, if any.
      (2)   The use of the lots is in conformity with the applicable zoning
requirements, if any.
      (3)   A permanent means of ingress and egress is recorded for each lot.
(Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.12.6 Transfer of Lots in Unapproved Subdivision Plats.
   Any person who, being the owner or agent of the owner of any land located
within the jurisdiction of the town, thereafter subdivides his land in
violation of applicable town ordinances or transfers or sells land by reference
to, exhibition of, or any other use of a plat showing a subdivision of the land
before the plat has been properly approved under applicable town ordinances and
recorded in the office of the New Hanover County Register of Deeds, shall be
guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. The description by metes and bounds in the
instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or
transferring land shall not exempt the transaction from this penalty. The town
may bring an action for injunction of any illegal subdivision, transfer,
conveyance, or sale of land, and the court shall, upon appropriate findings,
issue an injunction and order requiring the offending party to comply with the
subdivision ordinance. Building permits required pursuant to N.C.G.S. § 160D-
1110 may be denied for lots that have been illegally subdivided. In addition to
other remedies, the town may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to
prevent the unlawful subdivision of land, to restrain, correct, or abate the
violation, or to prevent any illegal act or conduct.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.12.7 Plat Approval Required Before Extension of Service.
   No street shall be accepted and maintained by the town, no street lighting,
water, or sewer shall be extended to or connected with any subdivision of land,
and no permit shall be issued by any administrative agent or department of the
town for the construction of any building or other improvement requiring a
permit, upon any land concerning which a plat is required to be approved,
unless and until it has been approved by the Board of Aldermen and the
requirements set forth in this Ordinance have been complied with.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.12.8 Coordination of Street System.
   The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall provide for the
continuation of the principal existing streets in adjoining subdivisions or,
when adjoining property is not subdivided, their proper projection insofar as
necessary for public requirements by providing new streets of a width deemed
necessary by the Planning Board and approved by the Board of Aldermen. In
general, the streets shall be at least as wide as existing streets; except,
that in no case shall the width be less than the minimum specified in Section
155.12.14. The street and alley arrangement shall be such as to cause no
hardship to owners of adjoining property when they plat their own land and seek
to provide for convenient access to it and shall provide for continuing a
reasonable number of through utility lines. When a new subdivision adjoins
unsubdivided land susceptible to being subdivided, the new streets shall be
carried to the boundaries of the tract proposed to be subdivided, except where
it is determined by the Planning Board and approved by the Board of Aldermen
that certain streets may not be required to be so extended.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.12.9 Parcels of Land to Consist of Multiples of Normal Blocks.
   When a parcel of land is subdivided into tracts larger than normal for
building lots, the parcels shall be divided, so far as practicable, into normal
block multiples so as to allow for the opening of major streets and the making
of satisfactory arrangements with the town for the ultimate extension of
streets.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.12.10 Preliminary Plats.
   (A)   In seeking to subdivide land and to dedicate streets, alleys, or other
lands for public use, the owner shall submit a preliminary plat, so marked,
which plat may be in pencil, to the Planning Board for its review. The Planning
Board will review the proposed plat and forward it to the Board of Aldermen
with its recommendations. Final approval of the preliminary plat shall be made
by the Board of Aldermen, and such plat may not be filed in the Office of the
Register of Deeds until such final approval is given. The provisions of this
section shall not prohibit any owner or its agent from entering into contracts
to sell or lease by reference to an approved preliminary plat for which a final
plat has not yet been approved under the provisions of the subdivision
ordinance or recorded with the Register of Deeds, provided the contract does
all of the following:
      (1)   Incorporates as an attachment a copy of the preliminary plat
referenced in the contract and obligates the owner to deliver to the buyer a
copy of the recorded plat prior to closing and conveyance.
      (2)   Plainly and conspicuously notifies the prospective buyer or lessee
that a final subdivision plat has not been approved or recorded at the time of
the contract, that no governmental body will incur any obligation to the
prospective buyer or lessee with respect to approval of the final subdivision
plat, that changes between the preliminary and final plats are possible, and
that the contract or lease may be terminated without breach by the buyer or
lessee if the final recorded plat differs in any material respect from the
preliminary plat.
      (3)   Provides that if the approved and recorded final plat does not
differ in any material respect from the plat referred to in the contract, the
buyer or lessee may not be required by the seller or lessor to close any
earlier than five days after the delivery of a copy of the final recorded plat.
      (4)   Provides that if the approved and recorded final plat differs in
any material respect from the preliminary plat referred to in the contract, the
buyer or lessee may not be required by the seller or lessor to close any
earlier than 15 days after the delivery of the final recorded plat, during
which 15-day period the buyer or lessee may terminate the contract without
breach or any further obligation and may receive a refund for all earnest money
or prepaid purchase price.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not prohibit any owner or its
agent from entering into contracts to sell or lease land by reference to an
approved preliminary plat for which a final plat has not been properly approved
under the subdivision ordinance, or recorded with the Register of Deeds where
the buyer or lessee is any person who has contracted to acquire or lease the
land for the purposes of engaging in the business of construction of
residential, commercial, or industrial buildings on the land, or for the
purpose of resale or lease of the land to persons engaged in that kind of
business, provided that no conveyance of the land may occur and no contract to
lease it may become effective until after the final plat has been properly
approved under the subdivision ordinance and recorded with the Register of
Deeds.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.12.11 Contents of Preliminary Plats.
   The preliminary plat shall be drawn to a scale not smaller than one inch to
100 feet and shall show:
   (A)   Name. The subdivision name, the names and addresses of the owners, and
the designer of the subdivision and his qualifications.
   (B)   Date, approximate North arrow, and scale.
   (C)   Lot lines.
   (D)   Lot dimensions.
   (E)   Boundaries. The boundary line of the tract to be subdivided drawn
accurately to scale and with accurate linear and angular dimensions.
   (F)   Location Map. A map showing the location of the subdivision.
   (G)   Primary Dunes. The location of the primary dunes as established by the
CAMA regulations.
   (H)   Heritage Trees. The location of all heritage trees.
   (I)   Existing Property Lines. The location of existing and platted property
lines, streets, buildings, water courses, railroads, bridges, water mains,
sewers, culverts, drainpipes, and public utility easements, and the names of
record owners of adjoining parcels of unsubdivided land.
   (J)   Flood hazard zones, wetland delineation and CAMA jurisdiction all must
be indicated on the preliminary plat.
   (K)   Proposed Improvements. The names, proposed location, and approximate
dimensions of proposed improvements. Structural encroachments, such as gate
houses, mail boxes and entrance signs, etc., within private rights-of-way must
show the dimensions of the structure and not be located in the site visibility
triangle. Provision of legal agreements stating the responsibility as to the
maintenance of the structures will be accomplished.
   (L)   Location of the proposed streets, alleys, culs-de-sac, or other public
ways.
   (M)   Private Areas within Subdivisions.
      (1)   The Planning Board shall be assured, prior to final plat approval,
that adequate provisions have been made through legal covenants and
restrictions which shall govern a homeowners' association, or through other
legal agreements, that the responsibility as to the maintenance of the streets,
utilities or other areas designated as private areas or as a common area will
be accomplished by a source other than by public maintenance.
      (2)   The subdivider shall provide and sign an acknowledgment of
compliance as specified in Section
155.12.16. Such acknowledgment shall appear on the final plat of the
subdivision.
   (N)   Sidewalks, Walkways, and Bikeways. Sidewalks, walkways and other
pedestrian ways shall be provided by the subdivider within or adjacent to a
subdivision, as deemed necessary by the Board of Aldermen upon recommendation
of the Planning Board, upon reasonable evidence that the sidewalks, walkways or
other pedestrian ways would be essential for pedestrian access to community
facilities, that such is necessary to provide safe pedestrian movement outside
the street or street rights-of-way area or that such is an extension or could
reasonably become an extension of existing sidewalks, walkways and other
pedestrian ways. All sidewalks, walkways, and other pedestrian ways shall be
aligned as required by the Board of Aldermen upon recommendation of the
Planning Board and designed and constructed to conform to
Chapter 99 of the Town Code of Ordinances. Sidewalks shall be indicated on all
preliminary plans.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.12.12 Conformity of Plat to Requirements.
   Preliminary plats shall be checked for:
   (A)   Conformity to the general street or thoroughfare plan.
   (B)   Conformity to the probable development of adjacent properties.
   (C)   Conformity to the existing street system.
   (D)   Street names.
   (E)   Lot size and arrangement.
   (F)   Necessary public utility easements.
   (G)   Improvements required within town limits.
   (H)   Conformity to policies, requirements, recommendations, and general
content of the town's land use plan, access plan, or any other plans, reports,
or feasibility studies the Planning Board considers relevant to its review, and
other physical development features which may from time to time be determined
by comprehensive physical development plans of the planning area. In the event
of a conflict in the recommendations of a plan or between plans, the Planning
Board may apply the more stringent recommendations if it deems this necessary
to protect the public interest.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.12.13 Approved Plats to be Kept on File.
   A copy of the approved preliminary plat shall be kept on file for public
examination. Approval of the preliminary plat shall be valid for a period of 60
days.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.12.14 Service Facilities Required Prior to Final Approval.
   (A)   Pursuant to N.C.G.S. § 160D-801 et seq., the following requirements
for service facilities or improvements shall be fulfilled by the owner of a
subdivision located within the corporate limits prior to the time a final plat
is approved by the Board of Aldermen:
      (1)   Streets and Alleys. Shall be graded to finish section and grade, as
approved, with pavement of 20-foot minimum width, consisting of not less than
three-inch crushed stone base and 1-1/2-inch bituminous concrete or approved
equivalent, completed. Curbs, sidewalks, and driveways shall be provided by the
developer.
      (2)   Storm Drainage. A storm drainage system shall be installed which is
capable of alleviating runoff waters of a ten year frequency storm. Inlets
shall be installed at intervals as needed and at not more than 400 feet
intervals. Pipe shall be extended to high water line at discharge.
      (3)   Utilities.
         (a)   Water. Shall be as provided for in
Chapter 50 of the Town Code of Ordinances, together with any amendments
subsequently adopted by the Board of Aldermen.
         (b)   Sanitary Sewer. Shall be as provided for in
Chapter 50 of the Town Code of Ordinances, together with any amendments
subsequently adopted by the Board of Aldermen.
         (c)   Electric and Telephone. Services may be provided either overhead
or underground. All services shall be installed subject to the franchise rights
of the town and to its control.
         (d)   Gas. No underground gas system shall serve more than one lot or
one facility. Tank containers may be used as set out in provisions of this code
and other ordinances governing the same.
   (B)   All service facilities or improvements required to be installed or
constructed shall be installed or constructed in accordance with the
specifications standards, policies, or other requirements of the town
applicable thereto.
   (C)   Performance Guarantees. In lieu of requiring the completion,
installation and dedication of all improvements prior to final plat approval,
the Town of Wrightsville Beach may enter into an agreement with the subdivider
whereby the subdivider shall agree to complete any remaining required
improvements as specified by the approved preliminary plat for that portion of
the subdivision to be shown on the final plat within a mutually agreed upon
specified time period not to exceed one year. The total cost of the remaining
improvements and administration for which the surety is offered shall not
exceed $50,000 except for minor subdivisions that require the extension of
sidewalks along existing streets. The surety limit stated in this section shall
be adjusted annually, at the beginning of each calendar year or fiscal year, to
compensate for construction costs, inflation, or other factors, in accordance
with an appropriate established index, as approved by the Town Attorney. Once
agreed upon by both parties and the security required herein is provided, the
final plat may be approved by the Board of Aldermen, if all other requirements
of this Ordinance are met. The town shall require a certified cost estimate
from a licensed contractor or engineer for the cost of completion of such
improvements.
      (1)   The subdivider shall provide one of the following performance
guarantees, elected at the subdivider's discretion, to ensure installation of
required improvements:
         (a)   Surety Performance Bond(s). The subdivider shall obtain a
performance bond(s) from a surety bonding company authorized to do business in
North Carolina. The bond(s) shall be payable to the Town of Wrightsville Beach,
and shall be in an amount not to exceed 125% of the entire cost, as estimated
by the subdivider in conjunction with the Board of Aldermen, and approved by
the Board of Aldermen for installing all required improvements. The duration of
the bond(s) shall be one year from the date the bond is issued, unless the
developer determines that the scope of work for the required improvements
necessitates a longer duration.
         (b)   Cash or Equivalent Security. The subdivider shall deposit cash,
an irrevocable letter of credit, or other instrument readily convertible into
cash at face value, either with the town or in a non-interest bearing escrow
account with a financial institution designated as an official depository of
the town. The use of any instrument other than cash shall be subject to the
approval of the Board of Aldermen. The amount of deposit shall not exceed 125%
of the cost, as estimated by the subdivider in conjunction with the Board of
Aldermen for installing all required improvements. If cash or other instrument
is deposited in escrow with a financial institution as provided above, then the
subdivider shall file with the town an agreement between the financial
institution and himself guaranteeing the following:
            1.   That said escrow account shall be held in trust until released
by the Board of Aldermen and may not be used or pledged by the subdivider in
any other matter during the term of the escrow; and
            2.   That in the case of a failure on the part of the subdivider to
complete said improvements, the financial institution shall, upon notification
by the town and submission by the town to the financial institution of an
engineer's estimate of the amount needed to complete the improvements,
immediately either pay to the Town of Wrightsville Beach the funds estimated to
complete the improvements, up to the full balance of the escrow account, or
deliver to the town any other instruments fully endorsed or otherwise made
payable to the town.
      (2)   A developer shall demonstrate reasonable, good-faith progress
toward completion of the required improvements that are secured by the
performance guarantee. If the improvements are not completed to the
specifications of Wrightsville Beach, and the current performance guarantee is
likely to expire prior to completion of the required improvements, the
performance guarantee shall be extended, or a new performance guarantee issued,
for an additional period. An extension under this subdivision shall only be for
a duration necessary to complete the required improvements.
      (3)   Upon default, meaning failure on the part of the subdivider to
complete the required improvements in a timely manner as spelled out in the
performance bond or escrow agreement, then the surety, or the financial
institution holding the escrow account shall, if requested by the town, pay all
or any portion of the bond or escrow fund to the Town of Wrightsville Beach up
to the amount needed to complete the improvements based on an engineering
estimate. Upon payment, the Wrightsville Beach Board of Aldermen, in its
discretion, may expend such portion of said funds as it deems necessary to
complete all or any portion of the required improvements. The town shall return
to the subdivider any funds not spent in completing the improvements.
      (4)   The town may release a portion of any security posted as the
improvements are completed and recommended for approval by the UDO
Administrator. Within 30 days after receiving the UDO Administrator's
recommendation, the Board of Aldermen shall approve or not approve said
improvements. If the Board of Aldermen approves said improvements, then it
shall immediately release any security posted.
      (5)   For subdivisions which are underwritten or constructed with federal
funds and for which the specifications for facilities or improvements are equal
to or of a higher standard than those required by the town, the bond-posting
requirement may be waived and the final plat approved prior to completion of
facilities or improvements.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.12.15 Final Plat.
   The original tracing and two copies of the final plat shall be filed with
and approved by the UDO Administrator. In the event the final plat is approved,
a statement of that fact shall be transcribed to the tracing and one copy
returned to the subdivider for recording, and one copy shall be retained by the
town. The approval shall be void unless the final plat is offered for filing
and recording in the Office of the Register of Deeds within 90 days of date of
approval.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.12.16 Contents of Final Plat.
   (A)   Final plats submitted for approval shall be in accordance with
N.C.G.S. § 47-30, as amended and to the State Board of Registration for
Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors "Manual of Practice for Land
Surveying." The final plat shall conform with the approved preliminary plat.
   (B)   A certified copy of the private or subdivision restrictions or
covenants proposed to be applied to the subdivision, if any, shall accompany
the submittal of the final plat.
   (C)   Required Statements, Certificates, and Forms.
      (1)   Certificate of Dedication. A certificate of ownership and
dedication shall be shown properly completed and signed by the owners and all
other interested parties, similar in wording to the following:
         "The undersigned hereby acknowledge(s) this plat and allotment to be
(his, her, their) free act and deed, and hereby dedicate(s) to public use as
streets, playgrounds, parks, open spaces, and easements forever all areas so
shown or indicated on said plat.
         Signed ..... "
      (2)   All property shown on the plat as dedicated for a public use shall
be deemed to be dedicated for any other public use authorized by the Town
Charter or any general, local, or special law pertaining to the town, when such
other use is approved by the Board of Aldermen as in the public interest.
      (3)   Street, utility and drainage maintenance disclosure statements
signed by the owner and/or subdivider for private development.
      (4)   All structures to be constructed, improved, or rehabilitated within
the area delineated as the 100-year flood area on the "Flood Boundary and
Floodway Map, Town of Wrightsville Beach" shall be constructed, improved or
rehabilitated in conformance with the town's flood management regulations (
Article 155.11, Part I).
      (5)   All lots as depicted on the plat meet or exceed the minimum area
and dimensional requirements of the zoning district in which located.
      (6)   The availability of water and/or sewer service to the lots in this
subdivision is subject to the completion of certain water and/or sewer line
extensions by the town, and certificates of occupancy will not be issued for
structures on such lots until such extensions are completed.
      (7)   Certificate of Registration by Register of Deeds.
         State of North Carolina
         County of New Hanover
         Filed for registration on the ____________ day of
___________________________, 20_____
         at _________________ (am/pm) and duly recorded in Map Book
_________________ at Page                                  .
         Register of Deeds
      (8)   Certificate of Accuracy and Mapping.
         I, _____________________________ certify that this map was (drawn by
me) (drawn under my supervision) from (an actual survey made by me) (an actual
survey made under my supervision); deed description in Book _________, Page
___________, Book __________, Page _________, etc. (other); that the error of
closure as calculated by latitudes and departures is 1:______; that the
boundaries not surveyed are shown as broken lines plotted from information
found in Book _____________, Page _____________; that this map was prepared in
accordance with NCGS § 47-30 as amended.
         Witness my hand and seal this ______ day of ____________________,
20_____.
         Surveyor
         State of North Carolina
         County of New Hanover
         I, ________________________, a Notary Public for said County and
State, do hereby certify that _______________________ personally came before me
this day and acknowledged the due
         execution of the foregoing instrument.
         Witness my hand and official seal, this ______ day of
_________________, 20_____.
         Official Seal
         Notary Public
         My Commission Expires: __________________
   (D)   Form of Endorsement. A form for the endorsement of the town shall be
stamped on the final plat before recording.
   (E)   Certificate of Ownership and Dedication.
      I (we) hereby certify that I am (we are) the owner (s) of the property
shown and described hereon and that I (we) hereby adopt this plan of a
subdivision with my (our) own free consent, establish minimum setback lines,
and dedicate all streets, alleys, walks, parks and other sites to public or
private use as noted. Further, I (we) certify the land as shown hereon is
within the platting jurisdiction of the Town of Wrightsville Beach, North
Carolina.
      Date                     Owner                                       
   (F)   Enforcement - No Service or Permits Until Final Plat Approved. No
street shall be accepted and maintained by the town nor shall any street
lighting be installed and added to the existing town systems until the final
plat is approved.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
PART II.
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section 155.12.17 Minimum Requirements.
   The requirements set forth in this Article shall be considered the minimum
requirements and shall be varied only in specific cases.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.12.18 Street Plans, Rights-of-Way, and Blocks.
   (A)   General Street Plan. All subdivision streets shall conform as to width
and location to the general street or thoroughfare plan for the town.
   (B)   Right-of-Way. The minimum right-of-way for streets shall be 60 feet.
Additional right-of-way may be required for other than residential streets in
accordance with the general street plan as adopted by the Board of Aldermen.
Streets or lanes having length of 400 feet or less and being open or connected
at one end only shall be not less than 50 feet. A partial width street, so
designated, may be dedicated when adjoining undeveloped property; provided,
that the width of the dedication, when permitted by the Planning Board and
approved by the Board of Aldermen, shall be such as to permit the installation
of the public facilities as may be necessary to serve the lots abutting
thereon. The owner of a subdivision of land abutting an existing partial width
street shall be required to dedicate the remainder of the full required width
of the street.
   (C)   Alleys. The minimum width of any alley shall be 20 feet, except in
commercial districts where the minimum width shall be not less than 22 feet.
Alleys shall be required in all blocks along the rear line of business
property.
   (D)   Easements. Where alleys are not provided, easements of not less than
five feet in width shall be provided on each side of all rear lot lines where
necessary or in other locations as may be directed by the Planning Board,
subject to final approval by the Board of Aldermen, for poles, wires, conduits,
storm or sanitary sewers, telephone, and water lines. Easements of greater
width may be required along the lines of or across lots where necessary for
storm drainage channels, surface overflow or for the extension of main sewers
or similar utilities.
   (E)   Culs-de-Sac. Culs-de-sac and dead-end streets shall terminate in a
circular right-of-way having a minimum radius of 40 feet. This provision may be
modified by the Planning Board, subject to final approval by the Board of
Aldermen. The culs-de-sac shall not exceed 400 feet in length.
   (F)   Intersecting Streets. Intersecting streets shall be laid out at
intervals that block lengths are not more than 800 feet, except where the
principal street serves lots fronting upon water areas and access by
intersecting street is not required; or where the principal street serves a
narrow island, strip of land, peninsula or is a cul-de-sac; or where, in the
opinion of the Planning Board, subject to final approval by the Board of
Aldermen, existing conditions justify a modification of this requirement.
   (G)   Block Widths. Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two tiers of lots
of minimum depth, plus alleys if needed and easements, except when prevented by
topographical conditions or the size of the property in which case the Planning
Board may approve a single tier of lots of minimum depth.
   (H)   Public Access. Public access shall be provided in accordance with the
recommendations of the town's land use plan and access plan, and/or the present
amount of public access and public parking as exists within the town now. If
any recommendations are found to conflict, the system requiring the greatest
quantity and quality of public access, including parking, shall govern.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.12.19 Requirements for Streets.
   (A)   Street Intersections. Street intersections shall be as nearly to right
angles as possible, and no intersections shall be at an angle less than 45
degrees.
   (B)   Street Off-Sets. Off-sets at street intersections shall not be
approved, except where deemed justifiable by the Planning Board and approved by
the Board of Aldermen.
   (C)   Reserve Strips for Limited Access Roads. Subdivisions showing reserve
strips controlling access to public ways shall not be approved, except when the
control and disposition of land comprising the strips is definitely placed
within the town's jurisdiction under conditions meeting the approval of the
Planning Board and Board of Aldermen.
   (D)   Street Names. Determinations regarding new street names, or changes in
street names must be reviewed by the New Hanover County 911 Administrator.
Street names shall be subject to the approval of the Board of Aldermen upon
recommendation of the Planning Board.
   (E)   Monuments. Permanent monuments shall be placed at all intersections or
at the tangent points of curves connecting intersecting street lines, at the
points of curvature and tangency in curved street lines, at all corners in the
exterior boundary of the subdivision, and at other points as may be necessary
to make the retracing of the lines as shown upon the final plat thereof
reasonably convenient. The location of all monuments shall be clearly
designated on the final plat. All lot corners shall be marked by permanent
markers.
   (F)   Curves. Street lines within the block deflecting from each other at
any one point more than five degrees shall be connected by a curve, the radius
of which shall be as determined after considering the factors of sight-
distance, type, and importance of street, anticipated traffic volume, and
convenience of traffic movement.
   (G)   All streets shall be constructed to the specifications of the town
(see Chapter 99 of the Town Code of Ordinances).
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.12.20 Lot Sizes and Side Lines.
   (A)   Area, Width. All lots shall conform to Section
155.6.5, Zoning District Development Standards.
   (B)   Side Lines of Lots. Side lines of lots shall be at right angles or
radial to the street lines, unless a variation from the rule will give a better
street and lot plan.
   (C)   Double Frontage Lots and Corner Lots. Lots with double frontage
running through the block from the street, shall be avoided where practicable.
Corner lots should be so designed as to prevent the rear of a building on a
corner lot from protruding beyond the setback line of a building fronting the
street which constitutes the side of the corner lot.
   (D)   Radius of Property Lines at Intersections. Property lines at corners
of all intersecting streets shall generally be rounded by an arc having a
radius of not less than 15 feet except that property lines at major street
intersections or at other locations where traffic hazards and congestion may be
anticipated shall be designed as special cases, and the necessary street
rights-of-way shall be provided therefor at the direction of the Planning
Board, subject to final approval by the Board of Aldermen.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.12.21 Setback Lines, Unusable Lots, and Land Elevation.
   (A)   Building Setback Lines. Building setback lines may be required to be
shown and properly designated which shall be not less than those required by
zoning provisions of this UDO.
   (B)   Unusable Lots. Where property is so platted as to leave unusable lots,
the lots shall be included within the subdivision and designated by the words
"reserve lot" followed by a numeral or letter to distinguish them from other
normal lots in the subdivision.
   (C)   Land Elevation Requirements. No lands shall be platted for
subdivision, the building and street areas of which are less than seven and
one-half feet mean sea level (MSL Beaufort Datum).
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
Section 155.12.22 Modification of Certain Requirements.
   The regulations concerning street widths, block lengths and widths, and
dead-end streets set forth in Section
155.12.18 and Section
155.12.19 may be modified by the Planning Board, subject to final approval by
the Board of Aldermen in the case of a subdivision of a tract of land large
enough to be developed as a relatively complete development or group housing
project in accordance with a well-studied plan, properly safeguarded by
restrictions and which adequately provide for traffic circulation, light and
air needs, and recreational requirements for the maximum anticipated population
and containing other requirements as may be recommended by the Planning Board
and approved by the Board of Aldermen.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
EXHIBIT A
DEFINITIONS
Section A.1 Purpose.
   For the purposes of this Ordinance, certain words, concept, and ideas are
defined herein. Except as defined herein, all other words used in this
Ordinance shall have their customary dictionary definition.
Section A.2 Interpretation.
   (A)   As used in this Ordinance, words importing the masculine gender
include the feminine and neuter.
   (B)   Words used in the singular in this Ordinance include the plural and
words used in the plural include the singular.
   (C)   Words used in the present tense include future tense.
   (D)   The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization,
corporation, company, trust, and partnership, LLC, and any other legal entity,
as well as an individual.
   (E)   The words "may" and "should" are permissive.
   (F)   The words "shall" and "will" are always mandatory and not merely
directive.
   (G)   The word "used for" shall include the meaning "designed for."
   (H)   The words "used" or "occupied" shall mean "intended, designed, and
arranged to be used or occupied."
   (I)   The word "lot" shall include the words "plot," "parcel," "site," and
"premises."
   (J)   The word "structure" shall include the word "building."
   (K)   The word "street" includes the word "alley," "road," "cul-de-sac,"
"highway," or "thoroughfare," whether designated as public or private.
   (L)   The word "includes" shall not limit the term to specified examples,
but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or circumstances
of like kind or character.
   (M)   The word "Aldermen" shall mean "Board of Aldermen" of Wrightsville
Beach, North Carolina.
   (N)   The word "administrator" shall mean the UDO Administrator or his/her
designee.
   (O)   The words "Planning Board" shall mean the "Wrightsville Beach Planning
Board."
   (P)   The word "Town" shall mean the "Town of Wrightsville Beach," a
municipality of the State of North Carolina.
   (Q)   The words "map," "zoning map," and "Wrightsville Beach Zoning Map"
shall mean the "Official Zoning Map for the Town of Wrightsville Beach, North
Carolina."
   (R)   The words "Board of Adjustment" shall mean the "Wrightsville Beach
Board of Adjustment."
Section A.3 Definitions.
1939 Line 
   A line established by the Town in 1939 pursuant to the authority set forth
in Public Laws of North Carolina, session 1939, Chapter 246, adopted by the
North Carolina General Assembly in 1939. This line runs from approximately Jack
Parker Boulevard north to Heron Street and is designated more specifically on
those maps recorded in Map Book 3 pages 71, 71A and 71B, New Hanover County
Registry.
    A
Access Structure
   A built upon surface allowing access to the beach area.
Accessory Building
   A building where it is incidental to that of the main building and is
detached and located on the same lot. Garages, carports, and storage sheds are
common urban accessory buildings.
Accessory Equipment
   Any equipment serving or being used in conjunction with a telecommunication
facility or support structure. This equipment includes, but is not limited to,
utility or transmission equipment, power supplies, generators, batteries,
cables, equipment buildings, cabinets and storage sheds, shelters or other
structures.
Accessory Structure
   A structure located on the same parcel of property as the principal
structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal
structure. Garages, carports, and storage sheds are common urban accessory
structures. Pole barns, hay sheds, and the like qualify as an accessory
structure on farms and may or may not be located on the same parcel as the farm
dwelling or shop building.
Accessory Use
   A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or
building and located on the same lot with the principal use or building.
Addition (To an Existing Building)
   An extension or increase in the floor area or height of a building or
structure.
Adjacent Property
   Properties immediately adjacent to the property of a request, including
properties and any portions of properties directly opposite from the property
of the request but separated by a street right-of-way.
Administrative Decision
   Decisions made in the implementation, administration, or enforcement of
development regulations that involve the determination of facts and the
application of objective standards set forth in N.C.G.S. Ch. 160D. These are
sometimes referred to as ministerial decisions or administrative
determinations.
Administrative Hearing
   A proceeding to gather facts needed to make an administrative decision.
Adult Care Home
   An assisted living residence in which the housing management provides 24-
hour scheduled and unscheduled personal care services to two or more residents,
either directly or for scheduled needs, through formal written agreement with
licensed home care or hospice agencies. Some licensed adult care homes provide
supervision to persons with cognitive impairments whose decisions, if made
independently, may jeopardize the safety or well-being of themselves or others
and therefore require supervision. Medication in an adult care home may be
administered by designated trained staff. Adult care homes that provide care to
two to six unrelated residents are commonly called family care homes.
Alteration
   As applied to a building, means any change or modification in construction
exit facilities, building equipment, or permanent fixtures which does not
include an addition to the building.
Amateur Radio Antenna
   Any tower and/or antenna owned and operated by an amateur radio operator for
"amateur service," as that term is defined by 47 C.F.R. § 97.3(a)(4). Said
towers and antennas must be used only for noncommercial purposes and must be 50
feet tall or less. For the purposes of this Ordinance, any antenna not meeting
this definition shall be deemed a "Wireless Telecommunications Facility."
Antenna
   Communications equipment that transmits, receives, or transmits and receives
electromagnetic radio signals used in the provision of all types of wireless
communications services.
Antenna Element Replacement
   The replacement of any part or all an antenna or antenna array with a model
of the same manufacturer and model type or close specification.
Apartment
   A portion of a building consisting of one or more rooms with bath and
kitchen designed for use as a single-family residence.
Appeal
   A request for a review of the UDO Administrator's interpretation of any
provision of this Ordinance.
Applicable Codes
   The N.C. State Building Code uniform fire, building, electrical, plumbing or
mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization together
with state, New Hanover County or Town of Wrightsville Beach amendments to
those codes enacted solely to address imminent threats of destruction of
property or injury to persons.
Approval Authority
   The Board of Aldermen shall be the approval authority for all applications
for the establishment of vested rights.
Approved
   Approved by the UDO Administrator or his/her designee.
Area of Shallow Flooding
   A designated Zone AO on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with
base flood depths determined to be from one to three feet. These areas are
located where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of
flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be
evident.
Auditorium
   A building or structure designed or intended for use for the gathering of
people as an audience to hear music, lectures, plays, or other presentations.
Average Foot-Candles
   The average of a number of points of foot-candle calculations or foot-candle
readings, either horizontal or vertical, in a given area. The calculations may
be initial or maintained foot-candles. Average foot-candles are calculated from
measurements on a grid.
Awning
   A structure made of cloth, metal, or other material affixed to a building in
such a manner that the structure may be raised or retracted from a building to
a flat position against the building, but not a canopy.
    B
Banner
   A sign made of flexible materials and supported along one or more sides or
at two or more corners by one or more fixed, rigid supports, such as poles,
rods, or a wall.
Barber or Beauty Shop
   A commercial enterprise or business established for the purpose of providing
hair cutting services and accessory services which are typical of barber and
beauty shops.
Basement
   Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on
all sides.
Base Flood
   The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Base Flood Elevation (BFE)
   The elevation of surface water resulting from a flood that has a 1% chance
of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. The BFE is shown on the
flood insurance rate map (FIRM).
Base Station
   A station at a specific site authorized to communicate with mobiles
stations, generally consisting of radio receivers, antennas, coaxial cables,
power supplies, and other associated electronics.
Beach Access (a)
   A naturally occurring or built upon surface facilitating pedestrian access
to the public beach area
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6786.jpg]
 
Beach Access Structure
   An access structure or beach walkover or other permitted structure
permitting or facilitating access to the beach area.
Beach Walkover
   A means of providing access from the landward side of a dune or dune system
to the public beach without disturbing the nature of the dune or surrounding
vegetation; access is facilitated by way of a structure installed upon pilings
over the dune and terminating at the toe of the dune.
Billboard
   An independent advertising device used to disseminate information concerning
a place, activity, or thing not pertaining to the use of the land upon which
the advertising device is located.
Board of Aldermen
   The governing body of the Town of Wrightsville Beach, North Carolina.
Boat Rental Facility
   A location where boats are made available for rent. Except as otherwise
provided herein, for purposes of this definition, a boat shall mean a motor
boat as defined in N.C.G.S. § 75A-2, a vessel as defined in N.C.G.S. § 75A-
2 with no means of propulsion other than drifting, manual paddling, poling or
rowing or a sailboat. For purposes of this definition a boat or vessel shall
not include jet skis or personal watercraft as defined in N.C.G.S. § 75A-13.3.
See Section 155.7.21 for additional conditions.
Boat Sales and Service
   A business that sells and services boats with no multi-level storage, no gas
sales and no direct water access.
Bona Fide Farm
   Agricultural activities as set forth in N.C.G.S. § 160D-903. Any of the
following is sufficient evidence that the property is being used for bona fide
farm purposes:
   (1)   A farm sales tax exemption certificate issued by the Department of
Revenue.
   (2)   A copy of the property tax listing showing that the property is
eligible for participation in the present-use value program pursuant to
N.C.G.S. § 105-277.3.
   (3)   A copy of the farm owner's or operator's Schedule F from the owner's
or operator's most recent federal income tax return.
   (4)   A forest management plan.
Breach
   A break or gap in the continuity of a dune caused by wind, water or
pedestrians.
Breakaway Wall
   A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is
intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral
loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building
or the supporting foundation system.
Bufferyard (a)
   A required open space, containing only screening and other uses as provided
by this Ordinance.  Both rear yards and side yards shall be considered
bufferyards.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6788.jpg]
 
Building
   Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or
occupancy.
Building Front
   The side of a building parallel to, or most nearly parallel to, the lot
frontage line or the side of the building containing the primary entrance as
designated by the owner. A building front may not face a side or rear lot line.
Building, Height of
   The vertical distance measured from a point in the center line of the street
(whether public or private) adjoining the front of the lot on which a structure
is to be built or improved that is an equal distance from the side lines
extended to the center line of the adjoining street to the highest point of the
coping of a flat roof; to the ridge line of a mansard roof; to the ridge of a
gable, hip, or gambrel roof; or to the highest point of a roof deck or hand
rail. Elevator penthouses and necessary mechanical service equipment are exempt
from this height limitation provided they are properly screened. Also exempt
are chimneys, solar panels, and church steeples. For corner lots adjoining two
streets or for those lots that do not adjoin a street, the adjoining street for
purposes of this definition shall be the street which is the address of the
lot. Features which increase the height of the street at its center above its
average grade, such as speed bumps, shall be omitted in determining building
height.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6790.jpg]
 
Building Inspector
   The town Building Inspector who is charged by the UDO Administrator with
enforcement of this Ordinance, where applicable.
Building Permit
   All land use, development, or building of any sort, excluding agricultural
uses, shall be required under this Ordinance to make application for, receive
approval of, and obtain a permit for said land use, development, or building.
This shall include but not be limited to any land disturbing activities other
than that stated above.
Building, Principal
   A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is
situated.
Building Setback Line
   A line establishing the minimum allowable distance between the property line
and the nearest portion of any structure or building constructed on a lot. No
building or structure or portion of a building or structure of any kind shall
be permitted between the building setback line and the property line, either
below, at, or above ground level, except as set forth herein, in Section 2.10,
or elsewhere in this Ordinance.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6792.jpg]
Bulkhead
   A vertical wall structure designed to retain shoreline material and prevent
erosion due to wave activity.
    C
Caliper
   The measurement of the diameter of a tree trunk. Measurement shall be taken
six inches above grade
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6794.jpg]
 
CAMA
   North Carolina's Coastal Area Management Act. This act, along with the
dredge and fill law and the federal Coastal Zone Management Act, is managed
through the North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources
(NCDENR), Division of Coastal Management (DCM).
CAMA Local Permit Officer (Code Enforcement Official, LPO)
   Staff of the Planning and Inspections Department of the town trained by the
Division of Coastal Management to implement the CAMA regulations for minor
permits. The Code Enforcement Official referred to in this Ordinance is also a
CAMA Local Permit Officer.
Cane
   The slender, strong but often flexible stem of a shrub.
Canopy
   A structure other than an awning made of cloth, metal, or other material
which may be totally or partially attached to a building for the purpose of
providing shelter to patrons or automobiles, or as a decorative feature on a
building wall. A canopy is not a completely enclosed structure.
Carrier on Wheels or Cell on Wheels (COW)
   A portable self-contained cell site that can be moved to a location and set
up to provide personal wireless services on a temporary or emergency basis. A
COW is normally vehicle-mounted and contains a telescoping boom as the antenna
support structure.
Cellar
   A portion of a building located partly or wholly underground having an
inadequate access to light and air from windows located partly or wholly below
the level of the adjoining ground.
Chemical Storage Facility
   A building, portion of a building, or exterior area adjacent to a building
used for the storage of any chemical or chemically reactive products.
Child Care Center
   An arrangement where, at any one time, there are three or more preschool-age
children or nine or more school-age children receiving child care.
Church Memorial Garden
   A place for the inurnment of cremated human remains contained in an urn in a
columbarium or by burial in the earth. A church memorial garden shall be
located on the same lot as the church and considered an accessory use and
accessory structure. It may be located in the rear or side yard and may
encroach into required side and rear yard setbacks.
Coastal Barrier Resources System (CBRS)
   Undeveloped portions of coastal and adjoining areas established by the
Coastal Barrier Resources Act (COBRA) of 1982, the Coastal Barrier Improvement
Act (CBIA) of 1990, and subsequent revisions, and includes areas owned by
federal or state governments or private conservation organizations identified
as otherwise protected areas (OPA).
Coastal High Hazard Area
   A special flood hazard area extending from offshore to the inland limit of a
primary frontal dune along an open coast and any other area subject to high
velocity wave action from storms or seismic sources. The area is designated on
a FIRM, or other adopted flood map as determined in
Article 155.11, Part I of this Ordinance, as Zone VE.
Collocation
   The placement, installation, maintenance, modification, operation or
replacement of wireless facilities on, under, within, or on the surface of the
earth adjacent to existing structures, including utility poles, town utility
poles, water towers, buildings, and other structures capable of structurally
supporting the attachment of wireless facilities.
Columbarium
   A free-standing structure or wall, not exceeding six feet in height,
containing niches for the placement of cremated human remains. A columbarium
shall be located on the same lot as the church and considered an accessory use
and accessory structure. It may be located in the rear or side yard and may
encroach into required side and rear yard setbacks.
Communications Facility
   The set of equipment and network components, including wires and cables and
associated facilities used by a communications service provider to provide
communications service.
Communications Service
   Cable service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6) (The one-way transmission to
subscribers of video programming, or other programming service and subscriber
interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video
programming or other programming service), and information service as defined
in 47 U.S.C. § 153(24) (The term "information service" means the offering of a
capability for generating, acquiring, storing, transforming, processing,
retrieving, utilizing, or making available information via telecommunications,
and includes electronic publishing, but does not include any use of any such
capability for the management, control, or operation of a telecommunications
system or the management of a telecommunications service), and
telecommunications service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153(53) (The term
"telecommunications service" means the offering of telecommunications for a fee
directly to the public.).
Communications Service Provider
   A cable operator as defined in "Communications Service" and 47 U.S.C. § 522
(5); a provider of information service, as defined in "Communications Service"
and 47 U.S.C. § 153(24); a telecommunications carrier, as defined in
"Communications Service" and in 47 U.S.C. § 153(51); or a wireless provider.
Computation of Time
   The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding
the first and including the last day; and if the last day is Saturday, Sunday,
or a legal holiday, that shall be excluded.
Construction, Light Marina Related
   An activity whose principal business is the construction of marina related
structures such as floating docks, piers and other accessory structures,
excluding the construction of boats and other water vessels.
Coppice Mounds
   The initial stages of dune growth formed as sand accumulates on the downwind
side of plants and other obstructions on or immediately adjacent to the beach
seaward of the foredunes. Coppice mounds may be unvegetated.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6796.jpg]
 
County
   The County of New Hanover, in the State of North Carolina, except as
otherwise provided.
    D
Damaged Trees
   Trees with structural defects are considered to be damaged. Some indicators
of damaged trees are:
   (1)   Burlwood. Indicates abnormal wood growth and is associated with
strength loss.
   (2)   Cavities and Decay. These 'bad spots' in a tree are great for wildlife
but are often cause for removal near structures.
   (3)   Construction Injury. Roots, trunk and branches can be severely damaged
by grading equipment. Many times this damage is extensive enough that the tree
should be removed.
   (4)   Dead Branches. Large dead branches and hangers should be removed if
there is no other damage to the tree. Long overextended branches also should be
removed. Dead branches by themselves are not cause for removal.
   (5)   Dead Tree. If more than 50% of the major limbs are dead or dying and
the tree is in a declining state, it shall be removed.
   (6)   Edge Tree. If an edge tree is leaning and it has a potential target,
it should be removed. Natural lean and leans where the ground is being heaved
are both considered leans.
   (7)   Fungal Fruiting Bodies (Mushrooms and Conks). This can mean
significant strength loss and should be investigated by a professional and
removed if it is warranted.
   (8)   Roots, Cankers, Cracks. These can be signs of significant structural
strength loss. Either removal or further professional investigation is needed.
"DAS" or "Distributive Access System"
   A technology using antenna combining technology allowing for multiple
carriers or wireless service providers to use the same set of antennas, cabling
or fiber optics.
Deteriorated
   That a dwelling is unfit for human habitation and can be repaired, altered,
or improved to comply with all the minimum standards established by this
Ordinance, at a cost not in excess of 50% of its value, as determined by
findings of the UDO Administrator.
Determination
   A written, final, and binding order, requirement, or determination regarding
an administrative decision.
Developer
   A person, including a governmental agency or redevelopment authority, who
undertakes any development and who is the landowner of the property to be
developed or who has been authorized by the landowner to undertake development
on that property.
Development
   Any of the following:
   (1)   The construction, erection, alteration, enlargement, renovation,
substantial repair, movement to another site, or demolition of any structure.
   (2)   The excavation, grading, filling, clearing, or alteration of land.
   (3)   The subdivision of land as defined in N.C.G.S. § 160D-802.
   (4)   The initiation or substantial change in the use of land or the
intensity of use of land. This definition does not alter the scope of
regulatory authority granted by N.C.G.S. Ch. 160D.
Development Approval
   An administrative or quasi-judicial approval made pursuant to N.C.G.S. Ch.
160D that is written and that is required prior to commencing development or
undertaking a specific activity, project, or development proposal. Development
approvals include, but are not limited to, zoning permits, site plan approvals,
special use permits, variances, and certificates of appropriateness. The term
also includes all other regulatory approvals required by regulations adopted
pursuant to N.C.G.S. Ch. 160D, including plat approvals, permits issued,
development agreements entered into, and building permits issued.
Development Regulation
   A unified development ordinance, zoning regulation, subdivision regulation,
erosion and sedimentation control regulation, floodplain or flood damage
prevention regulation, mountain ridge protection regulation, stormwater control
regulation, wireless telecommunication facility regulation, historic
preservation or landmark regulation, housing code, State Building Code
enforcement, or any other regulation adopted pursuant to N.C.G.S. Ch. 160D.
Diameter Breast Height (DBH)
   A measure of the size of a tree. Diameter is measured by finding the
circumference of the tree trunk with a tape measure and dividing the result by
pi (3.14159). The circumference measure shall be taken at breast height - four
and one-half feet above existing grade (the base of the tree). In the event of
a multi trunk tree, the DBH of each trunk shall be summed to determine a total
DBH for that tree.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6798.jpg]
 
Dilapidated
   That a dwelling is unfit for human habitation and cannot be repaired,
altered, or improved to comply with all the minimum standards established by
this Ordinance at a cost not in excess of 60% of its value, as determined by
findings of the Inspector.
Dish Antenna
   A dish antenna, which is also referred to as an earth station, is defined as
an accessory structure that includes the following: (1) An antenna or dish
antenna whose purpose is to receive communication or other signals from
orbiting satellites and other extraterrestrial sources; (2) A low-noise
amplifier, which is situated at the focal point of the receiving component and
whose purpose is to magnify the transfer signals; and (3) A coaxial cable whose
purpose is to carry the signals into the interior of a building.
Disposal
   As defined in N.C.G.S. § 130A-290(a)(6), the discharge, deposit, injection,
dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing of any solid waste into or on any land
or water so that the solid waste or any constituent part of the solid waste may
enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters,
including groundwaters.
Dock and Piers
   Platforms that extend into public waters for purposes such as mooring
watercraft, loading and unloading watercraft, water access, and seating areas.
Private docks and piers include those structures associated with residentially
zoned areas and for which no rent or fees are charged for use. Commercial docks
and piers are those structures associated with commercially zoned areas or for
which rents or other fees are charged for use, or for which membership is
required for use, such as private clubs.
Drip Line (a)
   The ground area under a tree, directly under the tips of its outermost
branches, where it sheds rain or irrigation water.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6800.jpg]
 
Dune
   Dynamic sand deposition(s) representing a fluctuation in elevation within
that area of the beach having development limitations as prescribed within this
Ordinance. The word "dune" as used in this Ordinance shall mean frontal or
single dunes, dune ridges, and dune systems or any part thereof, both old and
new, and shall include the vegetative cover related to these dunes.
Dune Ridge (Dune System)
   The continuous line of dunes which are usually well vegetated and rise
landward of the beach area but may also rise directly from a flat, wave-cut
beach immediately after a storm. A continuous line of dunes having primary dune
height is called a primary dune system (see Primary Dune).
Duplex
   A building consisting of two dwelling units arranged or designed to be
occupied by two families living independently from each other. The units shall
share a common and contiguous wall, where the units are side by side, or
abutting ceiling and floor, where one unit is above the other.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6802.jpg]
 
Dwelling
   Any building, structure, manufactured home, or mobile home, or part thereof,
used and occupied for human habitation or intended to be so used, and includes
any outhouses and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith.
The term does not include any manufactured home, mobile home, or recreational
vehicle, if used solely for a seasonal vacation purpose.
Dwelling, Multi-family
   A building or portion thereof used or designed as a residence for three or
more families living independently of each other and doing their own cooking
therein on a site of less than one acre. See also Housing Development.
Dwelling Unit
   A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or
more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating,
cooking, and sanitation.
    E
Elevated Building
   A non-basement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above
ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or
columns.
Eligible Facilities Request
   A request for a modification of an existing wireless tower or base station
that involves collocation of new transmission equipment or replacement of
transmission equipment but does not include a substantial modification.
Encroachment
   The advance or infringement of uses, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent
structures, or development into a floodplain (which may impede or alter the
flow capacity of a floodplain), or into a required setback.
Equipment Compound
   An area containing accessory equipment surrounding or near the base of a
wireless support structure within which a wireless facility is located.
Eroding Area
   A portion of the shoreline which is experiencing an historical erosion rate
of greater than two feet per year based on published data.
Erosion
   The wearing away of land or the removal of beach and/or dune sediments by
wave action tidal currents, wave currents, drainage, or wind. Erosion includes,
but is not limited to, horizontal recession and scour and can be induced or
aggravated by human activities.
Evidentiary Hearing
   A hearing to gather competent, material, and substantial evidence in order
to make findings for a quasi-judicial decision required by a development
regulation adopted under N.C.G.S. Ch. 160D.
Expansion of an Existing Antenna Array
   The addition of an antenna or antenna array with a new manufacturer and/or
model type and/or increases the bandwidth of the antenna or antenna array.
Extermination
   The control and elimination of insects, rodents, or other pests by
eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible
materials that may serve as their food, by poisoning, spraying, fumigating,
trapping or by other recognized and legal pest elimination methods approved by
the UDO Administrator.
    F
Fall Zone
   The area in which a wireless support structure may be expected to fall in
the event of a structural failure, as measured by engineering standards.
Family
   One or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption, living as a
single housekeeping unit, and having a recognized head of household, or not
more than four persons not so related, occupying a dwelling unit and living as
a single housekeeping unit.
Family Care Home
   An adult care home having two to six residents. The structure of a family
care home may be no more than two stories high, and none of the aged or
physically disabled persons being served there may be housed in the upper story
without provision for two direct exterior ground-level accesses to the upper
story.
Family Child Care Home
   A child care arrangement located in a residence where, at any one time, more
than two children, but less than nine children, receive child care.
Fence
   Any constructed barrier of any material or combination of materials serving
as an enclosure or boundary. A fence shall include all supporting and
associated structures such as columns, decorations, gates, and berms. Fences
may be open or solid provided the natures of the construction does not violate
the provisions of Section
155.7.10.
Festoon
   A chain or garland of flowers, leaves, ribbons, or similar material hung or
strung as a decoration.
Fixture
   Assembly that houses the lamp or lamps and can include all or some of the
following parts: a housing, a mounting bracket or pole socket, a lamp holder, a
ballast, a reflector or mirror, and/or a refractor or lens.
Floating Home
   (1)   Any vessel in fact used, designed, or occupied as a permanent dwelling
unit, business office, or source of any occupation or for any private or social
club of whatsoever nature, including, but not limited to, a structure
constructed upon a barge primarily immobile and out of navigation or which
functions substantially as a land structure while the same is anchored, moored,
or docked within the zoning jurisdiction of the town, whether such vessel is
self propelled or not and whose volume coefficient is greater than 3,000 square
feet. Volume coefficient shall be determined by dividing the habitable space of
a vessel measured in cubic feet by the draft of a vessel measured in feet of
depth.
   (2)   Where the dead weight of a vessel is excessive from the use of ballast
or the extensive use of materials not reasonably needed to provide a safe and
durable hull, the weight of such ballast or additional hull thickness shall be
computed and any draft resulting from such excess weight or from keels or other
projections from the vessel's bottom shall not be included in the vessel draft
used to compute the volume coefficient of the vessel.
   (3)   The foregoing definition of "floating home" shall not include a marina
restaurant permitted in the C-3 Commercial District III zoning district
pursuant to special use permit approved by the Board of Aldermen as provided
for in Section
155.7.28 of this Ordinance.
Flood or Flooding
   A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from:
   (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
   (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from
any source.
Flood Insurance
   The insurance coverage provided under the National Flood Insurance Program.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)
   An official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency, on which both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community are delineated.
Flood Insurance Study (FIS)
   An examination, evaluation, and determination of flood hazards,
corresponding water surface elevations (if appropriate), flood hazard risk
zones, and other flood data in a community issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency. The flood insurance study report includes flood insurance
rate maps (FIRMs).
Flood Prone Area
   See Floodplain.
Floodplain
   Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source.
Floodplain Administrator
   The UDO Administrator or his/her designee appointed to administer and
enforce the floodplain management regulations.
Floodplain Development Permit
   Any type of permit that is required in conformance with the provisions of
this Ordinance prior to the commencement of any development activity.
Floodplain Management
   The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures
for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural
resources in the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency
preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and
open space plans.
Floodplain Management Regulations
   
Article 155.11, Part I, and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations,
building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances, and other
applications of police power which control development in flood prone areas.
This term describes federal, state, or local regulations, in any combination
thereof, which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and
damage.
Floodproofing
   Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or
adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate
or improved real property, water, and sanitation facilities, structures, and
their contents.
Floodway
   The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that
must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively
increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
Flood Zone
   A geographical area shown on a flood hazard boundary map or flood insurance
rate map that reflects the severity or type of flooding in the area.
   (1)   Zone A. Areas subject to inundation by the 1%-annual-chance flood
event generally determined using approximate methodologies. Because detailed
hydraulic analyses have not been performed, no base flood elevations (BFEs) or
flood depths are shown. Mandatory flood insurance purchase requirements and
floodplain management standards apply.
   (2)   Zone AE and A1-30. Areas subject to inundation by the 1%-annual-chance
flood event determined by detailed methods. Base flood elevations (BFEs) are
shown. Mandatory flood insurance purchase requirements and floodplain
management standards apply.
   (3)   Zone VE. Areas subject to inundation by the 1%-annual-chance flood
event with additional hazards due to storm-induced velocity wave action. Base
flood elevation (BFEs) derived from detailed hydraulic analyses are shown.
Mandatory flood insurance purchase requirements and floodplain management
standards apply.
Floor
   A floor shall be the base or supporting surface of a building or the lower
most horizontal plane of an enclosed area located between the interior surfaces
of the exterior building walls and shall include: (i) all areas whether
finished or unfinished; (ii) all open area on each level for the landings of
interior stairwells, elevator shafts and interior chases and voids; and (iii)
the area under any walls or other supports of any kind.
Floor Area
   The total area of the floor as defined herein of a building.
Floor Area Ratio (FAR)
   The ratio of the measured area of a structure to the lot on which it is
built expressed as a decimal. Only the measured area above the base flood
elevation shal1 be included in the calculatio n. The measured area and the lot
size are always measured in square feet. Applies to single-family and duplex
structures only.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6804.jpg]
 
Foot-Candle
   Illuminance produced on a surface as measured by a calibrated light meter.
Freeboard
   The height added to the base flood elevation (BFE) to account for the many
unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater that the height
calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave
action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization on the
watershed. The base flood elevation plus the freeboard establishes the
regulatory flood protection elevation.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6806.jpg]
 
Frontal Dune
   The first mound of sand located landward of that area extending from the
mean low water line to a point where vegetation or a change in elevation occurs
having sufficient vegetation, height, continuity and configuration to offer
protective value.
Full Cut-Off Lights (a)
   An outdoor light fixture that emits no light rays above the horizontal plane
of the fixture.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6808.jpg]
 
Functionally Dependent Facility
   A facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is
located in close proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility necess
ary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbui lding, or
ship repair. The term does not include long-term storage, manuf acture, sales,
or service facilities.
    G
Garage
   An area used or capable of being used for normal automobile storage with
normal automobile access.
Garbage
   The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation,
cooking and consumption of food.
General Maintenance Activities
   Activities related to a structure that involve cleaning and painting and
repair or replacement of existing components of the structure with like
components in such a way that the existing design of the structure is not
altered.
Glare
   Light emitted from a light fixture with intensity great enough to reduce a
viewer's ability to see, and in extreme cases, causing momentary blindness; the
eye's direct line-of-sight contact with a light source.
Green Space
   An area consisting solely of dirt, mulch, or other similar natural ground
cover and natural planting materials.
Guest Home or Tourist Home
   Any dwelling occupied by owner or operator in which rooms are rented for
guests and for lodging of transients and travelers for compensation, where not
more than four rooms are used for these purposes.
    H
Habitable Room
   A room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living,
sleeping, cooking, or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water closet
compartments, laundries, heater rooms, foyers or communicating corridors,
closets and storage spaces.
Habitable Space
   Suitable for habitation and/or housing with a controlled physical
environment in which people can live under surrounding hospitable conditions.
Habitable space shall also include any space below the 100-year base flood
elevation which is finished and which enhances the structural stability of the
walls to exceed 20 pounds per square foot. Examples of finished space shall
include but not be limited to furniture in place, no floodway openings, and
used in the manner described in this definition.
Hazardous Waste Facility
   As defined in N.C.G.S. Ch. 130A, Art. 9, a facility for the collection,
storage, processing, treatment, recycling, recovery, or disposal of hazardous
waste.
Health Club
   A commercial enterprise or business established for the purpose of providing
facilities for physical exercise with the use of athletic equipment and
accessory services which are typical of health clubs.
Heritage Species
   Any live oak tree or eastern red cedar tree.
Highest Adjacent Grade (HAG)
   The highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction,
immediately next to the proposed walls of the structure.
Highway
   A dedicated and accepted public right-of-way for vehicular traffic. A
highway shall include all of the dedicated right-of-way and shall not be
limited to the paved surface only.
Historic Structure
   Any structure that is:
   (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
   (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of Interior as
contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district
or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a
registered historic district;
   (3)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic landmarks in
communities with a Certified Local Government (CLG) Program; or
   (4)   Certified as contributing to the historical significance of a historic
district designated by a community with a Certified Local Government (CLG)
Program. Certified Local Government Programs are approved by the U.S.
Department of the Interior in cooperation with the North Carolina Department of
Cultural Resources through the State Historic Preservation Officer as having
met the requirements of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 as
amended in 1980.
Holiday Lighting
   Temporary seasonal lighting, in the nature of decorations, clearly
incidental to and customarily associated with nationally recognized holidays.
Home Occupation
   Occupations described herein which are carried out within a dwelling unit
for the purpose of gain or support by a person or resident of such premises in
accordance with the regulations of this Ordinance. Permitted home occupations
shall be limited to office and professional use and homecrafts.
Horizontal Illuminance
   Light falling on a horizontal surface measured in foot-candles.
Hotel and Motel
   A building designed for occupancy for transients and having 16 or more rooms
or suites of rooms for rent to such transients. Such hotel or motel shall
contain an on-site office of the purpose of renting rooms and such other
operational functions normal to a hotel or motel. Single rooms shall contain no
more than 500 square feet including one bathroom. Suites shall consist of no
more than two rooms not to exceed a total of 600 square feet with one bathroom.
Suites may consist of two or more units in combination; however, when this is
the case, each unit shall be counted separately for density and parking
requirements. (See Apartment, Dwelling-Multifamily.)
Hotel and Motel Suite
   A suite shall be defined as two rooms sharing bath facilities not to exceed
a total of 600 square feet.
Hotel and Motel Unit
   A unit shall be defined as one room and a bath with or without kitchen
facilities not exceeding 500 square feet.
Household Appliance
   White goods or large electrical appliances that are typically, but not
necessarily, finished in white enamel. Household appliance includes, but shall
not be limited to, a stove, refrigerator, washing machine, clothes dryer and
dishwasher.
Housing Development
   A group of three or more dwelling units on property designed for occupancy
by separate families. Examples would be: cluster-type subdivisions; planned
unit developments; apartments; and housing projects, a project constructed for
unit ownership as permitted by the North Carolina Unit-Ownership Act, (N.C.G.S.
Ch. 47A) when approved under the requirements for group housing developments as
set forth in the subdivision regulations of the town. Zero setback single-
family housing may be allowed provided the housing complies with the special
use standards and the setback of the opposite lines shall be double that
required for the zone.
    I
IESNA
   Illuminating Engineering Society of North America.
Indirect Illumination
   Illuminated as a result of the glowing element(s), lamp(s), globe(s), or
reflector(s) of an artificial light source that is not visible to an observer.
Infestation
   The presence, within or around a dwelling, of any insects, rodents, or other
pests in such numbers as to constitute a menace to the health, safety, or
welfare of the occupants or to the public.
In the Town
   Any territory, jurisdiction of which for the exercise of its regulatory
power has been conferred on the town by public or private law.
    J
None
    K
None
    L
Landlocked Waterfront Lot
   Lots not abutting any streets, but abutting a public beach or waterway.
Legislative Decision
   The adoption, amendment, or repeal of a regulation under N.C.G.S. Ch. 160D
or an applicable local act. The term also includes the decision to approve,
amend, or rescind a development agreement consistent with the provisions of
N.C.G.S. Ch. 160D.
Legislative Hearing
   A hearing to solicit public comment on a proposed legislative decision.
Levee
   A man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control,
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
Levee System
   A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and
associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are
constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
Level of 100-Year Flood
   The highest level of flooding that, on the average, is likely to occur once
every 100 years (or has a 1% chance of occurring each year). In no case,
however, shall any structure have habitable space below a minimum of two feet
above the base flood elevation as shown on the federal flood insurance rate
maps in both the A and V Zones and in both residential and non-residential
structures. Both new construction and/or substantial improvement of existing
structures shall comply with the requirements of this Ordinance at the lowest
supporting structural member in the V Zone and at the finished floor elevation
in the A Zone.
Light(ing)
   Light emanating from any human-made device.
Light Pollution
   General sky glow caused by the scattering of artificial light in the
atmosphere.
Light Source (Lamp)
   Any light or lighting that directly radiates visible light; part of the
fixture that produces actual light.
Light Trespass
   Shining of light produced by a light fixture, other than a municipal street
light on a public right-of-way, beyond the boundaries of the property on which
it is located. A calibrated measurement above 0.1 foot-candles on the receiving
property (the property of the person complaining of the trespass) is "light
trespass." The measurement is made at adult eye level five feet within the
boundary of the receiving property with a calibrated light meter.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6810.jpg]
 
Line of Vegetation
   The extreme seaward boundary of natural vegetation which spreads
continuously inland. If unable to identify the stable vegetation line, then the
line can be extrapolated from the next nearest point of stable vegetation on
both the north and south of the area in question.
Lot
   A parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied by a building or
group of buildings devoted to a common use, together with the customary
accessories and open spaces belonging to same.
Lot, Corner
   A lot or portion of a lot at the junction of and abutting upon two or more
streets. For nonconforming lots, only the street which the lot is addressed is
subject to the front yard setback. See Section
155.2.6, Visibility on Corner Lots.
Lot, Depth of (a)
   The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6812.jpg]
 
Lot Frontage
   The front of a lot shall be construed to be the portion nearest the street.
For the purpose of determining yard requirements on through lots, all sides of
a lot abutting parallel or approximately parallel streets shall be considered
frontages. For landlocked waterfront lots, the side of the lot abutting the
water shall be considered the rear lot line and the side opposite this rear lot
line shall be considered the front lot line.
Lot Line
   The line bounding a lot as defined herein.
Lot, Through
   A lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets.
Lot Width
   The mean horizontal distance between side lot lines.
Lowest Adjacent Grade (LAG)
   The elevation of the ground, sidewalk, or patio slab immediately next to the
building, or deck support, after completion of the building.
Lowest Floor
   The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An
unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles,
building access, or limited storage in an area other than a basement area is
not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such an enclosure is
not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-
elevation design requirements of this Ordinance.
Lumen
   Total quantity of light produced by a light source, according to the
manufacturer's ratings. One foot-candle is one lumen per square foot.
    M
Maintained Foot-Candle
   Average foot-candles that are calculated with an adjustment for a
maintenance factor that includes dirt build-up, lamp lumen loss over time,
ballast factor, and so on. Immediately after installation, the system may have
higher illumination levels, which over time will decrease to the average
maintained level.
Manufactured Home
   A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a
permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent
foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term manufactured home
does not include a recreational vehicle.
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision
   A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Market Value
   The building value, not including the land value and that of any accessory
structures or other improvements on the lot. Market value may be established by
independent certified appraisal, replacement cost depreciated for age of
building and quality of construction (actual cash value), or adjusted tax
assessed values.
Marina or Boatominium
   A place where boats are stored, serviced, or supplied with any type of
marine and service a contiguous group of two or more boat slips, each of which
is or may be separately owned and with common ownership of the land, piers,
walkways, and any other structures necessary for service of the slips. Projects
approved under the North Carolina Unit Ownership Act (N.C.G.S. Ch. 47A) and
having an approved special use permit are excluded from this definition.
Marina Residential
   A waterfront multi-family residential project allowed only by special use
permit in the C-3 Commercial District III and meeting all the criteria set
forth in Section
155.7.26.
Marina Restaurant
   A vessel in fact used or designed as a permanent restaurant constructed upon
a barge primarily immobile and out of navigation and which functions
substantially as a land structure while the same is anchored, moored, or docked
within a marina located in the C-3 Commercial District III zoning district of
the town, whether such vessel is self-propelled or not, and meeting all of the
criteria set forth in Section
155.7.28. A marina restaurant shall be allowed only pursuant to a special use
permit issued by the Board of Aldermen for use in conjunction with the
operation of a yacht club and related marina meeting all of the requirements
set forth in Section
155.7.28.
Marquee
   A roof-like structure or awning projecting over an entrance to a building.
Mayor
   The Chief Elected Official of Wrightsville Beach.
Mean Sea Level
   The average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a
reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. Refer to
each FIRM panel to determine datum used.
Measured Area
   The measured area shall be the total area of the floor of a building that is
located above the base flood elevation to include external, non-habitable or
unconditioned voids in buildings whether under roof or not and not considered a
deck. Where a floor lies below a ceiling height of greater than 15 feet (as in
a vaulted ceiling), then that area of the floor under the vertical height of
greater than 15 feet shall be counted twice in computing measured area. Attics,
with or without a laid floor, with structural headroom of five feet or greater
shall be included in the measured area. The following shall be excluded from
the computation of measured area:
   (1)   One access corridor in the attic of a building if it:
      (a)   Runs parallel to the center roof ridge;
      (b)   Is no wider than three feet; and
      (c)   Does not exceed five feet in height.
   (2)   Staircases and stair treads.
Meeting and Events Center
   A facility in which space and ancillary services, which may include food
services, are furnished to groups holding functions including, but not limited
to, meetings, weddings, and receptions. Food may be prepared on site, but food
service shall not be provided to members of the general public who are not
members of a group holding a function at which the food service is provided.
Meeting Rooms
   A structure or portion of a structure, area or other facility privately
owned and utilized for general meeting and conference activities. The use may
include an administrative office used solely for the purpose of leasing the
meeting room; however, no cooking facilities of any kind shall be permitted in
the meeting room or administrative office. Meeting or conference rooms that
qualify as accessory uses to a hotel or motel shall be excluded from this
definition.
Micro Wireless Facility
   A small wireless facility that is no larger in dimension than 24 inches in
length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height and that has an exterior
antenna, if any, no longer than 11 inches.
Minimum Foot-Candle
   The minimum foot-candle reading for a given area.
Mixed Use Commercial-Residential
   A type of use providing for commercial use on the first finished floor of
the structure facing the public right-of-way or other public space and
residential use on the second and any additional permitted floors. No
residential use shall be permitted on the first finished floor of the
structure. Commercial use shall be permitted on the second or higher finished
floors of the structure. Those commercial uses permitted in a mixed use
development shall be the commercial uses permitted in the applicable zoning
district. Each residential unit permitted in a mixed use development shall have
a minimum of 1,500 square feet of heated space and shall comply with all other
provisions of this Ordinance.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6814.jpg]
 
Modifications, Major
   Improvements to existing telecommunications facilities or support
substantial change to the facility or structure. Collocation of new
telecommunications facilities to an existing support structure without
replacement of the structure shall not constitute a major modification. Major
modifications include, but are not limited to, extending the height of the
support structure by more than 20 feet or 10% of its current height whichever
is greater, and the replacement of the structure.
Modifications, Minor
   Improvements to existing telecommunications facilities and support
structures that result in some material change to the facility or support
structure but of level, quality, or intensity that is less than a "substantial"
change. Such minor modifications include, but are not limited to, extending the
height of the support structure by less than 20 feet or 10% of its current
height, whichever is greater, and the expansion of the compound area of for
additional accessory equipment.
Multiple Dwelling
   Any building, or portion thereof, which is designed, built, rented, leased,
let or hired out to be occupied, or which is occupied as the home or residence
of two families or more, living independently of each other and doing their own
cooking in the said building and shall include flats and apartments.
Multi-Unit Assisted Housing with Services
   An assisted living residence in which hands-on personal care services and
nursing services which are arranged by housing management are provided by a
licensed home care or hospice agency through an individualized written care
plan. The housing management has a financial interest or financial affiliation
or formal written agreement which makes personal care services accessible and
available through at least one licensed home care or hospice agency. The
resident has a choice of any provider, and the housing management may not
combine charges for housing and personal care services. All residents, or their
compensatory agents, must be capable, through informed consent, of entering
into a contract and must not be in need of 24-hour supervision. Assistance with
self- administration of medications may be provided by appropriately trained
staff when delegated by a licensed nurse according to the home care agency's
established plan of care.
    N
Natural Area
   Those portions or areas of each lot, tract, or parcel which are designated,
or required, to retain the original vegetation and existing topography.
Natural Vegetation
   Any vegetation, whether original or planted, that is compatible with the
property according to Article 9, Part III.
Natural Water Feature
   This area shall include the ocean front, all natural and man-made water
courses, and all wetlands.
New Construction
   Structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after June 9,
1970, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
Nonconforming Building
   A building that does not comply with the yard, area, and height requirements
of this Ordinance.
Nonconforming Lot
   A lot existing on the effective date of this Ordinance or any amendment
hereto that cannot meet the minimum area or lot width or depth requirements of
the district in which the lot is located.
Nonconforming Situation
   A situation that occurs when, on the effective date of this Ordinance or any
amendment hereto, an existing lot or structure, or lawful use of an existing
lot or structure, does not conform to one or more of the regulations applicable
to the district in which the lot or structure is located. Among other
possibilities, a nonconforming situation may arise because a lot does not meet
minimum acreage requirements, because a structure does not satisfy maximum
height limitations, because the relationship between existing buildings and the
land (in such matters as density and setback requirements) is not in conformity
with this Ordinance, or because land, buildings or other areas subject to this
Ordinance are used for purposes made unlawful by this Ordinance or any
amendment hereto.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6816.jpg]
 
Nonconforming Structure
   A structure that legally existed prior to the adoption date of this
Ordinance, but which is not in compliance with the requirements of this
Ordinance for the district in which the structure is located.
Nonconforming Use
   Any building, land or other areas subject to this Ordinance lawfully
occupied by a use on the effective date of this Ordinance or amendment hereto
which does not conform after the passage of this Ordinance or amendment with
the use requirements of the district in which it is situated. For example, a
commercial retail use in a residential district may be a nonconforming use. The
term also refers to the activity that constitutes the use made of the property.
For example, the use of property as a duplex in an area zoned exclusively for
single-family residences is a nonconforming use.
Non-Encroachment Area
   The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that
must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively
increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot as designated in the
flood insurance study report.
Non-Glare
   Materials with a finish which does not produce a brightness sufficient to
cause annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual performance and visibility.
Nursing Home
   A facility, however named, which is advertised, announced, or maintained for
the express or implied purpose of providing nursing or convalescent care for
three or more persons unrelated to the licensee. A nursing home is a home for
chronic or convalescent patients, who, on admission, are not as a rule, acutely
ill and who do not usually require special facilities such as an operating
room, X-ray facilities, laboratory facilities, and obstetrical facilities. A
nursing home provides care for persons who have remedial ailments or other
ailments, for which medical and nursing care are indicated; who, however, are
not sick enough to require general hospital care.
    O
Oath
   Includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words swear and sworn shall be
equivalent to the words affirm and affirmed.
Oceanfront Lot
   A lot of record which is adjacent to the Atlantic Ocean or the property line
or other inlet hazard area. An oceanfront lot shall also include lots adjacent
to town, state or U.S. Government owned property that adjoins the Atlantic
Ocean.
Oceanfront Pier
   A pier constructed wholly or in part east of the property line as
established by Chapter 246 of the Public Laws of North Carolina, Session 1939,
as amended.
Ocean Hazard Area
   Those AECs that are considered natural hazard areas along the Atlantic Ocean
shoreline where, because of their special vulnerability to erosion or other
adverse effects of sand, wind, and water, uncontrolled or incompatible
development could reasonably endanger life or property. Ocean hazard areas
include beaches, frontal dunes, inlet lands, and other areas in which geologic,
vegetative, and soil conditions indicate a substantial possibility of excessive
erosion or flood damage.
Ocean-Related Business
   A business activity limited solely to teaching participants to surf, paddle
board, or kite board and the rental of chairs and umbrellas by hotels located
immediately adjacent to the beach front.
Occupant
   Any person over one year of age, living, sleeping, cooking or eating in, or
having actual possession of a dwelling unit or rooming unit.
Occupancy
   The purpose for which a building is used or intended to be used. Change of
occupancy is not intended to include change of tenants or proprietors.
Official Time Standard
   Whenever certain hours are named in this code, they shall mean standard time
or daylight saving time as may be in current use in this town.
OPA
   An otherwise protected area.
Opaque Fence
   Any six foot minimum fence which creates complete visual separation between
adjoining properties.
Opaque Wall
   Any six foot minimum wall which creates complete visual separation between
adjoining properties.
Openable Area
   That part of a window or door which is available for unobstructed
ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors.
Open Air Market
   Any temporary display of goods in an open or partially open setting as
requested by the applicant and approved by the Board of Aldermen.
Operator
   Any person who has charge, care or control of a building, or part thereof,
in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.
Ordinary Maintenance
   Ensuring that telecommunications facilities and support structures are kept
in good operating condition. Ordinary maintenance includes inspections,
testing, and modifications that maintain functional capacity, aesthetic and
structural integrity; for example, the strengthening of a support structure's
foundation or of the support structure itself. Ordinary maintenance includes
replacing antennas and accessory equipment on a like-for-like basis within an
existing telecommunications facility and relocating the antennas of approved
telecommunications facilities to different height levels on an existing
monopole or tower upon which they are currently located. Ordinary maintenance
does not include minor modifications or major modifications.
Original Vegetation
   Plant life that existed on the site at its first stage of existence.
Outdoor Lighting
   Night-time illumination of an outside area, object, or building by any man-
made device located outdoors or indoors that produces light by any means.
Owner
   Any owner of a legal or equitable interest in real property, including
heirs, devisees, successors and assigns, having a vested estate and the agent
or personal representative of such owner. For purposes of this Ordinance, owner
shall include a person holding a valid and recorded option to purchase the real
property with respect to which he seeks to establish a vested right.
    P
Parking Facility
   Area used for the storage of vehicles. Interior shall mean the area within
the parking facility curb or pavement.
Parking Lot Off-Site
   A parking lot providing off-site parking for commercial uses located within
400 feet of the nearest point of the property on which the parking lot is
located. Such parking lot shall only be used for parking directly associated
with the commercial use with which the parking lot is associated and for no
other purposes.
Parking Lots
   Lands outside of the public right-of-way, properly improved in accordance
with
Article 155.9, Part I, Off-Street Parking Requirements, with suitable ingress
from and egress to a public street, for the sole use of parking motor vehicles.
Parking Space (a)
   A clearly marked storage space for one automobile, plus the necessary access
space. Such parking space shall always be located outside the dedicated street
right-of-way and conform to the standards set forth in 
Article 155.9, Part I.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6818.jpg]
 
Parties in Interest
   All individuals, associations, and corporations who have interests of record
in a dwelling or any who are in possession thereof; or shall have charge, care
or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or
as executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee, or guardian of
the estate of the owner. Any such person thus representing the actual owner
shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this Ordinance, and of rules
and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if he were the
owner.
Person
   A corporation, firm, partnership, limited liability corporation (LLC),
association, organization, and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an
individual.
Personal Property
   Every type of property except real property, as herein defined.
Planning and Development Regulation Jurisdiction
   The geographic area defined in N.C.G.S. Ch. 160D within which a city or
county may undertake planning and apply the development regulations authorized
by N.C.G.S. Ch. 160D.
Platting Jurisdiction
   The land located within the corporate limits and the land located within one
mile in every direction from the corporate limits and not located in any other
incorporated city or town. However, the platting jurisdiction shall extend only
to a point equidistant from the corporate limits of the town.
Plumbing
   The labor, materials, and fixtures used in the installation, maintenance,
extension, and alteration of all piping, fixtures, appliances, and
appurtenances in connection with any of the following: sanitary drainage or
storm drainage facilities, the venting system and public or private water-
supply system, within or adjacent to any building, structure, or conveyance;
also the labor and material used in the installation, maintenance, extension,
or alteration of storm water, liquid waste, or sewage, and water supply systems
on any premises to their connection with any point of public disposal.
Post-FIRM
   Construction or other development for which the start of construction
occurred on or after June 12, 1970, the effective date of the initial flood
insurance rate map for the area.
Pre-FIRM
   Construction or other development for which the start of construction
occurred before June 12, 1970, the effective date of the initial flood
insurance rate map for the area.
Premises
   A lot, plot, or parcel of land including the buildings or structures
thereon.
Primary Dune
   The Coastal Area Management Act defines a primary dune as the first mounds
of sand located landward of the ocean beaches having an elevation equal to the
mean flood level for the area plus six feet. The primary dune extends landward
to the lowest elevation in the depression behind that same mound of sand.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6820.jpg]
 
Primary Frontal Dune
   A continuous or nearly continuous mound or ridge of sand with relatively
steep seaward and landward slopes immediately landward and adjacent to the
beach and subject to erosion and overtopping from high tides and waves during
major coastal storms. The inland limit of the primary frontal dune occurs at
the point where there is a distinct change from a relatively steep slope to a
relatively mild slope.
Principally Above Ground Building
   A building that has at least 51% of its actual cash value, including
machinery and equipment, above ground.
Private Access Easement
   A private access easement is an easement crossing private property and
providing access to four or fewer residential lots, all of which were existing
lots of record as of May 13, 2014 and are located in the R-1 or R-2 Zoning
Districts. A private access easement shall be constructed in accordance with
the standards set forth in Section
155.7.21.
Private Club
   An establishment that is organized and operated solely for a social,
recreational, patriotic, or fraternal purpose and that is not open to the
general public, but is open only to the members of the organization and their
bona fide guests. This provision does not, however, prohibit such an
establishment from being open to the general public for raffles and bingo games
as required by N.C.G.S. § 14-309.11(a) and N.C.G.S. § 14-309.13. No
organization that discriminates in the selection of its membership on the basis
of religion shall be eligible to receive any permit issued under this
Ordinance. A private club does not include permanent or temporary residential
occupancy.
Protected Trees
   The following shall be considered protected trees and shall be subject to
the provisions of this Ordinance.
   (1)   Trees planted or retained in order to meet the requirements of Article
9, Part III; or
   (2)   Any heritage tree having a DBH measurement of at least eight inches on
town-owned property, any public right-of- way, or private property.
Public Easement
   As used in this code, means an unoccupied open space adjoining a building
and on the same property, that is permanently maintained accessible to the Fire
Department and free of all encumbrances that might interfere with its use by
the Fire Department.
Public Safety and/or Nuisance
   Anything which is injurious to the safety or health of an entire community
or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs
the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or
river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.
Public Trust Waters
   All waters of the Atlantic Ocean from the mean high water mark seaward; all
natural bodies of water subject to measurable tides; and all navigable waters.
    Q
Quasi-judicial Decision
   A decision involving the finding of facts regarding a specific application
of a development regulation and that requires the exercise of discretion when
applying the standards of the regulation. The term includes, but is not limited
to, decisions involving variances, special use permits, certificates of
appropriateness, and appeals of administrative determinations. Decisions on the
approval of subdivision plats and site plans are quasi-judicial in nature if
the regulation authorizes a decision-making board to approve or deny the
application based not only upon whether the application complies with the
specific requirements set forth in the regulation, but also on whether the
application complies with one or more generally stated standards requiring a
discretionary decision on the findings to be made by the decision-making board.
    R
Real Property
   Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments.
Recreational Vehicle (RV)
   A vehicle, which is:
   (1)   Built on a single chassis;
   (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
   (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
   (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Reference Level
   The top of the lowest floor for structures within special flood hazard areas
designated as Zone A1-30, AE, A, A99, or AO. The reference level is the bottom
of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor for structures
within special flood hazard areas designated as Zone VE.
Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation
   The base flood elevation plus the freeboard. In special flood hazard areas
where base flood elevations (BFEs) have been determined, this elevation shall
be the BFE plus two feet of freeboard.
Remedy a Violation
   To bring the structure or other development into compliance with state and
community floodplain management regulations or, if this is not possible, to
reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced
include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood
damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of this Ordinance, or
otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing federal financial
exposure with regard to the structure or other development.
Remove (Including Removing or Removal)
   The cutting down or digging up of any live or dead vegetation; the cutting
of any portion of a protected tree that has the dimensions of a protected tree
at the point of the cut; and all other acts that cause the death or destruction
of any protected tree.
Repair
   The replacement of existing work with the same kind of material used in the
existing work, not including additional work that would change the structural
safety of the building, or that would affect or change required exit
facilities, a vital element of an elevator, plumbing, gas piping, wiring or
heating installations, or that would be a violation of a provision of law or
ordinance. The term repair or repairs shall not apply to any change of
construction.
Replacement
   Constructing a new support structure of proportions and of equal height or
such other height as would be allowed under the definition of minor
modification to a pre-existing support structure in order to support a
telecommunications facility or to accommodate collocation and removing the
preexisting support structure.
Replacement Tree
   A tree replanted and surviving for at least one year to compensate for the
removal of a tree of greater diameter. Replacement trees shall have a DBH of at
least three inches when planted.
Required
   Required by some provision of this Ordinance.
Residence
   A building or portion thereof designed, arranged, or used for permanent
living quarters for one or more families.
Residence, Single-family
   A detached building designed for occupancy by or occupied exclusively by one
family.
Residential Child-Care Facility
   A staffed premise with paid or volunteer staff where children receive
continuing full-time foster care.
Residential Occupancy
   Buildings in which families or other households live or in which sleeping
accommodations are provided. Such buildings include, among others, the
following: dwellings, multiple dwellings, and lodging houses, and all
dormitories.
Residential Piers
   Piers owned by the contiguous landowner in residential zones or the shore
zone which portion of the shore zone would be an extension of the residential
use of the owners lot.
Residential Unit
   A building or portion thereof designed, arranged, or used for living
quarters for one family.
Restaurant
   An establishment whose principal business is the sale, to customers, of
foods, frozen desserts, or beverages, in a ready-to-eat state, and whose design
and principal method of operation determines its classification as follows:
   (1)   Standard: In standard restaurants, food and beverages are usually
consumed within the restaurant building and;
      (a)   Customers are provided with an individual menu and served by an
employee at the same table or counter at which their food and beverages are
consumed; or
      (b)   Customers make their selections of food and beverages from a
counter where ready-to-eat items are displayed, as in cafeteria or buffet
service, and carry their selections to a table for consumption.
   (2)   Carry-out: Foods and beverages are usually served in edible containers
or in paper, plastic, or other disposable containers by an employee at a
standing counter or drive-in window, and consumption is normally off the
premises but may be allowed within a motor vehicle parked on the premises or at
other facilities on the premises outside the principal building.
   (3)   Fast-food: A fast-food restaurant is the same as carry-out but in
addition allows consumption of food and beverages within the principal
building.
   (4)   Sidewalk café: A standard restaurant that has been approved for an
outside dining space placed on a public sidewalk.
Retaining Wall
   A wall or similar structural device used at a grade change to hold the soil
on the uphill side from slumping, sliding, or falling.
Rezoning
   See Zoning Map Amendment.
Rooming House
   Any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling containing one or more rooming
unit, in which space is let by the owner or operator to three or more persons
who are not members of the family of the owner or operator.
Rooming Unit/Rental Unit
   Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended
to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes.
Root Protection Zone
   The land area around the base of a tree in which disturbances are prohibited
in order to protect the roots of the tree and aid in the tree's survival.
Rubbish
   Combustible and non-combustible waste materials except garbage, and the term
shall include ashes, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber,
leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter,
glass, crockery and dust.
    S
Salvage Yard
   Any non-residential property used for the storage, collection, and/or
recycling of any type of equipment, and including but not limited to vehicles,
appliances, and related machinery.
Schools, Limited Public Classroom Leases
   Leasing of space by a public school system, as a tenant, in structures owned
by the Wrightsville Beach Baptist Church located at 601 Causeway Drive,
Wrightsville Beach, N.C. that were in existence on September 1, 2012, for use
only as public school classrooms and related storage and restroom areas. No
more than two classrooms may be leased by such landlord in all property owned
by such landlord within the town. Any lease entered into in accordance with
Ordinance 1742, passed April 8, 2015, shall permanently end on or before June
20, 2019.
Search Ring
   The area within which a wireless support facility or wireless facility must
be located in order to meet service objectives of the wireless service provider
using the wireless facility or wireless support structure.
Service Station
   Any building or land used for the dispensing, sale, or offering for sale at
retail of any automobile fuels, lubricants, or tires; however, indoor car-
washing, minor mechanical adjustment, and tire repair are only performed
incidental to the conduct of the service station.
Shielding
   A design feature or a device that is applied to a light fixture or to a
structure on which a light fixture is mounted to prevent its light output from
being visible from selected locations or horizontal and/or vertical angles.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6822.jpg]
 
Shopping Center Complex
   A building or buildings located on the same site having three or more
commercial uses with a minimum of 16,000 square feet of gross leasable area,
planned and constructed as a single project with appropriate parking and
loading facilities located on-site.
Shore Line Development Boundary
   The eastern-most boundary for development on oceanfront lots at Wrightsville
Beach. The exact location of the Shore Line Development Boundary is dependent
upon a comparison of varying enforcement factors with the most restrictive
applying.
Shrub, Intermediate
   Deciduous or evergreen plants installed at a minimum height of 36 inches, a
minimum of five canes, and a minimum spread of roots or rootball diameter of 14
inches.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6824.jpg]
 
Shrub, Large
   Deciduous and/or evergreen plants, as required in the applicable sections,
installed at a minimum height of five-feet, a minimum of six canes, and a
minimum spread of roots or rootball diameter of 24-inches. Large shrubs shall
be maintained at a height of six to ten feet.
Shrub, Small
   Deciduous and/or evergreen plants, as required in the applicable sections,
installed at a minimum height of 18-inches, a minimum of five canes, and a
minimum spread of roots or rootball diameter of ten inches. Small shrubs shall
be maintained at a height of 2 to 4 feet.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6828.jpg]
 
Sidewalk (a)
   Any portion of a street, between the curb line and the adjacent property
line intended for the use of pedestrians.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6826.jpg]
 
Sign
   Any words, lettering, numerals, parts of letters or numerals, figures,
phrases, sentences, emblems, devices, designs, trade names, or trade marks by
which anything is made known, including any surface, fabric, or other material
or structure designed to carry such devices, such as are used to designate or
attract attention to an individual, a firm, an association, a corporation, a
profession, a business, or a commodity or product, which are exposed to public
view, and used to attract attention.
Sign Alteration
   Any change of copy, sign face, color size, shape illumination, position,
location, construction, or supporting structure of any sign.
Sign Area (a)
   The surface area of a sign shall be computed as including the entire area
visible from any one point, within a regular geometric form or combinations of
regular geometric forms comprising all of the display area of the sign
including lattice work, wall work, and individual letters and spaces between
letters comprising part of the sign. Computations of sign area shall include
only one side of a double-faced sign structure. If a sign has two sides joined
at an angle of greater than 60 degrees, the surfaces of both sides of the sign
shall be included in the computation of area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6830.jpg]
 
Sign, Balloon
   One or more balloons used as a permanent or temporary sign or as a means of
directing attention to any business or profession, or to a commodity or service
sold, offered, or manufactured, or to any entertainment.
Sign, Business
   An advertising device used to disseminate information concerning a person,
place, or thing, pertaining to the use of the land upon which it is located.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6832.jpg]
 
Sign, Cabinet
   A sign that contains all the text and/or logo symbols within a single
enclosed cabinet and may or may not be illuminated.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6834.jpg]
 
Sign, Combination
   A sign incorporating any combination of the features of freestanding,
projecting, and wall signs.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6836.jpg]
 
Sign, Fixed
   Any lighter-than-air or gas-filled balloon attached by means of a rope or
tether to a definite or fixed location.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6838.jpg]
 
Sign, Freestanding
   A sign that is attached to, erected on, or supported by some structure (such
as a pole, mast, frame, or other structure) that is not itself an integral part
of or attached to a building or other structure whose principal function is
something other than the support of a sign.
Sign, Illegal
   Any of the following:
   (1)   A sign erected without first obtaining a permit and complying with all
regulations in effect at the time of its construction or use;
   (2)   A sign that was legally erected but whose use has ceased because the
business it identifies is no longer conducted on the premises;
   (3)   A sign that is a danger to the public or is unsafe; or
   (4)   A sign that pertains to a specific event that has not been removed
within seven days after the occurrence of the event.
Sign, Independent (Billboard)
   One advertising device used to disseminate information concerning a person,
place, or thing not pertaining to the use of the land upon which it is located.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6840.jpg]
 
Sign, Kiosk
   A sign consisting of three to five sides that lists names of businesses
located on a property or in a building.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6842.jpg]
 
Sign, Marquee
   A sign designed to have changeable copy, either manually or electronically.
Marquee signs may be a principal identification sign, a freestanding sign, or a
wall sign.
Sign, Memorial
   A sign, tablet or plaque memorializing a person, event, structure or site.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6844.jpg]
 
Sign, Menu
   A temporary sign used to inform the public of the list of entrees, dishes,
foods, and entertainment available in a restaurant.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6846.jpg]
 
Sign, Mobile
   A sign attached to, mounted, pasted, painted, or drawn on any vehicle,
whether motorized or drawn, that is placed, parked, or maintained at one
particular location for the express purpose and intent of promotion or
conveying an advertising message.
Sign, Monument
   A freestanding sign supported primarily by an integral structural framework
or integrated into landscaping or other solid structural features other than
support poles.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6848.jpg]
 
Sign, Moving
   Any sign which in part or in total rotates, revolves, or otherwise is in
motion.
Sign, Off-Premises
   A sign that directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or
entertainment not exclusively related to the premises where such sign is
located or to which it is affixed.
Sign, Painted Wall
   A sign applied to a building wall with paint and which has no sign
structure.
Sign, Permanent
   A sign attached to a building, structure, or the ground in some manner that
requires a permit from the Planning and Inspections Department and which is
made of materials intended for long term use.
Sign, Portable
   A sign designated or intended to be moved easily that is not permanently
embedded in the ground or affixed to a building or other structure, including
any sign that rests upon the ground, a frame, a building, or other structure.
Including but not limited to the following signs: trailer signs (with or
without wheels), menu and sandwich boards, signs mounted for advertising
purposes on a vehicle that is parked and visible from the public right-of-way
(except signs identifying the related business when the vehicle is being used
in the normal day-to-day operation of that business), sidewalk or curb signs,
A-frame signs, and signs worn or held by a person.
Sign, Public Information
   A sign, usually erected and maintained by a public agency, that provides the
public with information and in no way relates to a commercial activity.
Includes, but not limited to, speed limit signs, stop signs, city limit signs,
street name signs, and directional signs.
Sign, Real Estate, Off-site
   A readily removable sign announcing the proposed sale or rental of property
other than the property upon which the sign is located and providing directions
to the subject property.
Sign, Rotating or Revolving
   A sign which in its entirety or in part move in a revolving or similar
manner. Such motion does not include methods of changing copy.
Sign, Searchlight (Beacon)
   Search-lights shall be considered signs that are used to announce, direct
attention to, or advertise businesses.
Sign, Snipe
   An off-premises sign that is tacked, nailed, posted, pasted, glued or
otherwise attached to trees, poles, stakes, fences, or to other objects.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6850.jpg]
 
Sign, Temporary
   An attached on-premises sign made of nonrigid material, designed and
displayed for a seasonal or brief activity such as, but not limited to, sales,
specials, promotions, holidays, auctions, business grand openings, and signs
advertising the lease or vacancy or rental units in multi-unit residential
developments. Symbols, figures, balloons, and other similar items shall be
considered temporary signs.
Sign, Third-Party
   Any sign identifying an enterprise and including a sponsoring advertisement,
such as Coca Cola or 7-Up.
Sign, Wind
   Any display or series of displays, banners, flags, balloons, or other
objects designed and fashioned in such a manner as to move when subjected to
wind pressure.
Sign, Yard
   A sign intended for temporary use that is not permanently affixed to the
ground or a structure of any kind and can be easily moved from one location to
another. An example would be a sign supported by a thin metal frame which frame
is stuck into the ground for support.
Signature or Subscription
   Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
Site Plan
   A document setting forth certain required information which shall include
visual locations, accurate dimensions, and all other requirements necessary to
determine the scope, impact, design, and the like of a project.
Site Specific Vesting Plan
   A plan that has been submitted to the town in which the applicant requests
vesting pursuant to N.C.G.S. § 160D-108.1, describing with reasonable certainty
on the plan the type and intensity of use for a specific parcel or parcels of
property. The plan may be in the form of, any of the following plans or
approvals: a subdivision plat, a preliminary or general development plan, or a
special use permit. At a minimum, the plan must include the approximate
boundaries of the site; significant topographical and other natural features
affecting development of the site; approximate location on the site of proposed
buildings, structures and other improvements; approximate dimensions, including
height, of the proposed buildings and other structures; and the approximate
location of all existing and proposed infrastructure on the site, including
water, sewer, roads and pedestrian walkways.
Small Wireless Facility
   A wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications:
   (1)   Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six cubic
feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the
antenna and all its exposed elements, if enclosed, could fit within an
enclosure of no more than six cubic feet.
   (2)   All other wireless equipment associated with the facility has a
cumulative volume of no more than 28 cubic feet.
For purposes of this definition, the following types of ancillary equipment are
not included in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meters,
concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation boxes, ground-based
enclosures, grounding equipment, power transfer switches, cutoff switches,
vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services, or other
support structures.
Solid Waste Disposal Facility
   As defined in N.C.G.S. § 130A-290(a)(35), any facility involved in the
disposal of solid waste.
Solid Waste Disposal Site
   As defined in N.C.G.S. § 130A-290(a)(36), any place at which solid wastes
are disposed of by incineration, sanitary landfill, or any other method.
Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA)
   The land in the floodplain subject to a 1% or greater chance of being
flooded in any given year, as determined in
Article 155.11, Part I.
Special Use Permit
   A permit issued to authorize development or land uses in a particular zoning
district upon presentation of competent, material, and substantial evidence
establishing compliance with one or more general standards requiring that
judgment and discretion be exercised as well as compliance with specific
standards. The term includes permits previously referred to as conditional use
permits or special exceptions.
Specimen Tree
   Any heritage tree, such as a Live Oak or Eastern Red Cedar, which usually
has one main stem or trunk and a DBH measurement of at least 20 inches.
Stable Vegetation
   All natural vegetation in all areas of the town to include original
vegetation as defined in this section; the CAMA Local Permit Officer shall
determine stability.
Stairway
   One or more flights of stairs and the necessary landings and platforms
connecting them, to form a continuous and uninterrupted passage from one story
to another in a building or structure.
Start of Construction
   Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was
issued, provided that the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of
the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
building.
State
   The State of North Carolina, except as otherwise provided.
Stealth Telecommunications Facility
   Any telecommunications facility that is integrated as an architectural
feature of a structure so that the purpose of the facility for providing
wireless services is not readily apparent to a casual observer. Stealth
technique includes such techniques as i) DAS or its functional equivalent; or
ii) camouflage where the tower is disguised to make it less visually obtrusive
and not recognizable to the average person as a wireless facility.
Story
   That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor
and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost story
shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the
topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above.
Street
   Includes any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway,
alley, lane, viaduct, bridge, and the approaches thereto within the town and
shall mean the entire width of the right-of-way between abutting property
lines.
Street Yard (a)
   Area, except for driveways, parallel and contiguous. The public right-of-way
which is measured perpendicular to the public right-of-way.
   If a lot is located on the corner of two public rights-of-way, the owner
shall designate one yard as the street yard and one yard as a side yard.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6852.jpg]
 
Structure
   Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires more or less
permanent location on the ground, or attached to something having more or less
permanent location on the ground.
Subdivision
   All divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building
sites, or other divisions when any one or more of those divisions is created
for the purpose of sale or building development (whether immediate or future)
and shall include all divisions of land involving the dedication of a new
street or a change in existing streets; but the following shall not be included
within this definition nor be subject to the regulations authorized by this
definition:
   (1)   The combination or recombination of portions of previously subdivided
and recorded lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the
resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards of the municipality as
shown in its subdivision regulations.
   (2)   The division of land into parcels greater than ten acres where no
street right-of-way dedication is involved.
   (3)   The public acquisition by purchase of strips of land for the widening
or opening of streets or for public transportation system corridors.
   (4)   The division of a tract in single ownership whose entire area is no
greater than two acres into not more than three lots, where no street right-of-
way dedication is involved and where the resultant lots are equal to or exceed
the standards of the municipality, as shown in its subdivision regulations.
   (5)   The division of a tract into parcels in accordance with the terms of a
probated will or in accordance with intestate succession under Chapter 29 of
the General Statutes.
Substantial Damage
   Damage of any origin sustained by a structure during any one-year period
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred. See definition of Substantial Improvement.
Substantial Improvement
   Substantial improvement shall include improvements and/or additions to a
residential, commercial, or other building or structure the cost of which
exceeds 50% of the assessed tax value of the structure as listed by the New
Hanover County Tax Office or as determined by a certified appraisal. For
purposes of this Ordinance, the term "assessed value" shall mean the value of
the structure before the improvement is started. The cost of the substantial
improvement shall be determined by adding together the cost of all proposed
construction.
Substantial Modification
   The mounting of a proposed wireless facility on a wireless support structure
that substantially changes the physical dimensions of the support structure. A
mounting is presumed to be a substantial modification if it meets any one or
more of the criteria listed below.
   (1)   Increasing the existing vertical height of the structure by the
greater of (i) more than 10%; or (ii) the height of one additional antenna
array with separation from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed 20 feet.
   (2)   Except where necessary to shelter the antenna from inclement weather
or to connect the antenna to the tower via cable, adding an appurtenance to the
body of a wireless support structure that protrudes horizontally from the edge
of the wireless support structure the greater of (i) more than 20 feet or (ii)
more than the width of the wireless support structure at the level of the
appurtenance.
   (3)   Increasing the square footage of the existing equipment compound by
more than 2,500 square feet.
Supplied
   Paid for, furnished, or provided by, or under control of the owner or
operator.
    T
Temporary Housing
   Any trailer or other structure used for construction or display purposes.
Tenant or Occupant
   Applied to a building or land shall include any person who occupies the
whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
Threatened Trees
   Those trees that may have a problem in later years if left in their current
state and are not cared for properly. These are trees which exhibit:
   (1)   Stunted Growth. Small distorted leaves and twigs.
   (2)   Leaf Color. Abnormal leaf color is an indicator of a problem.
Fertilization is usually necessary to correct this problem unless it is a
drainage problem.
   (3)   Insects and Disease. Leaves, twigs and roots can be affected by
insects and diseases. Diagnosis and treatments should be provided by a tree
care professional.
   (4)   Bark. Peeling bark is an indicator of damage be it either mechanical,
fungal or cold related.
   (5)   Excessive Cut or Fill. Both are equally damaging and should be
evaluated thoroughly. Exposing the root flare to the air or covering the trunk
with soil are both detrimental.
Town
   Town of Wrightsville Beach, except as otherwise provided.
Town Right-of-Way
   A right-of-way owned, leased, or operated by a town, including any public
street or alley that is not a part of the state highway system.
Town Utility Pole
   A pole owned by a town in the town right-of-way that provides lighting,
traffic control, or a similar function.
Tree Protection Fence
   Any fence material at least three feet in height with integrity to survive
the period of construction.
Tree Protection Plan
   An informal tree protection and mitigation plan submitted to the Department
of Planning and Parks staff to seek approval for removal of protected trees.
Tree heights may be estimated on the plan.
Tree, Shade
   Single stem deciduous or evergreen tree expected to reach a height in excess
of 30 feet at maturity. Installed shade trees shall be a minimum of a 12 to 14
foot height and a minimum two inch caliper.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6854.jpg]
 
Tree, Small
   Deciduous or evergreen tree expected to reach a height of not more than 30
feet at maturity. Installed tree shall be a minimum of eight to ten in height
with a minimum one inch caliper.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6856.jpg]
 
    U
Uniformity Ratio
   The ratio of the average foot-candle calculation to the minimum foot-candle
reading for a given area. This ratio is an indicator of lighting uniformity.
Up-Lighting
   Any light including but not limited to pole mounted, wall mounted, or ground
mounted fixtures that project above an imaginary horizontal plane through the
fixture.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6858.jpg]
Use
   The specific activity or function for which land, a building, or a structure
is designated, arranged, intended, occupied, or maintained.
Use, Principal
   The primary use and chief purpose of a lot or structure.
Utility/Service Equipment Stands
   Elevated decks required to raise electrical and mechanical equipment,
including but not limited to HVAC units, electrical meters, and generators
above the regulatory flood protection elevation as defined in
Article 155.11, Part I.
Utility Pole
   A structure that is designed for and used to carry lines, cables, wires,
lighting facilities or small wireless facilities for telephone, cable
television, or electricity, or to provide lighting or wireless services that is
not owned by the town.
    V
Variance
   A grant of relief from the requirements of this Ordinance.
Ventilation
   The process of supplying and removing air by natural or mechanical means to
or from any space.
Vertical Illuminance
   Light falling on a vertical surface measured in foot-candles.
Vertical Outdoor Platform Lift
   A fully powered vertical platform device designed to raise a person or
objects in order to overcome a step or similar vertical barrier that does not
include or require an enclosure, shaft, or surrounding structure. Vertical
outdoor platform lifts do not include traditional enclosed elevators such as
those typically found within a structure.
Vessel for Hire
   A watercraft for hire meeting one of the following classifications:
   (1)   A watercraft for hire approved by the U.S. Coast Guard for the
carrying of seven or more persons; or
   (2)   A watercraft for hire approved by the U.S. Coast Guard for the
carrying of six or fewer persons.
A vessel for hire shall not include a personal watercraft as defined in
N.C.G.S. Chapter 75A.
Vested Right
   The right of an owner of property to undertake and complete the development
and use of property under the terms and conditions of an approved site specific
vesting plan.
Violation
   The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with
the community's floodplain management regulations or other applicable sections
of this Ordinance. A structure or other development without the elevation
certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required
under
Article 155.11, Part I of this Ordinance is presumed to be in violation until
such time as that documentation is provided.
    W
Washover Areas
   Low areas that are adjacent to beaches and are inundated by waves and storm
tides. Washovers may be found in abandoned tidal channels or where dune systems
are poorly developed or breached by storm tides and erosion.
Water Surface Elevation
   The height, in relation to mean sea level of floods of various magnitudes
and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
Water Tower
   A water storage tank, a standpipe, or an elevated tank situated on a support
structure originally constructed for use as a reservoir or facility to store or
deliver water.
Watercourse
   A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel, or other topographic feature on
or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes
specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur.
Watercraft
   A boat, houseboat, jet ski, canoe, raft, surfboard, or other apparatus
designed for use on water, including trailers therefor, and motors, engines, or
sails designed to propel such craft or apparatus.
Wireless Infrastructure Provider
   Any person with a certificate to provide telecommunications service in the
state who builds or installs wireless communication transmission equipment,
wireless facilities, or wireless support structures for small wireless
facilities but that does not provide wireless services.
Wireless Services
   Any services, using licensed or unlicensed wireless spectrum, including the
use of Wi-Fi, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided to the public
using wireless facilities.
Wireless Services Provider
   A person who provides wireless services.
Wireless Support Structure
   A new or existing structure, such as a monopole, lattice tower, or guyed
tower, that is designed to support or capable of supporting wireless
telecommunications facilities, radio or TV antennas. A utility pole is not a
wireless support structure.
Wireless Facility
   Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between
user equipment and a communications network, including (i) equipment associated
with wireless communications; and (ii) radio transceivers, antennas, wires,
coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable
equipment, regardless of technological configuration. The term includes small
wireless facilities. The term shall not include any of the following:
   (1)   The structure or improvements on, under, within, or adjacent to which
the equipment is collocated.
   (2)   Wireline backhaul facilities.
   (3)   Coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is between wireless structures or
utility poles or city utility poles or that is otherwise not immediately
adjacent to or directly associated with a particular antenna.
   (4)   Amateur radio antennas see also, N.C.G.S. § 160D-905. See also the
definition of "Amateur Radio Antenna".
Writing or Written
   Includes printing and any other mode of representing words and letters.
    X
None
    Y
Yard
   A required open space on the same lot with a principal building. No
structure or portion of a structure shall be permitted in any part of a
required yard, either below, at, or above ground level, except as set forth in
Section
155.2.10 or elsewhere in this Ordinance.
Yard, Front (a)
   An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building between
the front line of the building and the lot frontage line (as defined herein)
extending across the full width of the lot.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6860.jpg]
 
Yard, Rear (b)
   A yard extending across the full width of the lot and measured between the
rear line of the lot and the rear line of the main building.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6862.jpg]
 
Yard, Side (c)
   An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a building between the side
line of the building and the side line of the lot and extending from the front
yard line to the rear line. If there is no front yard, the front boundary of
the side yard shall be the front line of the lot and if there is no rear yard
the rear boundary of the side yard shall be the rear line of the lot.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6864.jpg]
 
    Z
Zoning Enforcement Official
   The government officer who is charged by the UDO Administrator with
enforcement of this Ordinance, where applicable.
Zoning Map Amendment
   An amendment to a zoning regulation for the purpose of changing the zoning
district that is applied to a specified property or properties. The term also
includes (i) the initial application of zoning when land is added to the
territorial jurisdiction of The Town of Wrightsville Beach and (ii) the
application of an overlay zoning district. The term does not include (i) the
initial adoption of a zoning map by the Town of Wrightsville Beach, (ii) the
repeal of a zoning map and read option of a new zoning map for the entire
planning and development regulation jurisdiction, or (iii) updating the zoning
map to incorporate amendments to the names of zoning districts made by zoning
text amendments where there are no changes in the boundaries of the zoning
district or land uses permitted in the district.
(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1705, passed 4-11-13; Am. Ord. 1725,
passed 3-19-14; Am. Ord. 1728, passed 5-13-14; Am. Ord. 1739, passed 3-12-15;
Am. Ord. 1742, passed 4-8-15; Am. Ord. 1764, passed 2-9-17; Am. Ord. 1788,
passed 11-14-19; Am. Ord. 1792, passed 1-15-20; Am. Ord. 1796, passed 7-9-20;
Am. Ord. 1800, passed 7-9-20; Am. Ord. 1804, passed 7-9-20; Am. Ord. 1808,
passed 10-8-20; Am. Ord. 1811, passed 10-8-20; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22;
Am. Ord. 1850, passed 9-13-23; Am. Ord. 1862, passed 12-12-24)
EXHIBIT B
INSTALLATION DETAIL
Note: Exhibit B images are available in PDF. Please click HERE to view. You
must have Adobe Acrobat Reader installed to view the images in PDF.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6866.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6868.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/975216c7fd27cb769df7aa6957dcfba17b652f47/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6871.jpg]
 
(Ord. 1838, passed 3-10-22)
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to General Statutes of North Carolina
References to Code of 1972
References to Ordinances
References to General Statutes of North Carolina
G.S. Section Code Section
G.S. Section               Code Section
1-597                      90.05
1-598                      90.05
Ch. 7A                     Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                           155.11.16
                           50.999,
                           74.99,
                           90.99,
                           91.01,
                           91.99,
                           92.31,
                           92.99,
                           94.99,
                           95.99,
14-4                       96.99,
                           98.99,
                           100.99,
                           116.99,
                           130.99,
                           152.155,
                           152.999,
                           Ch. 155, Appx. A, §§
                           155.1.12,
                           155.9.23
14-77                      152.155
14-190.1                   131.02
14-190.10                  131.02
14-234                     31.05
14-269                     130.06
14-277.2                   98.12
14-288.1                   93.08
14-288.20A                 93.99
14-309.11(a)               Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                            A.3
14-309.13                  Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                            A.3
14-409.39(2)               93.08
15-27.2                    50.154
17C-10                     32.25
18B-1001                   130.07, Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                           155.7.30
18B-1006.1                 95.10
Ch. 20, Art. 7A            90.05
20-16                      114.09
20-97                      110.68
20-219.9                   90.05
20-219.9 et seq.           90.05,
                           92.24
20-219.11                  90.05
20-219.12                  90.05
20-280                     114.03
Ch. 29                     Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                            A.3
44A-2                      74.55
44A-4                      90.05
44A-5                      90.05
47-30                      Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                           155.12.16
Ch. 47A                    Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                            A.3
60A-493                    91.27
62-260                     114.01
69-1                       94.32
69-12                      94.04
Ch. 74C                    100.02
Ch. 75A                    Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                            A.3
75A-2                   Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                            A.3
75A-13.1                   Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                           155.7.22
75A-13.3                   Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                            A.3
77-20(e)                   98.02,
                           150.07
Ch. 78A                    110.65
Ch. 90, Art. 36            Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                           155.7.23
Ch. 93B                    110.25(B)
Ch. 95, Art. 12            32.06
103-4                      Ch. 76, Sch. I
105-37 [repealed]          110.65
105-37.1                   110.65
105-45 [repealed]          110.65
105-49 [repealed]          110.65
105-53 [repealed]          110.65
105-54 [repealed]          110.65
105-58 [repealed]          110.65
105-61 [repealed]          110.65
105-61.1 [repealed]        110.65
105-62 [repealed]          110.65
105-64 [repealed]          110.65
105-64.1 [repealed]        110.65
105-65 [repealed]          110.65
105-65.2 [repealed]        110.65
105-66.1 [repealed]        110.65
105-67 [repealed]          110.65
105-74 [repealed]          110.65
105-75.1 [repealed]        110.65
105-80 [repealed]          110.65
105-82 [repealed]          110.65
105-85 [repealed]          110.65
105-88                     110.65
105-89 [repealed]          110.65
105-89.1 [repealed]        110.65
105-90 [repealed]          110.65
105-91 [repealed]          110.65
105-97 [repealed]          110.65
105-98                     110.65
105-109                    110.54,
                           110.55
105-113.73                 110.65
105-113.79                 110.65
105-164.4(a)               Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                           155.7.18
105-277.3                  Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                           A.3
155-164.4(4c)              Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                           155.7.18
105-164.4(6)               Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                           155.7.18
105-249                    110.16(C)
105-249.1                  110.16(C)
105-277.2                  Charter §
                           7.5
105-349                    Charter §
                           4.4
                           Ch. 155, Appx. A, §§
113A-110                   155.1.2,
                           155.4.1
121-5                      110.35,
                           110.53
121-22                     90.01,
                           92.01
121-23                     90.01,
                           92.01
Ch. 130A, Art. 9           Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                           A.3
                           Ch. 155, Appx. A, §§
130A-290(a)(6)             155.11.4, Ch. 155,
                           A.3
                           Ch. 155, Appx. A, §§
130A-290(a)(35)            155.11.4,
                           A.3
                           Ch. 155, Appx. A, §§
130A-290(a)(36)            155.11.4,
                           A.3
130A, Article 9            Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                           155.11.4
131E-256                   Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                           155.7.4
136-131.2                  Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                           155.4.2
136-136.1                  Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                           155.4.2
Ch. 143, Art. 9            Charter §
                           7.6
Ch. 143, Art. 9C           Charter §
                           7.6
                           Ch. 155, Appx. A, §§
Ch. 143, Art. 21, Part 6   155.1.2,
                           155.11.1
                           32.12,
Ch. 143, Art. 33C          32.51,
                           32.57
143-143.15                 Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                           155.11.18
143-145(7)                 152.003
143-214.7                  50.131
                           Ch. 155, Appx. A, §§
143-215.58                 155.11.11.1,
                           155.11.15
143-318.9                  32.57
143-318.9 et seq.          32.12,
                           32.38
143-318.10                 32.12
143-318.18                 32.12
143-755                    Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                           155.4.2
Ch. 143A, Art. 33B         Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                           155.3.10
Ch. 143A, Art. 33C         Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                           155.3.8
143B-282                   94.07
146-12                     Charter §
                           7.1
Ch. 153A, Art. 6           Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                           155.1.2
153A-121                   132.01
159-2                      33.04
159-18                     50.080
159-18 - 159.22            33.06
159-24                     31.21
159-25                     33.05
159-28                     33.04,
                           33.06
159-28.1                   33.06
159-29                     31.02
159-30                     33.03
159-31                     33.03
Ch. 159, Art. 3            33.03,
                           33.04
159-48(a)(17)              50.080
159-48(a)(21)              50.080
160-425 [repealed]         33.06
160-431 [repealed]         33.06
160.432(1) [repealed]      33.06
160.432(2) [repealed]      33.06
160.432(4) [repealed]      33.06
160.432(5) [repealed]      33.06
160.432(7) [repealed]      33.06
160.432(9) [repealed]      33.06
Ch. 160A                   92.20
Ch. 160A                   152.155
                           Charter §
Ch. 160A, Art. 7, Part 2   4.1,
                           30.04
                           Charter §§
Ch. 160A, Art. 10          5.1 -
                           5.3
Ch. 160A, Art. 19, Part 3C 32.52
160A-1                     Charter §
                           1.2
160A-58.5                  50.111
160A-63                    Charter §
                           2.7
160A-67                    30.02
160A-71                    30.06,
                           30.07
160A-72                    30.10
                           Charter §
160A-74                    2.6,
                           30.09,
                           32.38
160A-78                    30.03
160A-146                   30.01,
                           32.55
                           10.99,
160A-175                   91.99,
                           151.999
                           74.99,
                           90.99,
                           91.99,
160A-175(b)                92.31,
                           92.99,
                           96.99,
                           130.99
160A-175(D) and (E)        110.55
160A-175(d) and (e)        91.99
160A-175(F)                91.99
160A-185                   50.056
160A-186                   91.01,
                           91.20
160A-188                   91.10
160A-189, 190              130.02
160A-193                   50.159, 95.29,
                           97.12
160A-205.3                 130.07
160A-207                   110.54
160A-209                   93.17
160A-211                   110.65
160A-212                   91.21
160A-216                   50.106
160A-281                   32.20
160A-282                   32.27
160A-282(a)                32.27
160A-284                   32.25
160A-284                   32.27
160A-285                   32.22
160A-303(b)                90.01
160A-303.1                 94.99
160A-308                   Charter §
                           7.4
160A-312                   50.016
160A-317                   50.017
160A-351                   32.35
160A-352                   32.35
160A-353                   32.37
                           Charter §§
                           7.2,
                           7.5,
160A-360                   90.06,
                           92.01,
                           92.20,
                           92.31
160A-361                   32.10,
                           32.13
160A-381                   Charter §
                           7.1
160A-388                   Charter §
                           2.8
160A-400.4                 32.52
160A-400.5                 32.52
160A-400.7                 32.46
160A-411                   151.110
160A-412                   151.110
                           Charter §
160A-417                   7.6,
                           50.017
160A-421                   150.22
160A-435                   94.02
160A-436                   94.02
                           Ch. 155, Appx. A, §§
Ch. 160D                   155.1.13,
                           A.3
                           Ch. 155, Appx. A, §§
Ch. 160D, Art. 7           155.1.2,
                           155.11.1
Ch. 160D, Art. 9           Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                           155.1.2
Ch. 160D, Art. 9 Part 2    Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                           155.11.1
Ch. 160D, Art. 9 Part 3    Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                           155.7.18
                           Ch. 155, Appx. A, §§
Ch. 160D, Art. 11          155.1.2,
                           155.11.1
Ch. 160D, Art. 13, Part 2  Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                           155.11.1
Ch. 160D, Art. 13,         Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
Part 3                     155.11.1
160D-103                   Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                           155.1.2
160D-108                   Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                           155.4.2
                           Ch. 155, Appx. A, §§
160D-108.1                 155.4.2,
                           155.4.3,
                           A.3
160D-301                   Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                           155.3.6
160D-301(b)(6)             Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                           155.4.5
160D-302                   Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                           155.3.10
160D-303                   Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                           155.1.4
                           Ch. 155, Appx. A, §§
160D-307                   155.3.7,
                           155.3.10
                           Ch. 155, Appx. A, §§
160D-308                   155.3.8,
                           155.3.10
160D-402(d)                Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                           155.2.9
160D-403(g)                Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                           155.1.12
160D-404                   Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                           155.1.12
160D-404(c)                152.999
                           Ch. 155, Appx. A, §§
160D-405                   155.1.12,
                           155.4.2
160D-406                   152.143
160D-501(a)                Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                           155.1.2
                           Ch. 155, Appx. A, §§
160D-601                   155.4.1,
                           155.4.3
160D-602                   Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                           155.4.2
160D-604                   Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                           155.4.1
160D-702                   Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                           155.1.2
                           Ch. 155, Appx. A, §§
                           155.1.2,
160D-703                   155.2.15,
                           155.4.8,
                           155.6.1
160D-801 et seq.           Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                           155.12.14
160D-801                   Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                           155.1.2
160D-802                   Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                           A.3
                           Ch. 155, Appx. A, §§
160D-903                   155.1.4,
                           A.3
160D-905                   Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                           A.3
160D-908                   Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                           155.10.2
160D-913                   Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                           155.1.4
160D-930 et seq.           Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                           155.7.18
160D-949                   152.151
160D-1108                  Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                           155.4.3
160D-1110                  Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                           155.12.6
160D-1111                  Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                           155.4.2
160D-1113                  Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                           155.1.12
160D-1115                  Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                           155.4.2
160D-1119                  152.141,
                           152.142
160D-1122                  152.143,
                           152.144
160D-1201                  152.001,
                           152.999
                           152.153,
160D-1203                  152.154,
                           152.156
160D-1205                  152.001
160D-1206                  152.152
160D-1207                  152.137
160D-1208                  152.151
160D-1402                  Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                           155.4.4
160D-1402(c)               Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                           155.4.4
160D-1403.1                Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                           155.4.2
162A-206 et seq.           50.080
163-227.2                  155.10.5
163-292                    Charter §
                           3.1
166A-13                    93.04
166A-19.3                  93.07
166A-19.15                 93.17
166A-19.15(c)              93.01
166A-19.22                 93.07
166A-19.22(b)(2)           93.18
166A-19.31                 93.18
166A-19.71                 93.16
Ch. 168                    91.12
                           
 
References to 1972 Code
Old Code Section New Code Section
Old Code Section New Code Section
2-2              31.01
2-3              31.02
2-4              30.06
2-6              30.09
2-7              30.10
2-9              30.08
2-10             30.05
2-12             32.10
2-13             32.11
2-14             32.12
2-16             32.13
5-1              113.01
5-1              115.01
5-2              113.02
5-3              115.02
5-4              115.03
5-5              115.04
5-6              115.06
5-15             113.10
5-16             113.11
5-17             113.12
5-21             113.14
5-22             113.20
5-23             113.21
5-24             113.22
5-25             113.23
5-26             113.24
5-27             113.25
5-28             113.26
7-2              33.02
7-3              33.03
7-4.1            110.01
7-4.2            110.02
7-4.3            110.10
7-4.4            110.11
7-4.5            110.12
7-4.7            110.14
7-4.8            110.15
7-4.9            110.16
7-4.10           110.25
7-4.11           110.26
7-4.12           110.27
7-4.13           110.28
7-4.14           110.29
7-4.15           110.30
7-4.16           110.31
7-4.17           110.32
7-4.18           110.33
7-4.19           110.34
7-4.20           110.35
7-4.21           110.36
7-4.22           110.45
7-4.23           110.46
7-4.24           110.47
7-4.25           110.48
7-4.26           110.49
7-4.27           110.50
7-4.28           110.51
7-4.29           110.52
7-4.30           110.53
7-4.31           110.54
7-4.32           110.55
7-4.33           110.65
7-4.34           110.66
7-4.35           110.67
7-4.36           110.68
8A-1             94.02
8A-2             94.02
8A-3             94.03
8A-3             94.30
8-3              94.31
8-3              94.32
8-3              94.33
8A-4             94.04
8A-5             94.05
8A-6             94.06
8A-7             94.07
8A-8             94.08
8A-9             94.01
8A-10            94.09
8A-11            94.10
8A-15            94.12
8A-16            94.13
9-11             96.01
9-11.1           96.02
9-11.2           96.03
9-11.3           96.04
9-11.4           96.99
11-2             70.02
11-3             70.03
11-4             70.04
11-5             70.05
11-6             70.06
11-7             70.07
11-9             70.15
11-10            70.16
11-11            70.18
11-12            70.22
11-13            70.23
11-14            70.24
11-15            74.01
11-16            74.02
11-17            74.04
11-18            74.05
11-20            74.07
11-21            74.08
11-23            74.09
11-25            74.10
11-26            74.11
11-27            74.12
11-28            74.13
11-31            74.14
11-32            74.16
11-33            74.15
11-35            71.01
11-36            71.02
11-37            71.03
11-38            71.04
11-39            71.05
11-40            71.06
11-41            71.07
11-42            71.08
11-43            71.09
11-44            71.10
11-46            72.10
11-47            72.11
11-48            72.08
11-48            72.12
11-49            71.12
11-50            71.13
11-51            71.14
11-52            71.15
11-53            71.16
11-54            71.17
11-55            71.18
11-56            71.19
12-5             97.07
13-1             92.02
13-2             92.03
13-3             92.04
13-4             92.05
13-5             92.06
13-6             92.07
14-2             130.02
14-3             92.01
14-4             130.04
14-5             130.05
14-6             98.03
14-7             92.13
14-8             113.15
14-9             113.15
14-11            132.02
14-12            92.14
14-14            92.12
14-17            92.15
15-1             150.02
15-1             150.03
15-2             150.04
15-3             150.05
15-4             150.06
15-7             150.09
15-8             92.16
15-9             150.10
15-10            150.11
15-11            150.01
15-12            150.12
15-13            150.13
15-14            150.14
15-15            150.15
15-16            150.16
15-17            150.17
15-18            150.20
15-19            150.21
15-22            150.22
16-1             32.20
16-2             32.21
16-3             32.22
16-4             32.23
16-5             32.24
17-1             99.01
17-2             99.02
17-3             99.03
17-4             99.04
17-5             99.05
17-6             99.06
17-7             99.07
17-8             99.08
17-9             99.09
17-10            99.14
17-11            99.15
17-12            99.16
17-13            99.10
17-14            99.11
17-15            99.12
17-16            99.13
                 
 
References to Ordinances
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
                     32.10,
--       3-20-69     32.11,
                     32.12,
                     32.13
--       7-22-70     151.002
--       4-13-72     94.13
--       7-27-72     33.06
--       1-11-73     33.03
                     152.115,
                     152.116,
                     152.117,
                     152.118,
--       2-22-73     152.119,
                     152.120,
                     152.121,
                     152.122,
                     Ch. 152, App.
                     30.10,
--       6-27-74     32.11,
                     32.12
                     32.35,
                     32.36,
                     32.37,
                     32.38,
--       7-25-74     32.39,
                     32.40,
                     32.41,
                     32.42,
                     32.43,
                     32.44
--       1-9-75      71.20
--       3-13-75     32.36,
                     32.44
                     150.12,
                     150.18,
                     150.19,
--       12-11-75    151.035,
                     151.036,
                     151.037,
                     151.038
                     152.001 -
                     152.007,
                     152.020 -
                     152.026,
                     152.040 -
                     152.046,
                     152.060 -
                     152.064,
                     152.075 -
                     152.084,
                     152.095 -
--       1-22-77     152.097,
                     152.100 -
                     152.104,
                     152.115 -
                     152.122,
                     152.135,
                     152.136,
                     152.150,
                     152.151,
                     152.156 -
                     152.158,
                     152.999
                     152.115,
                     152.116,
                     152.117,
                     152.118,
--       1-11-78     152.119,
                     152.120,
                     152.121,
                     152.122,
                     Ch. 152, App.
--       5-28-78     115.05
--       7-28-78     92.01
--       8-10-78     32.26
                     91.01,
                     91.02,
                     91.10,
                     91.11,
                     91.12,
                     91.13,
                     91.20,
--       9-28-78     91.21,
                     91.22,
                     91.23,
                     91.24,
                     91.25,
                     91.26,
                     91.27,
                     91.28,
                     91.99
--       10-26-78    92.01,
                     92.12
--       11-2-78     91.21
--       12-7-78     32.27
--       5-10-79     74.17
--       7-12-79     94.14
--       7-26-79     150.05
--       8-9-79      74.18
                     94.01,
                     94.02,
                     94.03,
                     94.04,
--       8-23-79     94.05,
                     94.30,
                     94.31,
                     94.32,
                     94.33
                     70.99 
                     96.01,
--       12-13-79    96.02,
                     96.03,
                     96.04,
                     96.99
--       3-27-80     152.025,
                     152.060
--       6-26-80     152.060
--       7-24-80     92.12
                     91.02,
--       5-28-81     91.12,
                     92.12,
                     92.16
--       6-25-81     92.08,
                     92.10
                     111.01,
                     111.02,
                     111.03,
                     111.04,
--       10-8-81     111.05,
                     111.07,
                     111.08,
                     111.98,
                     111.99
--       2-11-82     152.006,
                     152.007
--       7-22-82     92.12
                     74.99,
                     92.11,
--       5-26-83     130.02,
                     130.99,
                     132.98,
                     132.99
--       7-28-83     Ch. 50
                     93.01,
                     93.02,
--       10-4-84     93.03,
                     93.04,
                     93.04
--       9-5-85      151.003
--       8-11-88     92.08
1009     4-24-86     71.08
                     74.50,
1011     4-24-86     74.51,
                     74.52,
                     74.99
1012     4-24-86     74.23
                     50.018,
1036     12-4-86     50.080,
                     50.081,
                     50.082
                     151.001,
                     151.002,
                     151.003,
                     151.004,
1043     3-26-87     151.035,
                     151.036,
                     151.037,
                     151.038,
                     151.110
1048     4-9-87      92.12,
                     92.99
1068     12-17-87    92.16
1069     1-28-88     91.99
                     50.042,
                     50.048,
                     50.056,
1072     4-14-88     50.057,
                     50.058,
                     50.059,
                     50.070
                     71.54,
                     74.35,
                     74.36,
                     74.38,
1081     7-14-88     74.39,
                     74.40,
                     74.41,
                     74.53,
                     74.99
1085     9-8-88      74.38
1090     1-12-89     Ch. 110
1091     3-9-89      50.080
1094     5-11-89     97.07
1100     7-27-89     150.22
1101     7-27-89     Adopting Ordinance
1103     11-2-89     132.03
1104     10-12-89    152.060
1105     10-12-89    71.11,
                     92.18
1106     11-2-89     53.07
1107     11-16-89    Ch. 34
1108     1-11-90     31.20
1110     3-8-90      151.006
1119     7-26-90     50.002
1123     9-13-90     92.03
1128     12-20-90    30.06
1131     1-10-91     74.23,
                     74.99
1132     1-10-91     33.03
1136     1-14-91     70.28,
                     Ch. 76, Sch. III
1138     3-14-91     32.26
1144     5-23-91     92.20
1149     7-11-91     92.16
                     150.01,
1152     8-22-91     150.11,
                     150.12
1154     8-22-91     74.99
1156     9-12-91     50.080
1158     10-10-91    33.07
1161     11-21-91    92.20
                     94.01,
                     94.08,
                     94.11,
1163     12-19-91    94.30 -
                     94.33,
                     151.003,
                     152.004
1164     1-9-92      151.111
                     32.11,
1170     3-12-92     32.12,
                     32.13
1172     4-16-92     91.02
1176     4-30-92     Ch. 75, Sch. I
                     32.36,
                     32.37,
                     32.39,
1179     5-14-92     32.40.
                     32.42,
                     32.43,
                     32.44
1182     6-17-92     50.080
1198     9-10-92     32.46 -
                     32.52
1201     10-22-92    91.12
1208     1-14-93     Repealing
                     150.08
1213     6-10-93     32.52,
                     32.53
1215     7-8-93      74.99
1216     8-26-93     Ch. 116
                     93.01 -
                     93.08,
1217     8-26-93     93.10 -
                     93.17,
                     93.99
1218     9-9-93      116.09
1219     9-9-93      92.21
1220     9-9-93      Ch. 76, Sch. III
1222     12-2-93     32.46 -
                     32.53
1224     1-20-94     30.06
1228     4-28-94     74.99,
                     Ch. 76, Sch. IV
1230     4-28-94     Ch. 76, Sch. III
1233     5-26-94     Ch. 76, Sch. IV
1235     5-26-94     131.03
1239     8-25-94     92.07
1240     8-25-94     32.01 -
                     32.06
1245     1-12-95      
                     150.052
1247     3-30-95     94.99
                     33.02,
1250     5-18-95     33.04,
                     33.05,
                     33.08
1252     5-25-95     32.12
1254     8-17-95     Ch. 100
                     70.46 -
1256     8-17-95     70.49,
                     131.04
1257     9-14-95     70.49
1258     9-14-95     92.10
1259     9-21-95     130.03
                     151.035,
1263     11-16-95    151.036,
                     151.039
1266     12-11-96    130.06
1271     5-9-96      32.27
1274     6-13-96     70.35 -
                     70.39
1277     7-25-96     94.99
                     116.01,
                     116.02,
                     116.06,
1278     8-8-96      116.13,
                     116.17,
                     116.18,
                     116.99
1286     7-10-97     93.34,
                     93.35
                     71.21,
1287     7-10-97     71.22;
                     Ch. 75, Sch. II
1288     7-10-97     Ch. 76, Sch. III
1291     7-31-97     50.020
1292     7-31-97     50.116
1293     9-11-97     33.02
1295     9-25-97     110.65
1297     1-8-98      50.080
1298     1-22-98     32.35
1299     1-22-98     151.112
1307     4-23-98     74.24
1309     5-28-98     74.41
1310     5-28-98     Ch. 76, Sch. III
1316-B   6-25-98     74.41
1318     9-24-98     151.007
1320     10-8-98     74.39
1328     2-11-99     94.45 -
                     94.47
1329     3-11-99     32.11
                     70.16,
1330     4-8-99      70.19,
                     70.28
1331     4-8-99      74.04
1332     4-8-99      Ch. 76, Sch. III
1333     4-8-99      Ch. 76, Sch. IV
1337     6-24-99     74.13;
                     Ch. 76, Sch. III
                     96.99,
1341     7-29-99     97.06,
                     130.99
                     100.03,
1342     7-29-99     100.04,
                     100.99
1345     8-26-99     Delete 110.13
                     95.01,
                     95.02,
                     95.10 -
1346     8-26-99     95.20,
                     95.99,
                     96.05,
                     96.99
1348     11-18-98    91.12
1352     1-27-00     100.04
1353     2-10-00     92.16
1356     3-9-00      92.08,
                     92.99
1357     4-13-00     96.99
1359     4-13-00     130.99
1360     4-13-00     10.99
1364     4-13-00     92.99
                     74.38,
1366     7-13-00     74.41,
                     Ch. 76, Sch. IV
1373-A   2-28-01     74.39
1374     2-22-01     Ch. 76, Sch. I
1375-A   2-28-01     74.42
1377     3-22-01     33.07
1378     4-12-01     Ch. 75, Sch. I
                     116.04,
                     116.05,
1378-A   4-26-01     116.07 -
                     116.09,
                     116.13
1379     5-10-01     74.38
1384     6-14-01     74.43
1385     6-14-01     74.38
1389     7-12-01     91.12
1401     1-24-02     Ch. 75, Sch. III
1405     2-28-02     74.39,
                     74.41
1406     3-28-02     94.01
1407     3-28-02     91.02,
                     91.08
1408     3-28-02     91.12
1409     3-28-02     Ch. 76, Sch. III
1410     3-28-02     Ch. 76, Sch. III
1413     3-28-02     91.21,
                     91.99
1414     5-9-02      74.55
1416     6-13-02     32.27
1418     7-11-02     50.080,
                     95.18
1421     8-8-02      50.042
1422     8-8-02      50.999
1423     8-22-02     96.99,
                     130.99
1424     8-22-02     74.44,
                     74.99
                     92.01,
1428     10-10-02    92.22,
                     92.24,
                     92.25
                     98.02 -
                     98.05,
1430     10-24-02    98.07,
                     98.13,
                     98.14,
                     98.99
1431     10-24-02    150.21
                     74.08,
                     74.12,
1442     4-24-03     74.39,
                     74.41,
                     74.55
1443     4-24-03     Ch. 76, Sch. I
1444     4-24-03     74.19
1448     8-14-03     91.10
1454     1-8-04      98.02
1456     2-12-04     92.16
1458     3-25-04     74.38,
                     Ch. 76, Sch. I
1459     5-27-04     96.05
1462     6-10-04     74.42,
                     Ch. 76, Sch. IV
1465     8-12-04     98.02 -
                     98.04
1469     9-30-04     31.06
1472     2-24-05     32.35
1474     4-14-05     92.12,
                     92.99
1475     4-14-05     32.26
1483     10-13-05    Ch. 76, Sch. III
1489     1-12-06     32.05
1490     1-26-06     92.12
1492     1-26-06     32.35
1496     2-22-06     74.39,
                     74.41
1497     2-22-06     117.01-
                     117.69
1504     3-23-06     32.55-
                     32.59
1512     7-13-06     50.080,
                     50.082
1516     8-27-06     50.162
1520     9-14-06     30.06
1521     9-14-06     Ch. 76, Sch. III
1524     10-12-06    98.03
1525     10-26-06    130.01
1531     6-15-07     92.05,
                     92.18
1533     4-12-07     92.12
1534     3-28-07     91.99
1535     5-10-07     74.41
1536     6-14-07     50.101,
                     50.106
1537     6-28-07     50.080,
                     50.082
                     50.130 -
1538     5-24-07     50.161,
                     50.999
1541     8-9-07      150.02
1543     8-9-07      92.21
1544     8-9-07      92.26
1545     8-9-07      74.19,
                     Ch. 75, Sch. I
                     98.02 -
                     98.05,
1547     8-23-07     98.13,
                     98.14,
                     98.99
1548     9-13-07     92.09
1549     9-13-07     92.17
1550     9-27-07     95.21
1551     9-27-07     74.38.1
1552     9-27-07     92.21
1561     10-25-07    95.10
1565     1-10-08     92.27,
                     150.05
1570     2-25-08     74.14
1571     2-25-08     74.40,
                     74.41
1572     3-13-08     74.38.1
1574     4-24-08     74.11
1575     5-5-08      92.12
1576     6-25-08     50.080
1578     7-17-08     92.21,
                     92.99
1583     8-28-08     98.03,
                     98.04
1584     9-25-08     95.25
1587     12-11-08    151.008,
                     151.009
1590     1-29-09     50.159,
                     50.999
1591     2-12-09     74.56
1592     2-26-09     32.36 -
                     32.43
                     92.01,
1593     3-12-09     92.28 -
                     92.30,
                     92.99
1594     4-9-09      32.38
1595     4-9-09      116.15
1596     4-9-09      91.99
1597     5-14-09     74.25
1598     5-14-09     Ch. 76, Sch. IV
1600     5-28-09     98.04
1601     6-11-09     99.01 -
                     99.03
1602     6-11-09     74.11
1603     6-11-09     115.05
1606     6-25-09     91.21
1607     6-25-09     50.080
1612     9-10-09     Ch. 76, Sch. III
1614     10-29-09    74.39
                     98.01 -
1616     1-14-10     98.15,
                     98.99
1617     2-11-10     32.56
1618     2-11-10     74.55
1619     2-11-10     74.41
1620     2-11-10     74.39
1621     2-11-10     Ch. 76, Sch. IV
1623     3-11-10     Ch. 76, Sch. I
1624     4-8-10      150.07
1625     4-8-10      74.38
                     70.01,
1626     4-22-10     92.01,
                     92.18
1627     5-13-10     Ch. 76, Sch. III
1628     5-13-10     92.99
1629     5-13-10     92.27
1630     6-24-10     114.01 -
                     114.22
1632     7-15-10     95.13
                     74.15,
1633     7-15-10     74.99,
                     Ch. 76, Sch. III
1634     7-15-10     114.13
1637     8-12-10     74.43
1638     8-12-10     Ch. 76, Sch. I
                     98.02,
1640     8-12-10     98.05,
                     98.09
1641     10-14-10    92.99
1642     11-18-10    92.31
1643     11-18-10    32.55 -
                     32.59
1644     12-9-10     50.120 -
                     50.128
1645     12-9-10     95.13
                     32.35,
1646     2-10-11     32.38,
                     32.43
1647     2-10-11     Ch. 76, Sch. I
1650     3-10-11     74.56
1651     3-10-11     74.39
1652     4-14-11     Ch. 76, Sch. I
1654     4-14-11     32.11
1655     5-12-11     114.01
1656     5-12-11     Ch. 76, Sch. IV
1658     7-14-11     114.21
1660     7-14-11     74.26
1661     7-14-11     50.080
                     92.01,
1663     8-11-11     92.22,
                     92.24
                     114.01,
1664     11-16-11    114.02,
                     114.05
1665     11-16-11    Ch. 76, Sch. I
1668     1-12-12     32.35
1670     2-9-12      Ch. 75, Sch. I
1675     3-8-12      74.42
1676     3-8-12      91.12
                     74.35,
1678     5-10-12     74.45 -
                     74.47
                     Ch. 76, Schs. I,
1679     5-10-12     III,
                     IV
1682     6-14-12     98.03
                     50.002,
1683     6-14-12     50.080,
                     50.082
1684     7-12-12     91.99
1685     7-12-12     92.99
1686     7-12-12     130.99
1687     7-12-12     92.32
1688     8-16-12     91.99
1689     8-16-12     114.01,
                     114.13
1691     8-16-12     92.26
1692     8-16-12     92.99
1693     8-16-12     Ch. 76, Sch. I
                     Ch. 155, Appx. A, §§
                     155.1.1 -
                     155.1.13,
                     155.2.1 -
                     155.2.15,
                     155.3.1 -
                     155.3.13,
                     155.4.1 -
                     155.4.7,
                     155.5.1 -
                     155.5.5,
                     155.6.1 -
                     155.6.5,
                     155.7.1 -
                     155.7.11,
1695     11-8-12     155.7.13 -
                     155.7.17,
                     155.7.19,
                     155.7.20,
                     155.8.1 -
                     155.8.18,
                     155.9.1 -
                     155.9.24,
                     155.10.1 -
                     155.10.15,
                     155.11.25 -
                     155.11.35,
                     155.12.1 -
                     155.12.22,
                     Exh. A and
                     B
1697     10-11-12    92.12
1699     2-14-13     Ch. 155, Appx. A, § 155.8.11
1700     2-14-13     Ch. 155, Appx. A, § 155.9.6
1702     2-14-13     74.46
1703     3-14-13     74.46
1704     4-11-13     92.33,
                     92.99
                     Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
1705     4-11-13     155.6.4,
                     Ch. 155, Appx. A, Exh. A
1707     5-9-13      92.12,
                     92.99
1708     5-9-13      74.39
                     91.22.1,
                     95.25,
1710     5-9-13      97.08 -
                     97.12,
                     97.99
1711     6-13-13     96.99,
                     130.99
1712     6-13-13     114.01
1713     6-13-13     Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                     155.8.11
1715     8-8-13      Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                     155.10.6
1716     9-12-13     Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                     155.9.1
1717     9-12-13     114.05
1721     1-23-14     33.02
1722     2-18-14     Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                     155.6.5
                     74.38.1,
                     74.41,
1723     3-25-14     74.43,
                     74.51,
                     Ch. 76, Sch. I
1724     3-19-14     Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                     155.2.4
                     Ch. 155, Appx. A, §§
1725     3-19-14     155.6.4,
                     155.9.1,
                     Ch. 155, Appx. A, Exh. A
1726     3-25-14     Ch. 76, Sch. IV
                     Ch. 155, Appx. A, §§
1727     5-3-14      155.3.13,
                     155.4.4
                     Ch. 155, Appx. A, §§
1728     5-13-14     155.2.3,
                     155.7.21,
                     Ch. 155, Appx. A, Exh. A
1729     4-10-14     Ch. 76, Sch. I,
                     IV
1730     6-12-14     Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                     155.9.12
1731     6-12-14     50.080
1733     7-10-14     92.29
                     93.01,
                     93.06 -
                     93.08,
1734     9-11-14     93.10 -
                     93.12,
                     93.16 -
                     93.18,
                     93.99
1735     11-13-14    Ch. 155, Appx. A, §§
                     155.8.12 
1736     12-11-14    70.38
1737     1-8-15      Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                     155.2.4
1739     3-12-15     Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                     155.6.4, Exh. A
1742     4-8-15      Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                     155.6.4, Exh. A
1744     5-7-15      98.03
                     74.35,
                     74.38.1,
                     74.39,
1745     5-28-15     74.43,
                     74.45,
                     74.46,
                     74.48,
                     Ch. 76, Sch. IV
1746     6-11-15     92.26
1747     10-13-15    Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                     155.1.12
1748     8-13-15     97.02
1749     9-10-15     Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                     155.7.20
1750     10-13-15    Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                     155.4.1
1752     11-12-15    32.56
1753     12-10-15    Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                     155.9.6
1754     12-10-15    32.56
1756     2-11-16     Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                     155.8.4
                     70.38,
                     74.38,
                     74.39,
1757     2-11-16     74.40,
                     74.42,
                     74.49,
                     Ch. 76, Sch. I
                     Ch. 155, Appx. A, §§
1758     4-14-16     155.6.4,
                     155.7.22
                     Ch. 155, Appx. A, §§
1759     5-12-16     155.6.4,
                     155.9.2
1760     5-12-16     Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                     155.9.1
1761     6-8-16      50.080
1762     1-12-17     50.080
                     74.38,
1763     2-9-17      74.42,
                     74.46,
                     Ch. 76, Sch. I
1764     2-9-17      Ch. 155, Appx. A, Exh. A
                     Ch. 155, Appx. A, §§
1765     2-9-17      155.6.4,
                     155.6.5
                     97.08,
1766     5-11-17     97.13,
                     97.14,
                     97.99
                     Ch. 155, Appx. A, §§
1767     6-8-17      155.6.4,
                     155.7.23
Res.1465 8-11-05     Charter §
                     2.8
1674     11-6-12     92.02,
                     92.99
1768     7-10-17     130.07
1769     9-14-17     Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                     155.8.9
1770     12-14-17    Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                     155.9.1.6
1771     11-9-17     Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                     155.7.25
1772     1-11-18     92.01,
                     92.29
                     74.27,
1773     3-8-18      74.38,
                     74.48,
                     Ch. 76, Sch. III
1774     4-12-18     74.27
1775     4-12-18     Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                     155.7.10
1776     5-10-18     116.08
                     Ch. 155, Appx. A, §§
1777     6-12-18     155.6.4,
                     155.7.24
1778     6-12-18     50.080
                     Ch. 155, Appx. A, §§
1780     7-10-18     155.11.1 -
                     155.11.22
1781     1-7-19      32.56,
                     32.57
                     74.23,
                     74.37,
                     74.38,
1782     1-15-19     74.42,
                     74.43,
                     74.46,
                     74.48,
                     74.49
                     74.39,
1783     2-14-19     74.42,
                     74.46
                     Ch. 155, Appx. A, §§
1784     4-11-19     155.8.12,
                     155.8.13.1
                     90.01,
1785     5-9-19      90.05,
                     90.06,
                     90.99
1786     5-9-19      Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                     155.8.9
                     Ch. 155, Appx. A, §§
                     155.10.1,
1788     11-14-19    155.10.2,
                     155.10.4,
                     155.10.5,
                     Ch. 155, Appx. A, Exh. A
1790     9-12-19     32.56
                     Ch. 155, Appx. A, §§
                     155.6.4,
1792     1-15-20     155.6.5,
                     155.7.26,
                     Ch. 155, Appx. A, Exh. A
1793     1-15-20     Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                     155.9.6
1794     4-7-20      93.99
                     Ch. 155, Appx. A, §§
1796     7-9-20      155.6.4,
                     155.7.18,
                     Ch. 155, Appx. A, Exh. A
1797     7-9-20      Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                     155.2.10
1798     7-9-20      Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                     155.7.28
1799     7-9-20      Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                     155.6.4
1800     7-9-20      Ch. 155, Appx. A, Exh. A
1801     7-9-20      Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                     155.9.1
1802     7-9-20      Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                     155.7.30
1803     7-9-20      Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                     155.6.4
1804     7-9-20      Ch. 155, Appx. A, Exh. A
1805     7-17-20     Ch. 76, Sch. IV
1806     7-17-20     74.37,
                     74.99
                     Ch. 155, Appx. A,
1808     10-8-20     155.6.4,
                     Exh. A
1809     10-8-20     Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                     155.9.1
                     97.01 -
1810     9-10-20     97.14,
                     97.99
                     Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
1811     10-8-20     155.7.17 
                     Exh. A
                     Ch. 155, Appx. A, §§
1813     10-8-20     155.1.12,
                     155.2.10,
                     155.6.4
                     Ch. 155, Appx. A, §§
1814     10-8-20     155.11.27 -
                     155.11.29
                     99.10,
1816     8-13-20     99.12,
                     99.17 -
                     99.22
1817     12-10-20    Ch. 155, Appx. A,
                     155.2.4
1823     3-11-21     70.01,
                     92.18
1824     3-11-21     91.29, Repeals 91.30
1826     4-8-21      74.49
1829     6-10-21     Ch. 76, Sch. III,
                     IV
1830     7-8-21      98.03,
                     98.04
1831     7-8-21      Ch. 76, Sch. I
1835     12-8-21     74.55
                     31.20,
                     98.02,
                     98.03, Ch. 155, Appx. A, §§
                     155.01,
                     155.1.1 -
                     155.1.13,
                     155.2.1 -
                     155.2.15,
                     155.3.1 -
                     155.3.13,
                     155.4.1 -
                     155.4.7,
                     155.5.1 -
                     155.5.5,
1838     3-10-22     155.6.1 -
                     155.6.5,
                     155.7.1 -
                     155.7.30,
                     155.8.1 -
                     155.8.19,
                     155.9.1 -
                     155.9.24,
                     155.10.1 -
                     155.10.15,
                     155.11.1 -
                     155.11.35,
                     155.12.1 -
                     155.12.22,
                     Exh. A,
                     Exh. B
1840     7-19-22     Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                     155.2.10
1841     4-14-22     Ch. 75, Sch. I
571B     6-20-22     50.162
                     150.01,
1842     10-13-22    150.12,
                     150.14
1843     3-15-23     Ch. 155, Appendix A, §
                     155.9.1.5
1844     5-9-23      Ch. 75, Sch. I
                     152.001 -
                     152.007,
                     152.020 -
                     152.026,
                     152.040 -
                     152.046,
                     152.060 -
                     152.064,
                     152.075 -
                     152.084,
1845     6-22-23     152.095 -
                     152.097,
                     152.100 -
                     152.104,
                     152.115 -
                     152.122,
                     152.135 -
                     152.144,
                     152.150 -
                     152.158,
                     152.999
1846     6-22-23     97.08,
                     97.09
1850     9-13-23     Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                     155.2.10, Exh. A
1852     8-10-23     97.08
1853     9-13-23     97.99
1854     1-11-24     Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                     155.7.21
1855     1-11-24     Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                     155.9.6
1856     1-11-24     98.03
                     74.17,
1857     2-8-24      74.36,
                     74.38,
                     74.41
1858     2-8-24      Ch. 75, Sch. I
1859     5-9-24      92.18
1860     6-13-24     97.99
1861     9-12-24     Ch. 155, Appx. A, §
                     155.7.10
                     155.2.10,
1862     12-12-24    155.6.4,
                     Exh. A
1863     12-12-24    131.04
1864     1-9-25      74.56
                     Ch. 155, Appx. A, §§
1867     9-11-25     155.4.5,
                     155.4.8,
                     155.6.4
1868     9-11-25     74.45
1869     11-18-25    32.37,
                     32.41
                    
 
