CITY OF BEGGS, OKLAHOMA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-2 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 2025-03, passed 7-14-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not amend the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
11.   CITY STANDARDS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Authority of code
   
10.03   Territorial applicability
   
10.04   Ordinances in effect in outlying territory of city
   
10.05   Application to future ordinances
   
10.06   Interpretation
   
10.07   Catchlines and headings; notes
   
10.08   Definitions
   
10.09   Rules of interpretation
   
10.10   Severability
   
10.11   Internal references to code; amendments included
   
10.12   Reference to offices
   
10.13   Reference to statutes
   
10.14   Conflicting provisions
   
10.15   Errors and omissions
   
10.16   Official time
   
10.17   Reasonable time; time of performance
   
10.18   Ordinances reinstated
   
10.19   Ordinances repealed
   
10.20   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.21   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.22   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.23   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.24   Section histories; statutory references
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   (A)   The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and
sections shall constitute and be designated as the “City Code of Beggs,
Oklahoma,” and may be so cited. This code may also be cited as the “city code”
or, in the provisions which follow, as the “code.”
(Prior Code, § 1-101)
   (B)   When a change or changes have been prepared and inserted in the code
as provided herein below, the words “as amended” may be added to the citation
or title when referring to the code as amended.
Statutory reference:
   Adoption and revision of codes of ordinances, see 11 O.S. §§ 14-108 and 14-
109
§ 10.02 AUTHORITY OF CODE.
   This code is a revision and codification of the general ordinances of the
city which has been enacted and published in accordance with the authority
granted in 11 O.S. §§ 14-108 and 14-109.
(Prior Code, § 1-103)
§ 10.03 TERRITORIAL APPLICABILITY.
   Except as provided otherwise, this code refers only to the commission or
omission of acts within the territorial limits of the city and to that
territory outside the city over which the city has jurisdiction, ownership or
control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision or any law.
(Prior Code, § 1-112)
§ 10.04 ORDINANCES IN EFFECT IN OUTLYING TERRITORY OF CITY.
   (A)   (1)   All ordinances of the city now in effect within the city are
hereby extended to all real property belonging to, or under the control of, the
city outside the corporate limits of the city and are in full effect therein
insofar as they are applicable.
      (2)   All ordinances of the city which shall go into effect in the future
shall also apply to, and be in full effect within, the boundaries of all
outlying real property insofar as they may be applicable.
   (B)   Any words in any ordinance indicating that the effect of an ordinance
provision is limited to the corporate limits of the city shall be deemed to
mean and include also the outlying real property belonging to, or under the
control of, the city unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
(Prior Code, § 1-113)
§ 10.05 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.06 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein or by law or implication required, the same
rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.07 CATCHLINES AND HEADINGS; NOTES.
   (A)   All designations and headings of titles, chapters, subchapters,
sections and divisions are intended only for convenience in arrangement and as
mere catchwords to indicate the contents of such titles, chapters, subchapters,
sections or divisions, whether printed in capital letters, italic letters or
boldface type. They shall not be deemed or taken to be any part or title of
such titles, chapters, subchapters, sections or divisions; nor, unless
expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed upon amendment or reenactment;
nor shall they be construed to govern, limit, modify, alter or in any other
manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of any of the provisions of this
code.
(Prior Code, § 1-106)
   (B)   Notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information or
referring to statutes or to other parts of the code are inserted in this code,
and may be inserted in changes to this code, for the convenience of persons
using the code and shall have no legal effect.
§ 10.08 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases are construed according to the common
and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and others
that have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law are construed
and understood according to such meaning.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
apply unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
      BOND. An obligation in writing binding the signatory to pay a sum certain
upon the happening or failure of an event.
      BUILDING. Any structure intended to have walls and a roof.
      BUILDING OFFICIAL. The person appointed by the city and designated as the
city’s building official.
      BUSINESS. Any profession, trade or occupation and any other commercial
enterprise conducted for monetary reward.
      CITY. The City of Beggs, in the County of Okmulgee and State of Oklahoma.
      CITY LIMITS. Within the city, and includes not only the corporate limits
of the city, but also any property which it owns or which is under its
jurisdiction.
      CLERK. The City Clerk.
      CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This municipal code, as
modified by amendment, revision and the adoption of new titles, chapters or
sections.
      COUNCIL. The governing body of the city, the City Council.
      COUNTY. The County of Okmulgee, Oklahoma.
      DEFINITIONS. When given within a chapter, subchapter or section, apply
only to words or phrases used in such chapter, subchapter or section unless
otherwise provided.
      DESIGNEE. Following an official of the city, means the authorized agent,
employee or representative of such official.
      EMPLOYEE. A person who is employed by the city, including, but not
limited to, a police officer, firefighter or laborer. Any person employed by
the city serves “at will” and is an at-will employee.
      HEALTH OFFICER. The administrator of the cooperative department of the
county and the city.
      JOINT AUTHORITY. All words giving JOINT AUTHORITY to three or more
persons or officers shall be construed as giving authority to a majority of the
persons or officers.
      KEEPER. One in possession of or who has the care, custody or
superintendence of a thing, place or business, whether or not the owner or
proprietor, and includes any person, firm, association, corporation, club and
copartnership, whether acting by itself or by a servant, agent or employee.
      LAW. Applicable federal law and court decisions, court decisions and
provisions of the Constitution and statutes of the state and ordinances of the
city, and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations promulgated
thereunder.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive and discretionary.
      MAYOR. The Mayor of the city.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      OATH. Any form of attestation by which a person signifies that he or she
is bound in conscience to perform an act or to speak faithfully and truthfully,
and includes an AFFIRMATION or DECLARATION in cases where, by law, an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath.
      OCCUPANT. The tenant or person in actual possession.
      OPERATE. Carry on, keep, conduct, maintain, manage, direct or
superintend.
      ORDINANCES. The ordinances of the city and all amendments and supplements
thereto.
      OTHER OFFICIALS or OFFICERS AND THE LIKE. Whenever reference is made to
officers, agencies or departments by title only, such as “City Clerk,” “City
Attorney,” “Fire Chief,” “Police Chief” and the like, they shall mean the
officers, agencies or departments of the city.
      OWNER. One who has complete dominion over particular property and who is
the one in whom legal or equitable title rests; when applied to a building or
land, OWNER means any part owner, joint owner, owner of a community or
partnership interest, life tenant, tenant in common or joint tenant of the
whole or part of such building or land.
      PERSON. Any individual, natural person, joint stock company, partnership,
voluntary association, club, firm, company, corporation, business trust,
organization or any other bodies corporate or politic or group acting as a
unit, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, partner, member, director,
officer or employee of any of them, including an executor, clerk, trustee,
receiver or other representative appointed according to law.
      PERSONAL PROPERTY. Any money, goods, movable chattels, things in action,
evidence of debt, all objects and rights which are capable of ownership and
every other species of property, except real property.
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before and next after, respectively.
      PROPRIETOR. An owner of the property or premises, including any person,
firm, association, corporation, club, partnership or other group acting as a
unit, whether acting by themselves or by a servant, agent or employee.
      PUBLIC PLACE. Means and includes any public street, road or highway,
alley, lane, sidewalk, crosswalk or other public way, or any public resort,
place of amusement, stadium, athletic field, park, playground, public building
or grounds appurtenant thereto, school building or school grounds, public
parking lot or any vacant lot, the elevator, lobby, halls, corridors and areas
open to the public of any store, office or apartment building or any other
place commonly open to the public.
      REAL PROPERTY. Land, together with all things attached to the land so as
to become a part thereof.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIDEWALK. The portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent
property along the margin of a street or other highway which is designed,
constructed and intended for the use of pedestrians to the exclusion of
vehicles.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. The name of a person, mark or symbol appended
by him or her to a writing with the intent to authenticate the instrument as
one made or put into effect by him or her.
      STATE. The State of Oklahoma.
      STATUTES. The Oklahoma Statutes, as they now are or as they may be
amended to be.
      STATUTORY REFERENCES. References to the statutes of the state as they now
are or as they may be amended.
      STREET. All streets, highways, avenues, boulevards, parkways, roads,
lanes, viaducts, bridges and the approaches thereto, docks built on the public
streets, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs, sidewalks, recreation and park
lands used for vehicular traffic, or other public ways or thoroughfares in the
city over which it has jurisdiction which have been, or may hereafter be,
dedicated and opened to public use, or such other public property so designated
in any law of the state.
      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading
in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
      TENANT. Any person occupying the premises, building or land of another in
subordination to such other person’s title and with his or her express or
implied assent, whether he or she occupies the whole or a part of that
premises, building or land, whether alone or with others.
      TIME. The hour of the day according to the official time of the day.
      TREASURER. The City Treasurer.
      WATERCOURSE. Any drain, ditch and stream flowing in a definite direction
or course in a bed with banks.
      WEEK. Seven days.
      WRITING or WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters or figures,
whether by printing or otherwise, capable of comprehension by ordinary visual
means.
      YEAR. A calendar year.
(Prior Code, § 1-102)
§ 10.09 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   In the construction of this code and all ordinances, the following rules of
construction and definitions shall be observed unless inconsistent with the
manifest intent of the City Council or the context clearly requires otherwise.
   (A)   AND or OR. “And” may be read “or” and “or” may be read “and” if the
sense requires it.
   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be
done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, the
requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the act by an authorized
agent or deputy.
   (C)   Gender. Words importing the masculine gender include the feminine and
neuter as well as the masculine.
   (D)   Singular and plural. Words used in the singular include the plural and
in the plural include the singular.
   (E)   Tenses. Words used in the past or present tense include the future,
past and present, where applicable, unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise.
   (F)   General term. A general term following a specific enumeration of terms
is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
(Prior Code, § 1-102)
§ 10.10 SEVERABILITY.
   It is declared to be the intention of the Council that the sections,
divisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and words of this code are severable.
If any section, division, paragraph, sentence, clause or word is declared
unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the judgment or decree of any court of
competent jurisdiction, then its unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not
affect the validity of any of the remaining sections, divisions, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses and words of this code since the sections or parts of
sections would have been enacted by the Council without and irrespective of any
unconstitutional or otherwise invalid section, division, paragraph, sentence,
clause or word being incorporated into this code.
(Prior Code, § 1-114)
§ 10.11 INTERNAL REFERENCES TO CODE; AMENDMENTS INCLUDED.
   (A)   Any reference in this code to an ordinance or provision of this code
means such ordinance or provision as may now exist or is hereafter amended.
   (B)   Any references in this code to titles, chapters, subchapters or
sections shall be to the titles, chapters, subchapters or sections of this code
unless otherwise specified.
(Prior Code, § 1-105)
§ 10.12 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of the city exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.13 REFERENCE TO STATUTES.
   Reference to the statutes of the state means the statutes as they now are or
as they may be amended, and a reference to the state statutes for a certain
year also means the comparable provision when included in future codifications.
§ 10.14 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   (A)   If the provisions of different titles, chapters, subchapters or
sections of this code conflict with or contravene each other, then the
provisions of each title, chapter, subchapter or section shall prevail as to
all matters and questions growing out of the subject matter of that title,
chapter, subchapter or section.
   (B)   If clearly conflicting provisions are found in different sections of
the same chapter, then the provisions of the section last enacted shall prevail
unless the construction is inconsistent with the meaning of that section.
(Prior Code, § 1-104)
§ 10.15 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   (A)   If a manifest error is discovered consisting of the misspelling of any
word, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached or the use of a word or words when another word or words were clearly
intended to express the intent, then the spelling shall be corrected and the
word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the
correct words were contained in the text as originally published.
   (B)   No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists
regarding the nature or extent of the error.
§ 10.16 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The OFFICIAL TIME, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within the city for the transaction of all municipal
business.
§ 10.17 REASONABLE TIME; TIME OF PERFORMANCE.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   When expressed in days, the time within which an act is to be done as
provided in any section, or any order issued pursuant to any section, is
computed by excluding the first and including the last day. If the last day is
a Sunday or legal holiday, then that day shall not be counted in the
computation. When expressed in hours, the whole of Sunday or a legal holiday,
from 12:00 a.m., midnight, to 12:00 a.m., midnight, is excluded.
(Prior Code, § 1-102)
§ 10.18 ORDINANCES REINSTATED.
   The provisions appearing in this code, insofar as they relate to the same
subject matter and are substantially the same as those ordinance provisions
previously adopted by the city and existing at the effective date of this code,
shall be considered as restatements and continuations thereof and not as new
enactments.
(Prior Code, § 1-107)
§ 10.19 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   (A)   All ordinances and parts of ordinances of a permanent and general
nature passed prior to and in effect at the time this code is adopted, but not
included in the code, are hereby repealed as of the time when the code goes
into effect.
   (B)   Ordinances passed on or after that date shall not be repealed or
amended by the adoption of the code.
§ 10.20 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.21 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   (A)   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication
shall take effect from and after due publication thereof unless otherwise
expressly provided.
   (B)   Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from their
passage unless otherwise expressly provided.
§ 10.22 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until due publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it, when publication is required to give
effect thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suits, proceedings, rights, fines, forfeitures or penalties
instituted, created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to
its repeal shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may be
prosecuted, enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in
force, unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause or provision unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.23 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, then the chapter or section shall be specifically
repealed and a new chapter or section containing the desired amendment
substituted in its place. Ordinances and parts of ordinances of a permanent and
general nature passed or adopted on and after the most recent ordinance
included in this code of ordinances may be passed or adopted either in the form
of amendments to this code of ordinances or without specific reference to the
code, but in either case, all ordinances and parts of ordinances shall be
deemed amendments to the code, and all of the substantive permanent and general
parts of the ordinances and changes made thereby in the code shall be inserted
and made in the code whenever authorized or directed by motion, resolution or
ordinance of the City Council, as provided herein.
§ 10.24 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance are listed following the text of the code
section. Example: (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord.
20, passed 1-1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, then this
indicates that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the
statute. Example: (11 O.S. § 1-402) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-1980; Ord. 20, passed
1-1-1985)
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, then this indicates that the reader should
refer to that statute for further information. Example:
   § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
   This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records unless otherwise exempted by state law.
   Statutory reference:
      Inspection of public records, see 51 O.S. §§ 24A.1 et seq.
   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the previous code of
ordinances of the city and subsequently amended, then the Prior Code section
number shall be indicated in the history by “(Prior Code, § 50.01).”
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Penalty provisions.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided by state law, whenever in this code or
in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be
unlawful or an offense or misdemeanor, or whenever in the code or ordinance the
doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be
unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any
provision of this code or any ordinance, upon conviction, shall be punishable
by a fine not exceeding the sum of $750 and/or 60 days of imprisonment. Each
day or any portion of a day during which any violation of this code or any
ordinance continues shall constitute a separate offense.
      (2)   The fine and cost for such unlawful act or offense shall not be
greater than the maximum fine and cost established by state statutes for the
same offense.
      (3)   Upon any conviction for an offense relating to speeding or for
parking violations, the punishment shall be by a fine not to exceed the sum of
$200, plus $25 court costs, plus lawful state fees.
(Prior Code, § 1-108)
   (B)   Each day of violation a separate offense. Each day that any person is
in violation of any provision of this code, and each day any such violation
occurs or continues to exist, shall be a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 1-109)
   (C)   Prohibited acts include causing, permitting and concealing. Whenever
in this code any act or omission is made unlawful or prohibited, it shall
include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting or concealing the fact
of such act or omission.
(Prior Code, § 1-110)
   (D)   Civil relief from violations. No penalty imposed by or pursuant to
division (A) above, or by any other section of this code or other ordinance of
the city, shall interfere with the right of the city to apply to the proper
courts of the state for a writ of mandamus, an injunction or other appropriate
relief in the case of violations of this code or other ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 1-111)
(Ord. 2007-08, passed 8-6-2007)
CHAPTER 11: CITY STANDARDS
Section
   
11.01   Map of the city
   
11.02   Ward boundaries
§ 11.01 MAP OF THE CITY.
   The map of the city showing its territorial limits as maintained in the
office of the City Clerk is hereby designated as the official map of the city,
and the corporate limits as shown thereon and as amended are declared to be the
true and correct corporate limits of the city, including all annexations made
to the city.
(Prior Code, § 1-201) (Ord. 2006-03, passed 4-13-2006)
§ 11.02 WARD BOUNDARIES.
   The city is divided into four wards.
(Prior Code, § 1-202) (Ord. 2006-03, passed 4-13-2006)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 11 O.S. §§ 20-101 through 20-105
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   CITY OFFICIALS AND GOVERNMENT ORGANIZATION
      
31.   CITY ORGANIZATIONS
      
32.   MUNICIPAL COURT
      
33.   LAW ENFORCEMENT AND PUBLIC SAFETY
      
34.   FINANCES AND REVENUE
      
35.   TAXATION
      
36.   GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE POLICIES
CHAPTER 30: CITY OFFICIALS AND GOVERNMENT ORGANIZATION
Section
Elected and Appointed Officials
   
30.01   Mayor; compensation and duties
   
30.02   Authority of Mayor, City Council to declare state of emergency
   
30.03   City Clerk; duties
   
30.04   City Treasurer; duties
   
30.05   City Attorney
Administration
   
30.20   Form of government
   
30.21   Meetings of the City Council, Public Works Authority
   
30.22   City elections; oath of office
   
30.23   Bonds for city officers and employees
   
30.24   Books delivered to successor
   
30.25   Compensation
   
30.26   Administrative departments, officers and agencies
   
30.27   Insurance and hold harmless for use of city property and special events
ELECTED AND APPOINTED OFFICIALS
§ 30.01 MAYOR; COMPENSATION AND DUTIES.
   (A)   That the Mayor of the City of Beggs, Oklahoma, shall be compensated at
the rate of $25,000 per year.
   (B)   The duties of the Mayor of Beggs, Oklahoma are hereby determined to be
as follows:
      (1)   Appoint, subject to the confirmation by the City council, the City
Attorney and all heads or Directors of administrative departments including
members of boards and commissioners and shall appoint all other administrative
officers and employees of the city; and
      (2)   Sign the commissions and appointments of all officers, elected, or
appointed; and
      (3)   Remove or suspend city officers or employees against whom charges
of incompetency, neglect or violation of duty are made, until such time as the
Council shall take action on the charges; and
      (4)   Supervise and control all administrative departments, agencies,
officers, and employees, act promptly on a charge of neglect or violation of
duty of any officers or employee, and require any officer to account for and
report to the council in writing on any subject pertaining to the duties,
powers, or functions of the officer when the mayor deems necessary; and
      (5)   Prepare a budget annually and submit it to the council. The mayor
shall be responsible for the administration of the budget after it goes into
effect; and
      (6)   Keep the council advised pf the financial condition and the future
needs of the city. The mayor shall submit to the council a report after the end
of the fiscal year on the finances and administrative activities of the city
for the preceding year; and
      (7)   Make recommendations to the council of measures for the wellbeing
of the city; and
      (8)   Enforce the city ordinances; and
      (9)   Grant pardons for violation of city ordinances, including the
remission of fines and costs, subject to the approval of the council. Said
approval may only be given at a meeting of the council after the reasons and
order of remission or pardon have been entered on the journal; and
      (10)   Assist Beggs Public Works Authority concerning water and sewer
problems; and
      (11)   Assist engineering companies concerning the future needs and plans
of the City of Beggs; and
      (12)   Assist oversee, recognize, and deal with personnel problems with
the Municipality subject to confirmation where necessary of the city council,
and
      (13)   Accept and deal with public complaints as made concerning the City
of Beggs; and
      (14)   Apply for REAP Grants completing documentation for said Grants and
work in conjunction with a professional, where necessary as concern the City of
Beggs; and
      (15)   Help, administer and oversee Grant Projects for the City of Beggs;
and
      (16)   Meet with and deal with salesmen calling on the City of Beggs
during the month; and
      (17)   Plan for future needs and requirements for the city involving road
repair, water and sewer upgrades, and other necessary items for the health and
safety of the citizens of Beggs, Oklahoma; and
      (18)   Arrange supervision for and work projects for community service
workers utilized by the City of Beggs; and
      (19)   Organize and supervise various work projects involving the new and
old lakes of the City of Beggs; and
      (20)   Act as a purchasing officer for the City of Beggs, to and
including signing purchase order, payroll checks and all bills payable, checks
for both the City and Beggs Public Works Authority; and
      (21)   Properly compile and approve all City Council agendas; and
      (22)   Preside over all Regular and Special Meetings of both the Beggs
City Council and the Beggs Public Works Authority; and
      (23)   Assist in the handling of all problems arising out or dealing with
the cemetery; and
      (24)   Meet with the public daily pertaining to the various problems and
complaints involved in the City of Beggs; and
      (25)   Undergo a yearly job performance review by the City Council; and
      (26)   Have such other powers, duties and functions as may be prescribed
by law or further prescribed by Ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 2-103) (Ord. 2005-02, passed 1-3-2005; Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-
24-2025)
§ 30.02 AUTHORITY OF MAYOR, CITY COUNCIL TO DECLARE STATE OF EMERGENCY.
   (A)   63 O.S. § 24-683.2 allows incorporated municipalities to declare and
adopt emergency powers as necessary to respond to any national or state
emergency. In response thereto, the City Council authorizes the Mayor to take
and declare any actions necessary to protect the citizens of the city during
times of emergency stemming from disease outbreak or any future health crisis
or environmental or natural disaster.
   (B)   Said emergency powers shall include, but not be limited to, the
following.
      (1)   The Mayor shall be authorized to make emergency purchases of goods
and services and enter into such contracts as may be necessary to protect the
health and welfare of the citizens of the city.
      (2)   The Mayor, with the advice of the City Police Chief, shall be
authorized to declare any curfew as may be necessary to protect the citizens of
the city.
      (3)   The Mayor shall be authorized to order the removal and remediation
of any conditions that are deemed to be an immediate threat to the health or
safety of the citizen of the city.
      (4)   The Mayor shall have the authority to order the closing of any
businesses or facilities within the city that are seen as contributing to the
spread of any infectious disease and to further order and limit the gathering
of people in public places.
      (5)   The Mayor shall be authorized to cancel or limit all meetings of
people within the community.
      (6)   The Mayor is authorized to assume all emergency management powers
as may be necessary to combat disease outbreak.
   (C)   The Mayor is authorized to issue any and all orders as may be
necessary to implement the powers granted herein and to take any other action
as may not be enumerated herein, but is found to be necessary to alleviate the
emergency in question.
   (D)   Further state of emergency protocols include:
      (1)   (a)   The city’s administration shall be authorized to make
emergency purchases of goods and services and enter into contracts as deemed
necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public and to
protect public or private property from further harm or damage.
         (b)   Emergency purchases of goods and services shall not be subject
to competitive bidding or other purchasing requirements established by this
code of ordinances. Contracts pursuant to this section may be entered into by
the Mayor without the prior approval of the City Council.
      (2)   The Police Chief, in consultation with the Mayor, may establish a
curfew as deemed necessary for the preservation of the health, safety and
welfare of the public.
      (3)   (a)   The city, its agents and its employees are hereby empowered
to enter onto public and private property to summarily remove conditions that
are deemed an imminent threat to the life, safety, health and welfare of the
city, its residents or the general public.
         (b)   The city, its agents or its employees shall suffer neither
liability nor be responsible for any damages caused to private or public
property during the abatement of existing and imminent threats to the safety,
health and welfare of the city, its residents or the general public.
      (4)   The Emergency Management Director, after due authorization from the
Mayor, shall have the power and authority to enforce all rules and regulations
relating to civil defense and emergency management and, if necessary, take
control of transportation, communications, public utilities or stocks of fuel,
food, clothing and medicine for the purpose of protecting the civilian
population. Said Director shall cooperate in every way with the activities of
governmental agencies or civil defense organizations.
   (E)   The City Council authorizes the Mayor to make any adjustments to
customer water billing that are relevant to the crisis or disaster at hand or
relevant to the adverse financial impact upon customers’ ability to pay created
by the crisis, disaster or event.
   (F)   The state of emergency expires whenever the City Council, in
conjunction with the Command Staff (emergency management), deems the emergency
is abated.
(Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-25-2020)
§ 30.03 CITY CLERK; DUTIES.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall be an officer of the city. The Clerk shall serve
as clerk for the Council. The Clerk shall:
      (1)   Keep the journal of the proceedings of the City Council;
      (2)   Enroll all ordinances and resolutions passed by the Council in a
book or set of books kept for that purpose;
      (3)   Have custody of documents, records and archives as may be provided
for by law or by ordinance and have custody of the seal of the city;
      (4)   Attest and affix the seal of the city to documents as required by
law or by ordinance; and
      (5)   Have such powers, duties and functions related to his or her
statutory duties as may be prescribed by law or by ordinance.
   (B)   The person who serves as City Clerk may be employed by the city to
perform duties not related to his or her position as City Clerk. The salary, if
any, for said duties shall be provided for separately by ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 2-105) (Ord. 2007-01, passed 1-12-2007)
§ 30.04 CITY TREASURER; DUTIES.
   (A)   The City Treasurer shall be an officer of the city. Subject to such
regulations as the Council may prescribe, the City Treasurer shall:
      (1)   Maintain accounts and books to show where and from what sources all
monies paid to the city have been derived and to whom and when any monies have
been paid;
      (2)   Deposit daily funds received for the city in depositories as the
Council may designate; and
      (3)   Have such other powers, duties and functions related to his or her
statutory duties as may be prescribed by law or by ordinance.
   (B)   The person who serves as City Treasurer may be employed by the city to
perform duties not related to his or her position as City Treasurer. The
salary, if any, for said duties shall be provided for separately by ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 2-106) (Ord. 2007-01, passed 1-12-2007)
§ 30.05 CITY ATTORNEY.
   The City Attorney is an officer of the city appointed by the Mayor with the
confirmation of the Council. The City Attorney shall have such duties as are
prescribed by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 2-107)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 30.20 FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
   (A)   The city shall not be governed by the provisions of the Oklahoma Town
Meeting Act under 11 O.S. §§ 16-301 et seq. for the election of its officers
and as a method of determining municipal questions. The city shall continue to
elect its officers and determine its municipal questions under the appropriate
provisions of 11 O.S. §§ 16-101 et seq. as pertain to the Aldermanic, or Mayor-
Council, form of government adopted and utilized by the city.
   (B)   The Council shall consist of four Council members. All powers of the
city shall be exercised in the manner prescribed by this code of ordinances, by
state statute and in such manner as prescribed by ordinances adopted by the
City Council.
(Prior Code, § 2-101) (Ord. 2013-01, passed 12-12-2013)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 11 O.S. §§ 9-101 et seq.
§ 30.21 MEETINGS OF THE CITY COUNCIL, PUBLIC WORKS AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Day and time. The regularly scheduled monthly meetings of the City
Council and Public Works Authority shall be held on the second Monday of each
month at the hour of 6:00 p.m. In the event of a conflict occurring because of
holidays or other conflicts, the regular meetings of such organizations shall
be set on the next business day best available to the municipal government.
   (B)   Location. Meetings of the City Council and Public Works Authority
shall be at the City Municipal Building unless otherwise required or directed
by the Mayor or other authorized municipal official. Any adjourned or continued
meeting may be held in any other place within the city, or as may be otherwise
needed, as required by the needs of the municipality.
   (C)   Rules governing. Rules to govern the conduct of such meetings may be
adopted as required by the municipality from time to time.
(Ord. 2015-02, passed 9-14-2015)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 25 O.S. §§ 301 et seq.
§ 30.22 CITY ELECTIONS; OATH OF OFFICE.
   (A)   (1)   The elected officers of the city are the Mayor, Council members,
Clerk and Treasurer. The terms of the Council shall be staggered so that at any
one general municipal election, the following officers are elected for four-
year terms:
         (a)   Council members from odd-numbered wards;
         (b)   The Mayor; and
         (c)   The Clerk.
      (2)   At the next general municipal election, the following officers
shall be elected for four-year terms:
         (a)   Council members from even-numbered wards; and
         (b)   The Treasurer.
   (B)   General municipal elections are held on the first Tuesday in April in
each odd-numbered year. A primary election shall be held the third Tuesday of
March in each odd-numbered year, at which time, candidates shall be nominated
for offices which are to be elected at the upcoming general municipal election.
The city shall continue to utilize the County Election Board to conduct all
municipal elections as may be required by law.
   (C)   The City Council shall ratify the election results of each and every
election certified to it by the Election Board before city officials are sworn
in to assume the duties of their office.
   (D)   City officials elected at a general municipal election shall assume
their duties, as provided by state law, on the second Monday following the
election at 12:00 p.m., noon. City officials elected at a special election
shall assume their duties immediately following adjournment of the meeting at
which they take the oath of office.
   (E)   City officials elected at any general or special election of the city
shall take the oath of office at a Council meeting. Whenever the regular
Council meeting falls before the second legal business day following the last
date to contest the city’s election results, a special Council meeting will be
held at 7:00 p.m. on the second legal business day following the last date to
contest the city’s election results to administer the oath to the persons
certified as elected and as ratified by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 2-104) (Ord. 2013-01, passed 12-12-2013)
§ 30.23 BONDS FOR CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   Such officers and employees of the city as are designated by the City
Council shall, before entering upon the discharge of their duties, execute and
file with the City Clerk surety bonds issued by a surety company authorized to
operate in the state and conditioned upon the faithful performance of their
duties. The city shall pay the premium on such bonds.
   (B)   The city shall provide a position bond in the minimum amounts as
follows:
      (1)   City Clerk: $25,000;
      (2)   City Treasurer: $25,000;
      (3)   Public Works Authority Clerk: $25,000;
      (4)   Mayor:$50,000 (when acting as the Mayor, the President of the City
Council shall be covered in the Mayor’s position bond); and
      (5)   Blanket bond for each police officer and Public Works Authority
employee: $2,500 each.
(Prior Code, § 2-109) (Ord. 2025-03, passed 7-14-2025)
§ 30.24 BOOKS DELIVERED TO SUCCESSOR.
   All books, vouchers, monies or other property belonging to the corporation
in charge or possession of any officer of the same shall be delivered to his or
her successor when qualified.
(Prior Code, § 2-111)
§ 30.25 COMPENSATION.
   (A)   The compensation of elected officers of the city shall be as provided
by ordinance as set forth herein or in any subsequent amendment thereto. Pay
periods shall be either once a month or twice a month as determined by
resolution, as shall be all holidays and leaves of absence.
   (B)   The City Treasurer shall be compensated as established by the city.
   (C)   The City Clerk shall be compensated as established by the city.
   (D)   The Mayor shall be compensated as established by the city and with no
expense account, but the Mayor, as with any city employee, shall have the right
to apply for the reimbursement of any expenses incurred while on city business.
(Prior Code, § 2-110) (Ord. 2005-02, passed 1-3-2005; Ord. 2007-01, passed 1-
12-2007)
§ 30.26 ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS, OFFICERS AND AGENCIES.
   There shall be such other administrative departments, agencies and officers
as the Council may establish.
(Prior Code, § 2-108)
§ 30.27 INSURANCE AND HOLD HARMLESS FOR USE OF CITY PROPERTY AND SPECIAL
EVENTS.
   (A)   (1)   Any person, group, entity, association, corporation or
organization (the “user”) which wishes to utilize city real property, parks,
streets, alleys or rights-of-way for any purpose, including, but not limited
to, a special event, carnival, fair, race, meet, rodeo or festival, shall
provide the city with a contract to indemnify and hold harmless the city from
any and all claims arising out of their use.
      (2)   The user shall provide the city with a certificate of insurance
naming the city as an “additional insured” and provide the city with a copy of
the policy on which the city is so designated. A copy of the policy shall be
filed with the City Clerk not less than ten days before the first date of the
use. The amounts of the policy shall be not less than the maximum exposure of
the city under the Governmental Tort Claims Act, being 51 O.S. §§ 151 et seq.
   (B)   Any food handlers, including, but not limited to, chefs, cooks,
preparers or servers, at such special event shall have and display
conspicuously a current food handler’s permit issued by the County Health
Department. Food handlers will ensure that hand washing facilities with soap
are available and utilized frequently. Violations of this division (B) are
punishable as provided in §
10.99(A) of this code.
(Prior Code, § 2-112)
CHAPTER 31: CITY ORGANIZATIONS
Section
Planning Commission
   
31.01   Establishment; appointment
   
31.02   Quorum
   
31.03   Organization and rules
   
31.04   Powers and duties
   
31.05   Purpose of Comprehensive Plan
   
31.06   Subdivision of land
Zoning Commission
   
31.20   Establishment; powers
   
31.21   Uniformity of regulations throughout district
   
31.22   Effect of Comprehensive Plan on zoning regulations
PLANNING COMMISSION
§ 31.01 ESTABLISHMENT; APPOINTMENT.
   (A)   There is hereby created a Planning Commission of the city. The
Commission shall be composed of five members nominated by the Mayor and
confirmed by the City Council.
   (B)   Each appointed member shall hold office for a period of three years or
until his or her successor takes office. The appointed members of the
Commission shall be nominated and appointed solely with reference to their
fitness and without reference to party affiliation and shall serve without
compensation. Members may be removed by the City Council only for inefficiency,
neglect of duty or malefaction in office.
   (C)   Vacancies occurring otherwise than through the expiration of term
shall be filled only for the unexpired terms by the Mayor with confirmation by
the City Council.
   (D)   The Mayor shall be an ex-officio member of the Commission. The Mayor
shall receive no compensation for his or her service on the Commission.
(Prior Code, § 12-101)
Statutory reference:
   Planning commissions, see 11 O.S. §§ 45-101 et seq.
§ 31.02 QUORUM.
   (A)   Three members of the Planning Commission shall constitute a quorum for
the transaction of business.
   (B)   Any action taken shall be official when concurred in by not less than
a majority of all appointed members of the Planning Commission entitled to
vote.
(Prior Code, § 12-102)
§ 31.03 ORGANIZATION AND RULES.
   (A)   Each year the Commission shall elect a Chairperson, a Vice Chairperson
and a Secretary, and may create and fill such other offices as it may deem
necessary. The term of the Chairperson, Vice Chairperson and Secretary shall be
one year.
   (B)   The Planning Commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of
business and regulations necessary to effectuate the purposes of the planning,
zoning and development provisions of this code.
(Prior Code, § 12-103)
§ 31.04 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   Employing staff; expenses.
      (1)   The Planning Commission, subject to approval of the City Council,
shall have the power and authority to employ planners, engineers, attorneys,
clerks and other help deemed necessary within the limits of the appropriation
fixed by the City Council.
      (2)   The salary and compensation of such employees shall be fixed by the
City Council and shall be paid out of the City Treasury as are other officers
and employees. Necessary expenses incurred by the Commission shall be paid from
the City Treasury as are other legal expenses of the city.
(Prior Code, § 12-104)
   (B)   Powers and duties enumerated.
      (1)   The Planning Commission shall have the power to prepare and
recommend to the City Council for adoption a Comprehensive Plan for the
physical development of the city.
      (2)   In the preparation of the Comprehensive Plan, the Planning
Commission may, from time to time, prepare and recommend to the City Council
for adoption a part or parts thereof, which parts shall cover one or more major
geographical divisions of the city or one or more major elements of the
Comprehensive Plan. The Planning Commission may, from time to time, recommend
extending, amending or changing any portion of the Comprehensive Plan.
      (3)   In conducting its work, the Planning Commission may consider and
investigate any subject matter tending to the development and betterment of the
city and may make recommendations as it deems advisable concerning the adoption
thereof to the City Council.
      (4)   The Planning Commission may make or cause to be made surveys,
studies, maps and plans in the conduct of its activities.
      (5)   Before final action is taken by the City Council on the location or
design of any public building, statue, memorial, park, boulevard, street,
alley, playground, public grounds, bridge or change in any location of any
street or alley, such question shall be submitted to the Planning Commission
for investigation and report.
(Prior Code, § 12-105)
§ 31.05 PURPOSE OF COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
   (A)   In the preparation of the Comprehensive Plan, the Planning Commission
may make careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of present conditions
and future growth of the city with due regard to its relation to neighboring
territory. The Plan shall be made with the general purpose of guiding and
accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of the city
and its environs which will, in accordance with present and future needs, best
promote health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity and the general
welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development.
   (B)   This includes, among other things:
      (1)   Adequate provisions for traffic;
      (2)   The promotion of safety from fire and other dangers;
      (3)   Adequate provisions for light and air;
      (4)   The promotion of a healthful and convenient distribution of the
population;
      (5)   The promotion of good civic design and arrangement; and
      (6)   The wise and efficient expenditure of public funds.
(Prior Code, § 12-106)
§ 31.06 SUBDIVISION OF LAND.
   (A)   The Planning Commission may prepare and recommend to the City Council
for adoption rules and regulations governing the subdivision of land within the
corporate limits for the city.
   (B)   All plans, plats or replats of land laid out in lots, plots, blocks,
streets, alleys or other ways intended to be dedicated to public or private use
within the corporate limits of the city may first be submitted by the City
Council to the Planning Commission for its recommendations. The disapproval of
any such plan, plat or replat by the City Council shall be deemed a refusal of
the dedications shown thereon.
   (C)   No plat or replat of a subdivision of land or dedication of a street,
alley or other easement shall be entitled to record unless it bears the
signature of the Mayor, attested by the City Clerk, certifying the approval and
acceptance thereof by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 12-107)
ZONING COMMISSION
§ 31.20 ESTABLISHMENT; POWERS.
   The Planning Commission shall also act as the Zoning Commission, which shall
have the power to prepare and to recommend to the City Council for adoption a
Zoning Plan to regulate and restrict the height, number of stories and size of
buildings and other structures, the percentage of a lot that may be occupied,
the size of yards, courts and other open spaces, the density of population and
the location and use of buildings, structures and land for trade, industry,
residence and other purposes.
(Prior Code, § 12-108)
§ 31.21 UNIFORMITY OF REGULATIONS THROUGHOUT DISTRICT.
   The Planning Commission may recommend the division of the city into
districts of such number, size and area as may be deemed best suited to carry
out the Zoning Plan. All such regulations shall be uniform for each class or
kind of building throughout each district, but the regulations in one district
may differ from those in other districts.
(Prior Code, § 12-109)
§ 31.22 EFFECT OF COMPREHENSIVE PLAN ON ZONING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Zoning regulations shall be made in accordance with a Comprehensive
Plan and designed to lessen congestion in the streets, to secure safety from
fire, panic and other dangers, to promote health and the general welfare, to
provide adequate light and air, to prevent the overcrowding of land, to avoid
undue concentrations of the population and to facilitate the adequate provision
of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public
requirements.
   (B)   Such regulations shall be made with reasonable consideration, among
other things, as to the character of the district and its peculiar suitability
for particular uses, and with a view to conserving the value of buildings and
encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the municipality.
(Prior Code, § 12-110)
CHAPTER 32: MUNICIPAL COURT
Section
Court Judges
   
32.001   Judge; qualifications
   
32.002   Authority of Judge to prescribe rules
   
32.003   Term of office of Judge
   
32.004   Appointment of Judge
   
32.005   Vacancy; successor
   
32.006   Removal of Judge from office
   
32.007   Compensation of Judge
   
32.008   Alternate Judge
   
32.009   Acting Judge
Court Officials
   
32.020   Police Chief as principal officer of Court
   
32.021   Clerk of the Court; duties and bond
   
32.022   City Attorney; powers and duties
Court Procedures
   
32.035   Definitions
   
32.036   Purpose
   
32.037   Jurisdiction
   
32.038   Change of venue; disqualification of the judge
   
32.039   Ordinance violations; citation issuance; arrest, custody
   
32.040   Prosecutions; filing complaint; fees; defects raised prior to trial
   
32.041   Issuance of summons; failure to appear
   
32.042   Failure to appear according to bond terms; bond forfeiture; bench
warrants
   
32.043   Complainant; witnesses; failure to appear
   
32.044   Issuance of warrant
   
32.045   Procedure for bail or bond; bond schedule
   
32.046   Arraignment
   
32.047   Postponement of trial
   
32.048   Defendant’s presence required at trial
   
32.049   Right to trial by jury; waiver
   
32.050   Procedure for trials not within scope of chapter
Traffic Violations
   
32.065   Traffic Violations Bureau established; fine payment; fines in lieu of
appearance
   
32.066   Traffic Bail Bond Act
Judgments and Penalties
   
32.080   Rendering judgment
   
32.081   Judgment of imprisonment
   
32.082   Suspension or deferment of judgment; powers
   
32.083   Payment of costs by defendant
   
32.084   Enforcement of fines, costs; imprisonment; work and community service
   
32.085   Same offense punishable by different code sections
   
32.086   Schedule of fines
   
32.087   Penalty assessments
   
32.088   Fines recoverable by civil action
   
32.089   Contempt of court
 
   
32.999   Penalty
COURT JUDGES
§ 32.001 JUDGE; QUALIFICATIONS.
   (A)   There shall be one judge of the Court. The Judge need not be a
licensed attorney at law, but, if not, he or she must be a resident of the city
of at least the age of 21 years, possessed of good moral character or otherwise
meet the requirements established by state law for municipal judges.
   (B)   A judge who is a licensed attorney may engage in the practice of law
in other courts, but he or she shall not accept employment inconsistent with
his or her duties as judge or arising out of facts which give rise to or are
connected with cases within the jurisdiction of the Court pending therein, or
which might become subject of proceedings therein.
(Prior Code, § 6-201)
§ 32.002 AUTHORITY OF JUDGE TO PRESCRIBE RULES.
   The Judge may prescribe rules, consistent with the laws of the state and
with the ordinances of the city, for the proper conduct of the business of the
Court.
(Prior Code, § 6-109)
§ 32.003 TERM OF OFFICE OF JUDGE.
   The official term of the Judge shall be two years, expiring on June 1 in
each odd-numbered year.
(Prior Code, § 6-202)
§ 32.004 APPOINTMENT OF JUDGE.
   (A)   Judges shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the City
Council. A proposed appointment shall be submitted in writing to the City
Council at the next to last regularly scheduled meeting prior to the day upon
which the appointment is to take effect and shall be acted upon at the next
regularly scheduled meeting.
   (B)   The City Council may decide upon the proposed appointment by a
majority vote of all the members of the Council. A failure of decision upon a
proposed appointment shall not prevent action thereon at a later regularly
scheduled meeting of the Council unless the Mayor, in writing, withdraws the
proposed appointment.
(Prior Code, § 6-203)
§ 32.005 VACANCY; SUCCESSOR.
   (A)   A vacancy in the office of Judge shall occur if the incumbent:
      (1)   Dies;
      (2)   Resigns;
      (3)   Ceases to possess the qualifications for the office; or
      (4)   Is removed, and the removal proceeding has been affirmed finally in
judicial proceedings or is no longer subject to judicial review.
   (B)   Upon the occurrence of a vacancy in the office of Judge, the Mayor
shall appoint a successor to complete the unexpired term upon the same
procedure as an original appointment is made.
(Prior Code, § 6-207)
§ 32.006 REMOVAL OF JUDGE FROM OFFICE.
   (A)   Judges shall be subject to removal from office by the Council for the
causes prescribed by the Constitution and laws of the state for the removal of
public officers. Proceedings for removal shall be instituted by the filing of a
verified written petition setting forth facts sufficient to constitute one or
more legal grounds for removal. Petitions may be signed and filed by the Mayor
or by 25 or more qualified electors of the city. In the latter event,
verification may be executed by one or more of the petitioners.
   (B)   The Council shall set a date for hearing the matter and shall cause
notice thereof, together with a copy of the petition, to be served personally
upon the Judge at least ten days before the hearing. At the hearing, the Judge
shall be entitled to representation by counsel, to present testimony, to cross-
examine the witnesses against him or her and to have all evidence against him
or her presented in open hearing.
   (C)   So far as can be made applicable, the provisions of the State
Administrative Procedure Act governing individual proceedings, being 75 O.S. §
309, and any amendments or additions thereto in effect at the time of the
hearing shall govern the removal proceedings hereunder.
   (D)   A judgment of removal shall be entered only upon individual votes by a
majority of all members of the Council in favor of such removal.
(Prior Code, § 6-206)
§ 32.007 COMPENSATION OF JUDGE.
   The Judge shall receive such salary as may be established and shall be paid
as established by the city.
(Prior Code, § 6-205)
§ 32.008 ALTERNATE JUDGE.
   There may be appointed for each Judge of the Court an Alternate Judge
possessed of the same qualifications as the Judge. His or her appointment shall
be for the same term and made in the same manner as the Judge. He or she shall
sit as judge of the Court in any case if the Judge is absent from court, unable
to act as judge or disqualified from acting as judge in the case.
(Prior Code, § 6-203)
§ 32.009 ACTING JUDGE.
   If at any time there is no judge duly-appointed and qualified who is
available to sit as judge, a person possessing the qualifications required by
this subchapter for the Judge shall be appointed as Acting Judge. The Acting
Judge shall preside as acting judge over the Court in the disposition of
pending matters until such time as the Judge or Alternate Judge shall be
available.
(Prior Code, § 6-204)
COURT OFFICIALS
§ 32.020 POLICE CHIEF AS PRINCIPAL OFFICER OF COURT.
   All writs or processes of the Court shall be directed, in his or her
official title, to the Police Chief, who shall be the principal officer of the
Court.
(Prior Code, § 6-105)
§ 32.021 CLERK OF THE COURT; DUTIES AND BOND.
   (A)   (1)   The City Clerk, or a deputy designated by him or her, shall be
the Court Clerk.
      (2)   The City Clerk shall:
         (a)   Assist the Judge in recording the proceedings of the Court and
in preparing writs, processes and other papers;
         (b)   Administer oaths required in proceedings before the Court;
         (c)   Enter all pleadings, processes and proceedings in the dockets of
the Court;
         (d)   Perform such other clerical duties relating to the proceedings
of the Court as the Judge
shall direct; and
         (e)   Receive any receipts for forfeitures, fees, deposits and sums of
money payable to the Court and as may be established by the Court or the City
Council.
      (3)   The Court Clerk shall pay to the City Clerk all money so received
by him or her, except for such special deposits or fees as shall be received to
be disbursed by him or her for special purposes. All money paid to the City
Clerk shall be placed in the General Fund of the city, or in such other fund as
the Council may direct.
(Prior Code, § 6-106)
   (B)   The Court Clerk shall give bond in such sum as set by the Council in
the form provided by state law. When executed, the bond shall be submitted to
the Council for approval. When approved, it shall be filed with the City Clerk
and retained in the municipal archives.
(Prior Code, § 6-108)
§ 32.022 CITY ATTORNEY; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The City Attorney, or his or her duly-designated assistant, may be the
prosecuting officer of the Court. He or she may prosecute, in his or her
discretion, all alleged violations of the ordinances of the city. He or she
shall be authorized, in his or her discretion, to prosecute and resist appeals,
proceedings in error and review from the Court to any other courts of the
state, and to represent the city in all proceedings arising out of matters in
the Court.
(Prior Code, § 6-107)
COURT PROCEDURES
§ 32.035 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly requires a different meaning.
   CHIEF OF POLICE or POLICE CHIEF. The peace officer in charge of the police
force of the city.
   CLERK. The Court Clerk as appointed by the city, including any deputy or
member of the office staff of the Clerk while performing duties of the Clerk’s
office.
   COURT. The Municipal Criminal Court of the city.
   JUDGE. The Judge of the Municipal Criminal Court, including any acting judge
or alternate judge thereof as provided for by the statutes of the state and
this chapter.
   THIS JUDICIAL DISTRICT. The District Court judicial district of the state
wherein the government of the city is situated.
(Prior Code, § 6-101)
Statutory reference:
   Municipal courts generally, see 11 O.S. §§ 27-101 et seq.
§ 32.036 PURPOSE.
   (A)   This chapter shall govern the organization and operation of the
Municipal Criminal Court of the city as put into operation by resolution duly
passed and filed in accordance with law, as authorized by state statutes.
   (B)   To the extent of conflict between any provisions of this chapter and
the provisions of any other ordinance of the city, the provisions of this
chapter shall control.
(Prior Code, § 6-102)
§ 32.037 JURISDICTION.
   The Court shall exercise original jurisdiction to hear and determine all
prosecutions wherein a violation of any ordinance of the city is charged,
including any such prosecutions transferred to the Court in accordance with
applicable law.
(Prior Code, § 6-103)
§ 32.038 CHANGE OF VENUE; DISQUALIFICATION OF THE JUDGE.
   (A)   In prosecutions before the Court, no change of venue shall be allowed.
   (B)   The judge before whom the case is pending may certify his or her
disqualification or he or she may be disqualified from sitting under the terms,
conditions and procedures provided by law for courts of record. If a judge is
disqualified, the matter shall be heard by an acting judge, appointed as
provided in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-104)
§ 32.039 ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS; CITATION ISSUANCE; ARREST, CUSTODY.
   (A)   (1)   If a resident of the city is arrested by a law enforcement
officer for the violation of any traffic ordinance for which other provisions
of this chapter do not apply, or is arrested for the violation of a nontraffic
ordinance, then the officer shall immediately release the person if the person
acknowledges receipt of a citation by signing it. However, the arresting
officer need not release the person if it reasonably appears to the officer
that the person may cause injury to himself or herself or others, or damage to
property, if released, or that the person will not appear in response to the
citation, or if the person is arrested for an offense against a person or
property. If the person fails to appear in response to the citation, then a
warrant shall be issued for his or her arrest and his or her appearance shall
be compelled.
      (2)   If the arrested resident is not released by being permitted to sign
a citation, as provided in division (A) above, then he or she shall be admitted
to bail either before or after arraignment or shall be released on personal
recognizance.
   (B)   If a nonresident of the city is arrested by a law enforcement officer
for a violation of any ordinance for which §
32.066 of this chapter does not apply, then the defendant shall be eligible to
be admitted to bail either before or after arraignment.
   (C)   If the alleged offense be a violation of an ordinance restricting or
regulating the parking of vehicles, including any regulations issued under such
an ordinance, and the operator be not present, then the police officer shall
place on the vehicle at a place reasonably likely to come to the notice of the
operator a citation conforming substantially to that prescribed in this
section, with such variation as the circumstances require. The operator of this
vehicle shall be under the same obligation to respond to the citation as if it
had been issued to him or her personally under division (A) above.
(Prior Code, § 6-113)
§ 32.040 PROSECUTIONS; FILING COMPLAINT; FEES; DEFECTS RAISED PRIOR TO TRIAL.
   (A)   All prosecutions for a violation of the ordinances of the city shall
be styled “The City of Beggs, Oklahoma vs. (naming defendant or defendants).”
Except as provided hereinafter, prosecutions shall be initiated by the filing
of a written complaint, subscribed and verified by the person making the
complaint, setting forth concisely the offense charged.
   (B)   There is no duty on the part of the city or any of its officers or
employees to formally prosecute actions in the Court. In the absence of a
prosecuting officer, the Judge shall proceed with the case and hear evidence
and examine witnesses in such manner as he or she may deem necessary to effect
justice.
   (C)   Any person, except for a police officer or other employee of the city,
filing a criminal offense complaint in the Municipal Court shall deposit with
the Clerk of the Court, unless waived by order of the Court, the court cost fee
as provided in this chapter. The court costs so deposited by such a complainant
shall be refunded to the complainant or person depositing the same upon
conviction or acquittal of the defendant. The court costs shall not be refunded
if the charges are dismissed at the request of the complainant who made the
deposit because the complainant fails or refuses to appear in court to testify
or aid in the prosecution of the charge filed by such complainant.
   (D)   All defects in the form or substance apparent on the face of a
complaint charging a violation of an ordinance of the city, and being grounds
for motion or demur, may only be raised by an accused in writing and prior to
trial.
   (E)   A complaint may be amended in matters of substance or form at any time
before the defendant pleads, without leave, and may be amended after plea or
order of the Court where the same can be done without material prejudice to the
rights of the defendant. No amendment shall cause any delay of the trial unless
good cause is shown by affidavit.
(Prior Code, § 6-112)
§ 32.041 ISSUANCE OF SUMMONS; FAILURE TO APPEAR.
   (A)   Upon the filing of a complaint charging a violation of an ordinance,
the Judge, unless he or she determines to issue a warrant of arrest, or unless
the defendant previously has been issued a citation or has been arrested and
has given bond for appearance, shall issue a summons naming the person charged,
specifying his or her address or place of residence, if known, stating the
offense with which he or she is charged, giving him or her notice to answer the
charge in the Court on a day certain, containing a provision for the official
return of the summons and including such other pertinent information as may be
necessary.
   (B)   The summons shall be served by delivering a copy to the defendant
personally or by certified mail. If he or she fails to appear and to answer the
summons within the prescribed period, then a warrant shall be issued for his or
her arrest as provided by this chapter.
   (C)   Any person who has been duly served with a summons or traffic citation
and who has signed a written promise to appear in court as directed in the
summons or citation, or as subsequently directed by the Court, and who fails to
appear pursuant to his or her written promise or as directed by the Court shall
be deemed guilty of an offense, which shall be punishable as provided in §
10.99(A) of this code.
(Prior Code, § 6-115)
§ 32.042 FAILURE TO APPEAR ACCORDING TO BOND TERMS; BOND FORFEITURE; BENCH
WARRANTS.
   (A)   If, without sufficient excuse, a defendant fails to appear according
to the terms or conditions of his or her bond either for hearing, arraignment,
trial or judgment, or upon any other occasion when his or her presence in court
or before the Judge may be lawfully required or ordered, then the Judge may
direct that fact to be entered upon the minutes of the Court, thereby declaring
the bond to be forfeited. The Judge may also order a bench warrant to be issued
for the defendant as provided in this chapter. The Judge, without advancing
court costs, may also cause the forfeiture to be certified to the District
Court of the county, where it shall be entered upon the judgment docket and
shall have the full force and effect of a District Court judgment. At such time
as the forfeiture is entered upon the District Court judgment docket, the
District Court Clerk shall proceed in accordance with the provisions of 59 O.S.
§§ 1332, 1333 and 1335, and a surety shall have all remedies available under
the provisions of 59 O.S. §§ 1301 through 1341 and 22 O.S. § 1108. Court costs
shall be collectible from the proceeds of the bond.
(Prior Code, § 6-116)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 11 O.S. § 27-118
§ 32.043 COMPLAINANT; WITNESSES; FAILURE TO APPEAR.
   No person having signed a complaint in the Municipal Court of the city
alleging the violation of an ordinance, or any other person in response to an
order of the Court, shall fail, refuse or neglect to appear for the purpose of
testifying as a witness at the trial of the case after having been notified of
the time, date and place at which the case is set for trial.
(Prior Code, § 6-117)
§ 32.044 ISSUANCE OF WARRANT.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided by city ordinance, upon the filing of a
complaint approved by endorsement by the City Attorney or by the Judge, there
shall be issued a warrant of arrest in substantially the following form:
 
The City of Beggs, Oklahoma to the Police Chief of the City of Beggs, Oklahoma.
Complaint upon oath this day has been made by (naming complainant) that the
offense of (naming the offense in general terms) has been committed and
accusing (name of defendant) thereof, you are commanded therefore forthwith to
arrest the above named (name of defendant) and bring (insert him, her or them,
as appropriate) before me, at (naming the place).
 
Witness my hand this ____ day of ____________, 20____.
 
________________________________
Judge of the Municipal Criminal Court of Beggs, Oklahoma
 
   (B)   It is the duty of the Police Chief personally, or through a duly-
constituted member of the city’s police force or any other person lawfully
authorized so to act, to execute the warrant as promptly as possible.
(Prior Code, § 6-118)
§ 32.045 PROCEDURE FOR BAIL OR BOND; BOND SCHEDULE.
   (A)   (1)   Upon arrest, or upon appearance without arrest in response to a
citation or summons, or at any time before trial before or after arraignment,
the defendant may be eligible to be released upon giving bail for his or her
appearance in an amount and upon conditions fixed by this chapter or the Judge,
who shall prescribe appropriate rules of court for the receipt of bail and
release of the defendant.
      (2)   In the case of arrests made at night or under other conditions of
emergency, or when the Judge is not available, the rules shall authorize the
Police Chief, or his or her designated representative, to accept a temporary
cash bond of not less than $10 nor more than the maximum monetary penalty
provided by ordinance for the offense charged.
      (3)   The Judge or Police Chief is authorized, subject to conditions as
may be prescribed by the Judge, to release a resident of the municipality on
personal recognizance.
   (B)   The city’s bail bond schedule setting forth specific offenses and bail
bond amounts and procedures therefor, as amended from time to time, is hereby
adopted and incorporated herein by reference.
(Prior Code, § 6-119)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 11 O.S. § 27-117
§ 32.046 ARRAIGNMENT.
   (A)   Upon making his or her appearance before the Court, the defendant
shall be arraigned. The Judge, or the City Attorney, shall read the complaint
to the defendant, inform him or her of his or her legal rights, including the
right of trial by jury, if available, and of the consequences of conviction,
and shall ask him or her whether he or she pleads guilty or not guilty.
   (B)   (1)   If the defendant pleads guilty, then the Court may proceed to
judgment and sentence or may continue the matter for subsequent disposition.
      (2)   If the plea is not guilty, and the case is not for jury trial, then
the Court may proceed to try the case or may set it for hearing at a later
date.
(Prior Code, § 6-120)
§ 32.047 POSTPONEMENT OF TRIAL.
   Before trial commences, either party may obtain a reasonable postponement
thereof upon good cause shown.
(Prior Code, § 6-121)
§ 32.048 DEFENDANT’S PRESENCE REQUIRED AT TRIAL.
   The defendant must be present in person at the trial of his or her case in
court.
(Prior Code, § 6-122)
§ 32.049 RIGHT TO TRIAL BY JURY; WAIVER.
   (A)   In all prosecutions in the Municipal Court for any offense for which
the city, with the concurrence of the Court, seeks the imposition of a fine of
more than $200, excluding court costs, or imprisonment, or both such fine and
imprisonment, a jury trial shall be had unless waived by the defendant and the
city, provided that the city has compiled its penal ordinances in accordance
with the provisions of 11 O.S. §§ 14-109 and 14-110.
   (B)   If the city has not complied with the statutory requirements, then the
fine for any ordinance so effected shall not exceed the sum of $50. In
prosecutions for all other offenses, or in cases wherein which a jury trial has
been waived by the defendant and the city, the trial shall be to the Court.
   (C)   A jury in the Municipal Court shall consist of six jurors, five of
whom may return a verdict. Such jurors shall be good and lawful people and
citizens of the county having the same qualifications required in jurors within
state court.
(Prior Code, § 6-124) (Ord. 2007-06, passed 8-6-2007)
§ 32.050 PROCEDURE FOR TRIALS NOT WITHIN SCOPE OF CHAPTER.
   In all trials, as to matters not covered in this chapter, by the statutes
relating to municipal criminal courts or by rules duly promulgated by the State
Supreme Court, the procedure applicable in trials of misdemeanors in the
district courts shall apply to the extent that they can be made effective.
(Prior Code, § 6-123)
TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS
§ 32.065 TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU ESTABLISHED; FINE PAYMENT; FINES IN LIEU OF
APPEARANCE.
   (A)   A Traffic Violations Bureau may be established as a division of the
office of the Clerk of the Court, to be administered by the Clerk or by
subordinates designated for that purpose. Persons who are cited for a violation
of one of the traffic ordinances of the city, other than a driver’s license
offense or an offense punishable by more than $200, may elect to pay a fine in
the Violations Bureau according to a schedule of fines prescribed from time to
time by the City Council. The payment shall constitute a final determination of
the cause against the defendant.
   (B)   The Court may adopt rules to carry into effect this section. If a
defendant who has elected to pay a fine under this section fails so to do, then
prosecution shall proceed under the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-110)
§ 32.066 TRAFFIC BAIL BOND ACT.
   (A)   In addition to other provisions of law for posting bail, any person,
whether a resident of the state or a nonresident, who is arrested by a law
enforcement officer solely for a misdemeanor violation of a state traffic law
or municipal traffic ordinance shall be released by the arresting officer upon
personal recognizance if:
      (1)   The arrested person has been issued a valid license to operate a
motor vehicle by this state, another state jurisdiction within the United
States which is a party to the Nonresident Violator Compact, being 47 O.S. §
790, or any jurisdiction of the Nonresident Violator Compact;
      (2)   The arresting officer is satisfied as to the identity of the
arrested person;
      (3)   The arrested person signs a written promise to appear as provided
for on the citation; and
      (4)   The violation does not constitute:
         (a)   A felony;
         (b)   Negligent homicide;
         (c)   Driving or being in actual physical control of a motor vehicle
while impaired or under the influence of alcohol or other intoxicating
substances;
         (d)   Eluding or attempting to elude a law enforcement officer;
         (e)   Operating a motor vehicle without having been issued a valid
driver’s license, or while the license is under suspension, revocation, denial
or cancellation;
         (f)   An arrest based upon an outstanding warrant;
         (g)   A traffic violation coupled with any offense stated in divisions
(A)(4)(a) through (A)(4)(f) above;
         (h)   An overweight violation, or the violation of a special permit
exceeding the authorized permit weight; or
         (i)   A violation relating to the transportation of hazardous
materials.
   (B)   (1)   If the arrested person is eligible for release on personal
recognizance as provided for in division (A) above, then the arresting officer
shall:
         (a)   Designate the traffic charge;
         (b)   Record information from the arrested person’s driver’s license
on the citation form, including the name, address, date of birth, personal
description, type of driver’s license, driver’s license number, issuing state
and expiration date;
         (c)   Record the motor vehicle make, model and tag information;
         (d)   Record the arraignment date and time on the citation; and
         (e)   Permit the arrested person to sign a written promise to appear
as provided for in the citation.
      (2)   The arresting officer shall then release the person upon personal
recognizance based upon the signed promise to appear. The citation shall
contain a written notice to the arrested person that release upon personal
recognizance based upon a signed written promise to appear for arraignment is
conditional and that failure to timely appear for arraignment shall result in
the suspension of the arrested person’s driver’s license in this state or in
the nonresident’s home state pursuant to the Nonresident Violator Compact.
   (C)   Procedures for arraignment, continuances and scheduling, timely
appearances, pleas of guilty or nolo contendere, posting bail, payment of fines
and costs, issuance of arrest warrants and requests for the suspension of
driver’s licenses shall be as required in state law, 22 O.S. §§ 1115.1 through
1115.5.
   (D)   A defendant released upon personal recognizance may elect to enter a
plea of guilty or nolo contendere to the violation charged at any time before
he or she is required to appear for arraignment by indicating such plea on the
copy of the citation furnished to him or her or on a legible copy thereof,
together with the date of the plea and his or her signature. The defendant
shall be responsible for assuring full payment of the fine and costs to the
Court Clerk. The defendant shall not use currency for payment by mail. If the
defendant has entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere as provided for in
this division (D), then such plea shall be accepted by the Court, and the
amount of the fine and costs shall be as prescribed by ordinance for the
violation charged or as prescribed by the Court.
   (E)   (1)   If, pursuant to the provisions of division (D) above, the
defendant does not timely elect to enter a plea of guilty or nolo contendere
and fails to timely appear for arraignment, then the Court may issue a warrant
for the arrest of the defendant, and the Municipal Court Clerk or District
Court Clerk, within 120 calendar days from the date the citation was issued by
the arresting officer, shall notify the State Department of Public Safety that:
         (a)   The defendant was issued a traffic citation and released upon
personal recognizance after signing a written promise to appear for arraignment
as provided for in the citation;
         (b)   The defendant has failed to appear for arraignment without good
cause shown;
         (c)   The defendant has not posted bail, paid a fine or made any other
arrangement with the Court to satisfy the citation; and
         (d)   The citation has not been satisfied as provided by law.
      (2)   (a)   The Court Clerk shall request the State Department of Public
Safety to either suspend the defendant’s driver’s license to operate a motor
vehicle in this state or notify the defendant’s home state and request
suspension of the defendant’s driver’s license in accordance with the
provisions of the Nonresident Violator Compact. Such notice and request shall
be on a form approved or furnished by the State Department of Public Safety.
         (b)   The Court Clerk shall not process the notification and request
provided for in this division (E) if, with respect to such charges:
            1.   The defendant was arraigned, posted bail, paid a fine, was
jailed or otherwise settled the case;
            2.   The defendant was not released upon personal recognizance upon
a signed written promise to appear as provided for in this section or, if
released, was not permitted to remain on such personal recognizance for
arraignment;
            3.   The violation relates to parking or standing, an overweight
violation, an overweight permit or the transportation of hazardous materials;
or
            4.   A period of 120 calendar days or more has elapsed from the
date the citation was issued by the arresting officer.
   (F)   (1)   The Court Clerk shall maintain a record of each request for
driver’s license suspension submitted to the State Department of Public Safety
pursuant to the provisions of this section.
      (2)   When the Court or Court Clerk receives appropriate bail or payment
of the fine and costs, settles the citation, makes other arrangements with the
defendant or otherwise closes the case, the Court Clerk shall furnish proof
thereof to such defendant, if the defendant personally appears, or shall mail
such proof by first-class mail, postage prepaid, to the defendant at the
address noted on the citation or at such other address as is furnished by the
defendant. Additionally, the Court or Court Clerk shall notify the home
jurisdiction of the defendant as listed on the citation, if such jurisdiction
is a member of the Nonresident Violator Compact, and shall in all other cases
notify the State Department of Public Safety of the resolution of the case.
      (3)   The form of proof and the procedures for notification shall be
approved by the State Department of Public Safety, provided, however, that the
Court or Court Clerk’s failure to furnish such proof or notice in the manner
provided for in this division (F) shall in no event create any civil liability
upon the Court, the Court Clerk, the state, or any political subdivision
thereof, or any state department or agency, or any employee thereof, but
duplicate proof shall be furnished to the person entitled thereto upon request.
(Prior Code, § 6-114)
JUDGMENTS AND PENALTIES
§ 32.080 RENDERING JUDGMENT.
   (A)   At the close of trial, judgment must be rendered without undue delay
by the Judge, who shall cause it to be entered in his or her docket.
   (B)   (1)   If the judgment is of acquittal and the defendant is not to be
detained for any other legal cause, then he or she must be discharged at once.
If the defendant pleads guilty or is convicted after trial, then the Court must
render judgment thereon, fixing the penalty within the limits prescribed by the
applicable ordinance and imposing sentence accordingly. A judgment that the
defendant pay a fine may direct also that he or she be imprisoned until the
fine is satisfied.
(Prior Code, § 6-125)
§ 32.081 JUDGMENT OF IMPRISONMENT.
   If, after conviction, a judgment of imprisonment is entered, then a copy
thereof, certified by the Clerk, shall be delivered to the Police Chief, the
County Sheriff or other appropriate officer. Such copy shall be sufficient
warrant for execution of the sentence.
(Prior Code, § 6-126)
§ 32.082 SUSPENSION OR DEFERMENT OF JUDGMENT; POWERS.
   (A)   (1)   The Judge of the Court, in imposing a judgment and sentence at
his or her discretion, is empowered to modify, reduce, suspend or defer the
imposition of such sentence, or any part thereof, and to authorize the person
to be released upon his or her own recognizance for a period not to exceed six
months from the date of the sentence under such terms or conditions as the
Judge may specify.
      (2)   The Judge may, with the consent of the defendant, defer further
proceedings after a verdict, finding or plea of guilty, but before passing a
judgment of guilt and imposing a fine, and place the defendant on probation for
a period not to exceed six months under such terms and conditions as prescribed
by the Court, which may include, but not be limited to, remedial action or
community service work on the streets, parks or other city-owned or city-
maintained projects with proper supervision. Upon completion of the probation
term, the defendant shall be discharged without a court judgment of guilt, and
the verdict, judgment of guilty or plea of guilty shall be expunged from the
record and the charge dismissed with prejudice to any further action.
   (B)   A defendant is not entitled to a deferred sentence if the defendant
has been previously convicted of a felony.
   (C)   Upon a finding of the Court that the conditions of release or any
community service have been violated, the Municipal Judge may enter a judgment
of guilty and may cause a warrant to be issued for the defendant, or may impose
the maximum sentence allowable for the violation of which the defendant was
convicted.
   (D)   Upon the issuance of the warrant or judgment of guilty being entered,
the person shall be delivered forthwith to the place of confinement to which he
or she is sentenced and shall serve out the full term or pay the full fine for
which he or she was originally sentenced, as may be directed by the Judge.
   (E)   The Judge may continue or delay imposing a judgment and sentence for a
period of time not to exceed six months from the date of the sentence. At the
expiration of such period, the Judge may allow the City Attorney to amend the
charge to a lesser offense.
   (F)   (1)   If a deferred sentence is imposed, then the maximum fine or
deferral fee in lieu of a fine for traffic-related offenses relating to
speeding or parking violations shall not exceed the sum of $200.
      (2)   The maximum fine or deferral fee in lieu of a fine for alcohol-
related, drug-related or any other offense shall not exceed the sum of $750.
      (3)   Provided, however, in no case shall the deferral fee exceed the
fine allowable by state statute.
      (4)   In any case of such deferred sentence, no additional fine, cost or
assessment shall be imposed beyond the deferral fee herein provided.
   (G)   The Court may also require restitution, and, in the event there was
damage done to public or private property during the commission of the offense,
the Court may require the defendant to repair or replace such damaged property
as a condition to a deferred sentence, as may be directed by the Court.
(Prior Code, § 6-127) (Ord. 2007-07, passed 8-6-2007)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 11 O.S. § 27-123
§ 32.083 PAYMENT OF COSTS BY DEFENDANT.
   If a judgment of conviction is entered, then the Clerk of the Court shall
tax the costs to the defendant in the sum of $30 or the maximum sum permitted
by state law, whichever is greater, plus the fees and mileage of jurors and
witnesses, all of which the defendant shall pay in addition to any fine that
may be imposed.
(Prior Code, § 6-128)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 11 O.S. § 27-126
§ 32.084 ENFORCEMENT OF FINES, COSTS; IMPRISONMENT; WORK AND COMMUNITY SERVICE.
   (A)   If a defendant who is financially able refuses or neglects to pay a
fine or costs, or both, then payment may be enforced by imprisonment until the
same shall be satisfied at the rate of $25 per day.
   (B)   (1)   If the defendant is without means to pay the fine or costs, then
the Municipal Judge may direct the total amount due to be entered upon the
court minutes and be certified to the District Court, where it shall be entered
upon the District Court’s docket and have the full force and effect of a
district court judgment.
      (2)   Thereupon, the same remedies shall be available for the enforcement
as are available to any other judgment creditor.
   (C)   (1)   All prisoners confined to jail on conviction or on plea of
guilty may be compelled, if their health permits, to work on community
projects, the public streets, avenues or ways, public buildings or other public
premises or properties.
      (2)   For each day of such work, the prisoner or defendant shall be
credited for two days of imprisonment toward any fine, costs or witness or
juror fees or mileage until the same are satisfied.
   (D)   The city shall direct where the work shall be performed. The
appropriate officer shall oversee the work. If a guard is necessary, then the
Police Chief shall make provision therefor.
(Prior Code, § 6-129)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 11 O.S. § 27-122 and 57 O.S. §§ 227 and 228
§ 32.085 SAME OFFENSE PUNISHABLE BY DIFFERENT CODE SECTIONS.
   In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by
different sections of this code of ordinances, the City Attorney may elect
under which to proceed, but not more than one recovery shall be had against the
same person for the same offense.
(Prior Code, § 6-130)
§ 32.086 SCHEDULE OF FINES.
   (A)   The City Council may establish a minimum fine schedule. The minimum
fine schedule, when established, shall provide for a minimum amount which a
person may pay upon a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to the listed offenses.
The minimum fine schedule shall include fines, court costs and any assessments
set by state law within the specified amount.
   (B)   Upon a plea of guilty or nolo contendere and payment of the required
minimum fine prior to the date scheduled for court appearance, no further court
appearance shall be required. The Judge may authorize the Court Clerk to accept
pleas of guilty and nolo contendere where the amount of the minimum fine is
paid at the time of such plea and prior to the scheduled Court appearance date.
(Prior Code, § 6-111)
§ 32.087 PENALTY ASSESSMENTS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition applies
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
      CONVICTION. Any final adjudication of guilt, whether pursuant to a plea
of guilty or nolo contendere or otherwise, and any deferred or suspended
sentence or judgment.
   (B)   (1)   Any person shall pay a sum as set by state law as a separate
penalty assessment for law enforcement training and as a separate
fingerprinting fee, which shall be in addition to and not in substitution for
any and all fines and penalties and costs otherwise provided for such offense,
when:
         (a)   Convicted of an offense punishable by a fine of $10 or more or
by imprisonment, excluding parking and standing violations; or
         (b)   Forfeiting bond when charged with such an offense under division
(B)(1)(a) above.
      (2)   The Court shall provide for separate bail for the assessments;
however, a defendant admitted to bail on an undertaking by a surety may include
the amount of the assessment in the undertaking.
   (C)   Upon conviction or bond forfeiture, the Court shall collect the
assessment and deposit the monies for payment as required by state law.
   (D)   At the end of every quarter, the city shall deposit with the State
Treasury the funds deposited in the Law Enforcement Training Fund and the AFIS
(Automated Fingerprint Identification System) Fund as required by law. The
Court Clerk shall also furnish to the State Treasury reports required on the
funds collected and penalty assessments imposed each quarter.
(Prior Code, § 6-132)
Statutory reference:
   Related Provisions, see 20 O.S. §§ 1313.2 through 1313.3
§ 32.088 FINES RECOVERABLE BY CIVIL ACTION.
   All fines shall be recoverable by civil action before any court of competent
jurisdiction in addition to any other method provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 6-133)
§ 32.089 CONTEMPT OF COURT.
   Obedience to the orders, rules and judgments made by the Court may be
enforced by the Judge, who may fine or imprison for contempt committed as to
him or her while holding court, or committed against a process issued by him or
her, in the same manner and to the same extent as the district courts of the
state.
(Prior Code, § 6-131)
§ 32.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99(A) of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   The failure to pay a fine levied pursuant to this chapter shall
constitute a separate offense against the city, subject to a fine as provided
in §
10.99(A) of this code of ordinances.
      (2)   If a fine is not paid by the defendant, then the fine may be
collected by committing the defendant to the city’s jail, where he or she shall
remain until his or her fine and any costs assessed against him or her are
discharged, either by payment, or by confinement in jail, or by working in
accordance with other provisions of this code or state law.
(Prior Code, § 6-133)
CHAPTER 33: LAW ENFORCEMENT AND PUBLIC SAFETY
Section
Fire Services
   
33.01   Fire Department
   
33.02   Volunteer department
   
33.03   Fire Chief; duties
   
33.04   Assistant Chief; duties
   
33.05   Secretary-Treasurer
   
33.06   Company officers
   
33.07   Social officers
   
33.08   Membership; new members
   
33.09   Bylaws
   
33.10   Rules, regulations changed by City Council
   
33.11   Use of fire equipment
   
33.12   Authority of firefighters at fires
   
33.13   Right of entry
   
33.14   False alarms; charges
   
33.15   Power to contract outside city limits
   
33.16   Charges for calls made outside city limits
   
33.17   Contracts for service; payment for service
   
33.18   Authority to answer calls within five miles
   
33.19   Firefighters considered serving in regular line of duty
   
33.20   Department considered agent of state
Police Services
   
33.35   Police Department; Police Chief
   
33.36   Department duties
   
33.37   Officers; appointment; duties
   
33.38   Mutual aid with County Sheriff’s Department
   
33.39   Delivery of unclaimed property; records
   
33.40   Disposition of personal property, general procedures
Civil Defense Department
   
33.55   Purpose
   
33.56   Civil Defense Department organization
   
33.57   Director; responsibilities and duties
   
33.58   Deputy Director, Assistant Director; responsibilities and duties
   
33.59   Emergency powers of civil defense organization
FIRE SERVICES
§ 33.01 FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   There is a fire department of the city, the head of which is the Chief
of the Fire Department.
   (B)   It is the duty of the Fire Department, among others:
      (1)   To extinguish fires;
      (2)   To rescue persons endangered by fire;
      (3)   To resuscitate and to administer first aid to persons injured in or
about burning structures, or elsewhere in the case of an emergency;
      (4)   To promote fire prevention; and
      (5)   Unless otherwise provided, to enforce all ordinances relating to
fires, fire prevention and the safety of persons from fire in public and
private buildings.
(Prior Code, § 13-201)
§ 33.02 VOLUNTEER DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   The Fire Department of the city is a volunteer department which has in
its service not less than six nor more than 20 volunteer firefighters.
   (B)   For the purpose of this subchapter, a VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTER is
considered as one who is enrolled as a member of the Fire Department and who
serves in the capacity without receiving a regular salary.
(Prior Code, § 13-202)
§ 33.03 FIRE CHIEF; DUTIES.
   (A)   The Chief shall be the administrative head of the Department, subject
to the laws of the state, ordinances of the city and the rules and regulations
adopted in this subchapter.
   (B)   The Chief shall have the following powers and duties, and he or she
may assign duties to other members of the Department.
      (1)   The Chief shall be responsible for the general condition and
efficient operation of the Department, the training of members and the
performance of all other duties imposed upon him or her. He or she shall have
supervision and control of the Fire Department, subject to the supervision and
control of the City Council.
      (2)   The Chief may inspect or cause to be inspected by members of the
Department the fire hydrants, cisterns and other sources of water supply at
least twice each year.
      (3)   The Chief may maintain a library or file of publications on fire
prevention and fire protection and shall make use of it to the best advantage
of all members.
      (4)   The Chief shall make every effort to attend all fires and direct
the officers and members in the performance of their duties.
      (5)   The Chief shall see that the citizens are kept informed on fire
hazards in the community and on the activities of the Department.
      (6)   The Chief shall see that each fire is carefully investigated to
determine its cause, and in the case of suspicion of incendiarism or arson,
shall notify the proper authorities and secure the preservation of all possible
evidence for future use in the case.
      (7)   The Chief is authorized to enter any building or premises in the
city at any reasonable hour for the purpose of making inspections and to serve
written notice on persons for any violations that may be found.
      (8)   The Chief shall see that complete records are kept of all fires,
apparatus and equipment, inspections, personnel and other information of the
Department and shall make reports to the City Council as he or she may require.
The Chief shall keep the city informed regarding the Fire Department and its
needs.
(Prior Code, § 13-203)
§ 33.04 ASSISTANT CHIEF; DUTIES.
   In the absence of the Chief, the Assistant Chief on duty shall command the
Department and be held responsible therefor in all respects with the full
powers and responsibilities of the Chief. The Assistant Chief shall be elected
from among the members of the Department and be appointed by the Chief, with
approval of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 13-204)
§ 33.05 SECRETARY-TREASURER.
   One member elected by the members of the Fire Department, subject to
approval of the Chief, shall be a Secretary-Treasurer. His or her duties shall
consist of the following:
   (A)   Calling the roll at the opening of each meeting;
   (B)   Keeping the minutes of each meeting; and
   (C)   Collecting any money due to the Department by the members.
(Prior Code, § 13-206)
§ 33.06 COMPANY OFFICERS.
   Company officers shall be selected by the Chief based on the following
criteria:
   (A)   Knowledge of firefighting;
   (B)   Leadership ability; and
   (C)   Knowledge of firefighting equipment.
(Prior Code, § 13-205)
§ 33.07 SOCIAL OFFICERS.
   The Department may elect a President, Vice President, Secretary or Treasurer
to be known as social officers. Such officers may be elected in any manner and
for any term the members may decide upon, and their duties shall be to arrange
for and manage any or all social functions sponsored by the members. The
functions and duties of the social officers shall in no way interfere with
those of the regular Department officers who are charged with the
responsibility for all fire service activities of the Department.
(Prior Code, § 13-210)
§ 33.08 MEMBERSHIP; NEW MEMBERS.
   (A)   Membership of the Department shall consist of such persons as may be
appointed by the Chief and approved by the Council, and shall be persons
residing within the city or in a reasonable proximity to the city. The
determination of whether candidates for appointment are capable of performing
their duties shall be made by the Chief after a medical and physical
examination has been made in a manner prescribed by the Chief and approved by
the City Council.
   (B)   New members of the Department shall be appointed by the Chief and
shall be on probation for one year after their appointment. Upon completion of
their probation period, new members must be approved by the majority of the
other members of the Fire Department, the Chief and the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 13-207)
§ 33.09 BYLAWS.
   The bylaws of the Department shall include the following.
   (A)   All volunteer Fire Department members are required, when notified, to
respond to alarms of fire and other emergencies.
   (B)   A member is required to be present at all regular meetings, called
meetings and training presented for the benefit of the firefighters.
   (C)   At least one regular business meeting of the members shall be held
each month.
   (D)   Any member having two unexcused absences in succession or three
unexcused absences in a period of three months will be dropped from the Fire
Department rolls.
   (E)   Any member leaving the city for an extended period of time is required
to notify the Chief.
   (F)   Any member refusing to attend training classes provided for members of
the Department will be dropped.
   (G)   Any member of the Fire Department may be dropped from the rolls for
the following offenses:
      (1)   Conduct unbecoming a firefighter;
      (2)   Any act of insubordination;
      (3)   Neglect of duty;
      (4)   Any violation of the rules and regulations governing the Fire
Department;
      (5)   Conviction of a felony; or
      (6)   By a majority vote of the members of the company and approval of
the Chief.
   (H)   Members with less than ten years of service are required to attend
school and achieve certification as soon as practically possible. Members with
ten or more years of service have three years in which to be certified by
training.
(Prior Code, § 13-208)
§ 33.10 RULES, REGULATIONS CHANGED BY CITY COUNCIL.
   The City Council, by motion or resolution, may adopt and change regulations
relating to the Fire Department and its organization, operation and
compensation.
(Prior Code, § 13-209)
§ 33.11 USE OF FIRE EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   The Department shall be equipped with such apparatus and other
equipment as may be required from time to time to maintain its efficiency and
to properly protect life and property from fire.
   (B)   Recommendations of apparatus and equipment needed shall be made by the
Chief and purchased after approval as with other city purchases.
   (C)   All equipment of the Department shall be safely and conveniently
housed in such places as may be designated by the City Council.
   (D)   Suitable arrangements and equipment shall be provided for people to
turn in alarms and to notify members of the Department so that they may
promptly respond.
   (E)   (1)   No person shall use any fire apparatus or equipment for any
private purpose, nor shall any person willfully and without proper authority
take away or conceal any article used in any way by the Department.
      (2)   No person shall enter any place where fire apparatus is housed or
handle any apparatus or equipment belonging to the Department unless
accompanied by, or having the special permission of, an officer or authorized
member of the Department.
(Prior Code, § 13-211)
§ 33.12 AUTHORITY OF FIREFIGHTERS AT FIRES.
   The Fire Chief, Assistant Fire Chiefs or other Fire Department officers in
charge shall have complete charge and control at all fires. Fire orders shall
be obeyed. The Chief or his or her officers may prescribe limits in the
vicinity of a fire which no persons except those residing or owning property
therein shall be permitted to enter except on the order of the officer in
command. Police officers may aid in carrying into effect the provisions of this
section.
(Prior Code, § 13-212)
§ 33.13 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The Chief of the Fire Department and his or her designee may at all
reasonable hours enter any building or premises within his or her jurisdiction
for the purpose of making any inspection or investigation which, under the
provisions of this subchapter and other provisions of this code, he or she may
deem necessary to make.
(Prior Code, § 13-213)
§ 33.14 FALSE ALARMS; CHARGES.
   (A)   Each property being serviced by the City Fire Department shall be
entitled to one false alarm call in any consecutive 12-month period without
charge. Any other false alarm calls to said property within said 12 consecutive
months shall be charged by the City Fire Department at the rate set by the city
per false alarm.
   (B)   The City Fire Department shall bill the property owner for such false
alarm, and in the event that it is not promptly paid, it shall be subject to
citation, costs and court fees within the City Municipal Court.
(Prior Code, § 13-214) (Ord. 2006-7, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 33.15 POWER TO CONTRACT OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS.
   The city is hereby authorized and empowered to enter into contracts or
agreements with individuals, firms, private corporations or associations,
military installations or commands or political subdivisions of the state for
fire protection outside the corporate limits of the city, and to contract to
provide fire protection jointly with other organizations and municipal
subdivisions of the state.
(Prior Code, § 13-221)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 11 O.S. §§ 29-105 et seq.
§ 33.16 CHARGES FOR CALLS MADE OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS.
   (A)   The city may enter into a contract with persons, organizations or
associations to provide fire protection service outside the city limits.
   (B)   Such contracts shall be conditioned upon the determination of the Fire
Chief that the property in question is within a reasonable distance from the
city and that, prior to any fire protection equipment being dispatched for any
fire call for such property, the Fire Chief on duty shall first approve such
call and determine that the equipment and personnel to be dispatched are not
needed for other purposes within the city.
   (C)   The charges for such calls shall be as specified in the fee schedule.
(Prior Code, § 13-224)
§ 33.17 CONTRACTS FOR SERVICE; PAYMENT FOR SERVICE.
   Any contract entered into by the city with an individual owner, a firm or a
private corporation, association or political subdivision for outside aid or
mutual aid for fire protection shall provide for the payment by the owner,
firm, private corporation, association or political subdivision for such
service, equipment or personnel in an amount reached through negotiation by the
parties.
(Prior Code, § 13-222)
§ 33.18 AUTHORITY TO ANSWER CALLS WITHIN FIVE MILES.
   The Fire Department is authorized to answer all calls within a distance of
five miles of the nearest fire station if first approved by the Fire Chief on
duty, and unless, in the opinion of the Chief, it is inexpedient to do so on
account of another fire in the city, broken apparatus, impassable or dangerous
highways or other physical conditions. The Fire Chief shall determine that the
equipment and personnel to be dispatched for such calls are not needed for
other purposes within the city.
(Prior Code, § 13-223)
§ 33.19 FIREFIGHTERS CONSIDERED SERVING IN REGULAR LINE OF DUTY.
   (A)   All firefighters attending and serving at fires or doing fire
prevention work outside the corporate limits of the city, as herein provided,
shall be considered as serving in their regular line of duty as fully as if
they were serving within the corporate limits of the city.
   (B)   The firefighters shall be entitled to all the benefits of any fire
pension and relief fund in the same manner as if the firefighting or fire
prevention work were being done within the corporate limits of the city.
(Prior Code, § 13-225)
§ 33.20 DEPARTMENT CONSIDERED AGENT OF STATE.
   The Fire Department, when answering any fire alarm or call or performing any
fire prevention services outside the corporate limits of the city, shall be
considered as an agent of the state and acting solely and alone in a
governmental capacity, and the city shall not be liable in damages for any act
of commission, omission or negligence while answering or returning from any
fire, or reported fire, or doing any fire prevention work under and by virtue
of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 13-226)
POLICE SERVICES
§ 33.35 POLICE DEPARTMENT; POLICE CHIEF.
   There shall be a police department, the head of which is the Chief of
Police, or the Police Chief, appointed by the City Council and removable by the
City Council. The Police Chief is an officer of the city and has supervision
and control of the Police Department.
(Prior Code, § 13-301)
§ 33.36 DEPARTMENT DUTIES.
   It is the duty of the Police Department:
   (A)   To apprehend and arrest on view or on warrant and bring to justice
violators of the ordinances of the city;
   (B)   To suppress all riots, affrays and unlawful assemblies which may come
to its knowledge, and generally to keep the peace;
   (C)   To serve warrants, writs, executions and other processes properly
directed and delivered to it;
   (D)   To apprehend and arrest persons violating federal or state laws as
provided by law and to turn them over to proper authorities; and
   (E)   In all respects, to perform all duties pertaining to the offices of
police officers.
(Prior Code, § 13-302)
§ 33.37 OFFICERS; APPOINTMENT; DUTIES.
   Police officers shall be appointed by the Police Chief, subject to approval
of the City Council. Police officers shall perform such duties as shall be
required of them by the Police Chief, the city ordinances and federal, state or
county laws and regulations and other actions required in the maintenance of
good order and public peace.
(Prior Code, § 13-303)
§ 33.38 MUTUAL AID WITH COUNTY SHERIFF’S DEPARTMENT.
   The City Police Department is authorized to come to the aid of the County
Sheriff’s Department whenever needed and upon its request within the boundaries
of the city or upon property owned by the city.
(Prior Code, § 13-304)
§ 33.39 DELIVERY OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY; RECORDS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section and §
33.40 of this chapter, POLICE CHIEF means the Police Chief or his or her
designee.
   (B)   All personal property which comes into the possession of any police
officer which has been found, or stolen, or taken off the person or out of the
possession of any prisoner or person suspected of or charged with being a
criminal, and which is not known to belong to some person laying claim thereto,
shall be, by the officer securing possession thereof, delivered into the charge
of the Police Chief.
   (C)   The Police Chief shall, in a permanent record book kept for that
purpose, make a record sufficient to identify the property, with the date and
circumstances of the receipt thereof, the name of the person from whom it was
taken and the place where it was found. The record shall also disclose the
subsequent disposal thereof, giving the date of sale, name and address of the
purchaser and the amount for which it was sold.
(Prior Code, § 13-501)
Statutory reference:
   Alcoholic beverages seized in violation of law, see 37A O.S. § 6-127
   Disposal of liquor and gambling equipment seized by police officers, see 22
O.S. §§ 1261 et seq.
   Disposal of stolen, embezzled property coming into police custody, see 22
O.S. §§ 1321 et seq.
   Disposition of personal property by Police Chief, procedures, application to
destroy, see 11 O.S. § 34-104
   Relating to finders of lost goods, see 15 O.S. §§ 511 et seq.
   Uniform Unclaimed Property Disposition Act, see 60 O.S. § 655
§ 33.40 DISPOSITION OF PERSONAL PROPERTY, GENERAL PROCEDURES.
   (A)   (1)   The Police Chief is authorized to sell personal property, other
than animals, money or legal tender of the United States, except as provided in
division (B) below, which has come into his or her possession in any manner if:
         (a)   The owner of the personal property is unknown or has not claimed
the property;
         (b)   The property has been in the custody of the Police Chief for at
least six months; or
         (c)   The property, or any part thereof, is no longer needed to be
held as evidence or for any other purpose in connection with any litigation.
      (2)   Any owner, to recover or claim property, must be able to
satisfactorily prove ownership to the Police Chief.
   (B)   Any property found by a person other than a public official which
shall be delivered to any police officer for “identification” and registration,
if not claimed or identified within 30 days, shall, within ten additional days
thereafter, if requested by the finder, be returned to him or her and a record
of such disposal made thereof. However, in all other cases, only property in
which the finder relinquishes any future claim to its ownership will be stored
in the city’s police property room.
   (C)   The Police Chief shall file an application in the County District
Court requesting the authority of the Court to conduct a sale of such personal
property or money or legal tender which has a fair market value of more than
its face value. The Police Chief shall attach to his or her application a list
describing such property or money or legal tender, including any identifying
numbers and marks, the date the property or money or legal tender came into his
or her possession and the name of the owner and his or her address, if known.
The Court shall set the application for hearing not less than ten days nor more
than 20 days after filing of the application.
   (D)   In any instance where the property has an actual or apparent value of
more than $25, at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing, notice of
the hearing shall be sent by certified mail to each owner at his or her address
as listed in the application. If the owner of any property with an actual or
apparent value exceeding $500 is unable to be served notice by certified mail,
then notice shall be provided by one publication in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city. The notice shall contain a brief description of the
property or money or legal tender of the owner and the place and date of the
hearing. The notice shall be posted at the assigned place for the posting of
city notices and at two other public places in the city.
   (E)   If no owner appears and establishes ownership to the property or money
or legal tender at the hearing, then the Court shall enter an order authorizing
the Police Chief to sell the personal property or money or legal tender for
cash to the highest bidder at an auction sale after at least five days’ notice
of the sale has been published. The Police Chief shall thereafter make a return
of the sale, and the order of the Court confirming the sale shall vest title to
the property or money or legal tender in the purchaser. The money received from
the sale of the personal property or money or legal tender shall be deposited
in the city’s General Fund after first paying court costs and other expenses.
   (F)   (1)   All money or legal tender of the United States, except as
provided in division (B) above, which has come into the possession of the
Police Chief pursuant to the circumstances provided for in division (A) above
shall be transferred by the Police Chief to the City Clerk for deposit in the
General Fund. Prior to any such transfer, the Police Chief shall file an
application in the District Court requesting the Court to enter an order
authorizing him or her to transfer the money for deposit in the General Fund.
The application shall describe the money or legal tender, any serial numbers,
the date the same came into his or her possession and the name of the owner and
his or her address, if known.
      (2)   Upon filing the application, which may be joined with an
application as described in division (C) above, a hearing shall be set not less
than ten days nor more than 20 days from the filing of the application. Notice
of the hearing shall be given as provided for in division (D) above. The notice
shall state that upon failure of anyone to appear to prove ownership to the
money or legal tender, the Court shall order the same to be deposited in the
General Fund. The notice may be combined with a notice to sell personal
property as provided for in division (D) above. If no one appears to claim and
prove ownership to the money or legal tender at the hearing, then the Court
shall order the same to be transferred to the General Fund as provided in this
division (F).
   (G)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any dangerous or
deadly weapons, narcotic or poisonous drugs, explosives or any property of any
kind or character which the possession... [reserved].
(Prior Code, § 13-502)
CIVIL DEFENSE DEPARTMENT
§ 33.55 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to create an emergency management and
civil defense organization for the city to be prepared for, and to function in
the event of, emergencies endangering the lives and property of the people of
the city. The duty of such civil defense organization shall be the protection
of the lives and health of the citizens of the city and of the property and
property rights, both private and public, and to perform all functions
necessary and incident thereto.
(Prior Code, § 13-401)
§ 33.56 CIVIL DEFENSE DEPARTMENT ORGANIZATION.
   The purpose of the Civil Defense Department (hereinafter “Department”) is to
prepare for, and function in the event of, emergencies endangering the lives
and property of the citizens of the city. The Department is headed by a
director, appointed by the City Council for such compensation and under such
terms as the City Council may establish. The Director serves at the pleasure of
the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 13-402)
§ 33.57 DIRECTOR; RESPONSIBILITIES AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Director of the Department shall be the administrative head of the
Department and shall be responsible for carrying out the emergency management
and civil defense program of the city in coordination with the Civil Defense
Advisory Committee.
   (B)   He or she shall have such further duties and responsibilities to
cooperate with all emergency services and civil defense agencies of other
governmental units, including the state and the federal government.
(Prior Code, § 13-403)
§ 33.58 DEPUTY DIRECTOR, ASSISTANT DIRECTOR; RESPONSIBILITIES AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The City Council or the Director, when empowered by the City Council,
may designate some person as Deputy Director or Assistant Director and shall
prescribe the duties of the Deputy or Assistant from time to time as necessary
for the carrying out of the emergency management and civil defense program of
the city. The Deputy Director shall perform all duties of the Director upon the
death, disability, illness or separation from service of the Director.
   (B)   In addition to the foregoing duties, the Deputy or Assistant shall
render such aid and assistance and perform such duties under the emergency
management and civil defense program of the city as may be required by the
Director.
(Prior Code, § 13-403)
§ 33.59 EMERGENCY POWERS OF CIVIL DEFENSE ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   In the event of an enemy-caused emergency or an emergency resulting
from natural causes, the Director, after due authorization from the Mayor,
shall have the power and authority to enforce all rules and regulations
relating to emergency management and civil defense and, if necessary, to take
control of transportation, communications, public utilities and stocks of fuel,
food, clothing and medicine for the purpose of protecting the civilian
population. He or she shall cooperate in every way with other governmental
agencies, emergency management services and civil defense organizations.
   (B)   The Director, other members of the Department and members of any
emergency services and the civil defense organization established herein shall
have the power and authority to enforce the laws of the state and ordinances of
the city during the period of emergency, and shall at such time have the
further power to make arrests for violations of such laws or ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 13-404)
CHAPTER 34: FINANCES AND REVENUE
Section
General Provisions
   
34.001   Depositories designated; deposit of funds
   
34.002   Funds secured by Unit Collateral System
   
34.003   Investments
   
34.004   Purchasing procedure
   
34.005   When bidding not required
   
34.006   Disposition of surplus, obsolete materials; bidding
Permit Fees
   
34.020   Permit fees set by City Council, Public Works Authority
   
34.021   Permit fees published
Utility Fee
   
34.035   Utility fee levied
   
34.036   Fee to be in lieu of franchise
   
34.037   Tax payable
   
34.038   Tax constitutes a lien
   
34.039   Ouster for failure to pay
Telephone Exchange Fee
   
34.050   Inspection fee and service charge
   
34.051   Charge in lieu of other license tax
Medical Trust
   
34.065   Establishment
   
34.066   Emergency medical services charge
   
34.067   Billing and payment
   
34.068   Payment to Emergency Medical Service, a trust
   
34.069   Duty of persons contracting for water service
   
34.070   Violation
 
   
34.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 34.001 DEPOSITORIES DESIGNATED; DEPOSIT OF FUNDS.
   All banks and financial institutions as are designated by the City Council
shall be designated as depositories for the funds of the city. The City
Treasurer shall deposit daily all public funds received by him or her in these
banks. Funds may be transferred from one depository to another upon direction
of the Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 7-102)
§ 34.002 FUNDS SECURED BY UNIT COLLATERAL SYSTEM.
   The deposits of the city shall be secured as provided by the Security for
Local Public Deposits Act. The provisions of the Security for Local Public
Deposits Act, 62 O.S. §§
517.1 through
517.7, are hereby adopted insofar as they are applicable to the city.
(Prior Code, § 7-103)
§ 34.003 INVESTMENTS.
   The City Treasurer, or any other person authorized to invest public monies,
shall invest the same in those investments authorized by the City Council or
authorized by state law in a manner authorized by either or both such City
Council and statutes.
(Prior Code, § 7-101)
§ 34.004 PURCHASING PROCEDURE.
   (A)   (1)   All purchases of supplies, materials, equipment and contractual
services which exceed $2,500 in a single transaction shall be made by the City
Council or pursuant to authorizations granted by it.
      (2)   All purchases shall comply with state law and shall be encumbered
prior to placing an order or contract as required by law.
   (B)   The city’s purchasing authority shall contract for and purchase all
supplies, materials and equipment for the offices, departments and agencies of
the city. The purchasing authority may also transfer to or between offices,
departments and agencies, or sell surplus or obsolete supplies, materials and
equipment.
   (C)   Before a contract shall be entered into, or any such purchase made
involving the expenditure of more than $2,500, or any sale made of property the
value of which is more than $12,500, such contract or sale shall:
      (1)   Be approved by the City Council;
      (2)   Be submitted for competitive bidding where the amount in question
exceeds the amount set forth in §
34.005(B)(1) of this chapter; and
      (3)   Have written notice given by the city’s purchasing authority for
sealed bids for the furnishing of such supplies, materials or equipment where
competitive bidding is required hereunder.
   (D)   (1)   The notice required in this section shall state the time and
place for filing the bids, contain an ample description of the supplies,
materials and equipment to be purchased or sold, state the time and place the
bids will be opened and state that all bids may be rejected.
      (2)   The bids shall be in writing and sealed and filed with the City
Clerk prior to the time they are to be opened. The bids may be rejected or the
city may readvertise for bids or, after due consideration thereof, may award a
contract to purchase such supplies, materials or equipment from the lowest and
best responsible bidder. However, the city’s purchasing authority may, at his
or her option, purchase any such materials, supplies and equipment through
central purchasing of the state.
(Prior Code, § 7-104) (Ord. 2008-02, passed 5-14-2008)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 61 O.S. §§ 101 et seq.
§ 34.005 WHEN BIDDING NOT REQUIRED.
   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition applies
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
      CONTRACTUAL SERVICES.
         (a)   Services performed for the city by persons not in the employment
of the city, and may include the use of equipment or the furnishing of
commodities in connection with such services under express or implied contract.
         (b)   CONTRACTUAL SERVICES include travel; freight; express; parcel
post; postage; telephone; telegraph; utilities; rent; repairs, alterations and
maintenance of buildings, equipment, streets, bridges and other physical
facilities of the city and other services performed for the city by persons not
in the employment of the city.
   (B)   The following may be purchased without giving an opportunity for
competitive bidding:
      (1)   Supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services where the
cost does not exceed $50,000 in a single transaction;
      (2)   Supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services which can be
furnished only by a single dealer or a sole-source vendor, or which have a
uniform price wherever bought;
      (3)   Supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services purchased
from another unit of government at a price deemed below that obtainable from
private dealers, including war surplus, or purchased at auction at a price
deemed below that obtainable elsewhere;
      (4)   Contractual services, such as gas, electricity, telephone service
and the like, purchased from a public utility at a price or rate determined by
the State Corporation Commission or other government authority;
      (5)   Supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services when
purchased at a price not exceeding a price set therefor by the state’s
purchasing agency or any other state agency authorized to regulate prices for
things purchased by the state, whether such price is determined by a contract
negotiated with a vendor or otherwise;
      (6)   Contractual services of a professional nature, such as engineering,
architectural, medical and legal services; or
      (7)   When an emergency is declared to exist.
(Prior Code, § 7-105) (Ord. 2008-02, passed 5-14-2008)
§ 34.006 DISPOSITION OF SURPLUS, OBSOLETE MATERIALS; BIDDING.
   (A)   No surplus or obsolete supplies, materials or equipment of a value of
more than $1,000 may be sold until the procedures outlined in this section have
been followed.
   (B)   The city’s purchasing authority may sell the following without giving
an opportunity for competitive bidding:
      (1)   Surplus or obsolete supplies, materials or equipment whose total
value does not exceed $1,000 in a single transaction;
      (2)   Supplies, materials or equipment when sold at a price at least as
great as that paid by the city for the same; or
      (3)   Where the City Council has authorized the sale of surplus property
at public auction under such terms, conditions and notice as the City Council
may prescribe or as the city’s purchasing authority deems appropriate.
(Prior Code, § 7-106)
PERMIT FEES
§ 34.020 PERMIT FEES SET BY CITY COUNCIL, PUBLIC WORKS AUTHORITY.
   Any and all permit fees set by the city or by the Public Works Authority
shall be set on an annual basis or as the city or the Public Works Authority
may determine to be in the best interest of the city and/or Authority. Said
fees and permits shall be set by formal action of the city or Authority at
either a regular or special session and shall be properly noticed and acted on
as with any other agenda items.
(Ord. 2012-03, passed 6-14-2012)
§ 34.021 PERMIT FEES PUBLISHED.
   All permit fees set by either the City Council or the Public Works Authority
shall be printed and displayed at the offices of the city and the Public Works
Authority.
(Ord. 2012-03, passed 6-14-2012)
UTILITY FEE
§ 34.035 UTILITY FEE LEVIED.
   There is hereby levied and assessed an annual tax of 2% upon the gross
receipts from residential and commercial sales of power, light, heat, gas,
electricity or water in the city, which tax shall be in lieu of any other
franchise, license, occupation or excise tax levied by the city, all as
provided by 68 O.S. §§ 2601 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 7-401)
§ 34.036 FEE TO BE IN LIEU OF FRANCHISE.
   The tax levied under this subchapter shall, when levied, apply to all
persons, firms, associations or corporations engaged in the business of
furnishing power, light, heat, gas, electricity or water within the corporate
limits of the city, except that it shall not apply to any person, firm,
association or corporation operating under a valid franchise from the city.
(Prior Code, § 7-402)
§ 34.037 TAX PAYABLE.
   The tax levied under this subchapter shall remain in effect until repealed
and shall be payable quarterly. The tax shall be placed in the General Revenue
Fund of the city. Amounts not paid when due shall bear interest at the rate of
10% per annum until paid.
(Prior Code, § 7-403)
§ 34.038 TAX CONSTITUTES A LIEN.
   The tax so imposed in this subchapter shall constitute a first prior lien on
all the assets located within the city of any person, firm or corporation
engaged in the business of selling power, light, heat, gas, electricity or
water within the city limits of the city.
(Prior Code, § 7-404)
§ 34.039 OUSTER FOR FAILURE TO PAY.
   Any person, firm or corporation failing or refusing to pay such tax when
levied shall be regarded as a trespasser and may be ousted from the city. In
addition thereto, an action may be maintained against such person, firm or
corporation for the amount of the tax and all expenses of collecting the same,
including reasonable attorney’s fees.
(Prior Code, § 7-405)
TELEPHONE EXCHANGE FEE
§ 34.050 INSPECTION FEE AND SERVICE CHARGE.
   (A)   There is hereby levied an annual inspection fee and service charge
upon each and every person operating a telephone exchange in the city to
compensate the city for the expenses incurred and services rendered incident to
the exercise of its police power, supervision, police regulation and police
control of the construction of lines and equipment of the telephone company in
the city.
   (B)   The amount of the inspection fee and service charge shall be an amount
equal to 2% of the gross revenues for each current year for exchange telephone
transmission service rendered wholly within the limits of the city.
   (C)   The inspection fee and charge shall be due and payable to the city
annually as set by the City Council and shall be paid into and appropriated and
expended from the General Revenue Fund of the city.
(Prior Code, § 7-301)
Statutory reference:
   City powers to levy tax on utilities, see 68 O.S. §§ 2601 et seq.
§ 34.051 CHARGE IN LIEU OF OTHER LICENSE TAX.
   (A)   During continued substantial compliance with the terms of this
subchapter by the owner of any telephone exchange, the charge levied by this
subchapter shall be and continue to be in lieu of all concessions, charges,
excises, franchises, licenses, privileges, permit fees or taxes or assessments,
except for ad valorem taxes.
   (B)   This section is not intended to extinguish or abrogate any existing
arrangement whereby the city is permitted to use the underground conduits, duct
space or pole contracts of the company for the fire alarm and police call
systems of the city, or for either of them.
(Prior Code, § 7-302)
MEDICAL TRUST
§ 34.065 ESTABLISHMENT.
   The city created the City of Beggs Medical Trust by Ord. 76-1, as amended by
Ord. 89-2, passed 4-3-1989, and Ord. 92-02, passed 12-11-1992. The Trust
instrument and papers are on file with the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, Appx. 6)
§ 34.066 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES CHARGE.
   (A)   (1)   To provide funds for the Emergency Medical Service, a Trust
(Okmulgee County, Oklahoma), there is hereby established an emergency medical
services charge, whereby each family unit in the city shall be levied and
assessed a monthly charge each month of $3.50, and for each additional family
unit over one located on the same premises, there shall be an additional charge
each month of $3.20.
      (2)   The term FAMILY LIVING UNIT shall include, but is not limited to,
single-family residences, trailer coaches and single-family living units in
duplexes, apartments and other multi-family dwellings, but shall not include
hotels, motels or rooming houses.
   (B)   Hotels, motels or rooming houses shall be charged $3.50 per month for
each rooming unit within the hotel, motel or rooming house.
   (C)   Combinations of any of the above shall be charged on a combination of
the types of unit or units so combined.
(Prior Code, Appx. 6, § 1)
§ 34.067 BILLING AND PAYMENT.
   (A)   Billings for the emergency medical services charge established in this
subchapter shall be made on the monthly water bills and shall be governed by
the same rules and regulations that govern the payment of water bills. Fees for
water services will not be accepted without payment for the emergency medical
services charge. Deposits made by the users of city water required to guarantee
payment of water bills may and shall be applied to the payment of defaulted
emergency medical services charges.
   (B)   However, each person or persons contracting for water services shall
have the right of prepayment of the charge by paying in lump sum the balance of
the amount to be charged and assessed during the remainder of any fiscal year
if the charge can reasonably be ascertained.
(Prior Code, Appx. 6, § 2)
§ 34.068 PAYMENT TO EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE, A TRUST.
   The City Treasurer shall monthly pay over and transfer to the Emergency
Medical Service, a Trust (Okmulgee County, Oklahoma), an amount equal to the
amount of all funds collected from the emergency medical services charge by the
city.
(Prior Code, Appx. 6, § 3)
§ 34.069 DUTY OF PERSONS CONTRACTING FOR WATER SERVICE.
   It shall be the obligation and duty of the person or persons with whom the
city has entered into a contract for water service to keep the City Clerk
informed as to the actual number of family living units and/or rooming units
served by the water service connection.
(Prior Code, Appx. 6, § 4)
§ 34.070 VIOLATION.
   It is unlawful for any inhabitants of the city to willfully violate any of
the provisions of this subchapter so as to avoid, or attempt to avoid, payment
in full or in part of the emergency medical services charge established in this
subchapter, levied and assessed.
(Prior Code, Appx. 6, § 5) Penalty, see §
34.999
§ 34.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99(A) of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of §§
34.065 through
34.070 of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined in an amount not to
exceed $20, excluding costs. Each day’s continuation of any offense shall be
deemed a separate offense and shall be punished as such.
(Prior Code, Appx. 6, § 5)
CHAPTER 35: TAXATION
Section
Sales Tax
   
35.01   Title; ordinance history
   
35.02   Definitions
   
35.03   Classification of taxpayers
   
35.04   Subsisting state permits
   
35.05   Purpose of revenues; disposition of proceeds
   
35.06   Tax rate; sales subject to tax
   
35.07   Exemptions; sales subject to other tax
   
35.08   Exemptions; governmental and nonprofit entities
   
35.09   Exemptions; general
   
35.10   Exemptions; agriculture
   
35.11   Exemptions; manufacturers
   
35.12   Exemptions; corporations and partnerships
   
35.13   Tax due and payable
   
35.14   Payment of tax; brackets
   
35.15   Tax constitutes prior claim
   
35.16   Vendor’s duty to collect tax
   
35.17   Returns and remittances; discounts
   
35.18   Interest and penalties; delinquency; discount forfeiture
   
35.19   Waiver of interest and penalties
   
35.20   Erroneous payments; claim for refund
   
35.21   Failure to file; fraudulent returns
   
35.22   Tax records confidential
   
35.23   Provisions cumulative
   
35.24   Amendment by City Council
Use Tax
   
35.35   Title
   
35.36   Definitions
   
35.37   Classification of taxpayers
   
35.38   Subsisting state permits
   
35.39   Purposes of revenues
   
35.40   Tax imposed
   
35.41   Exemptions
   
35.42   Time due; returns; payment
   
35.43   Tax constitutes debt
   
35.44   Collection of tax by retailer or vendor
   
35.45   Collection by retailer or vendor with no place of business within
state, or both within and without state; permits
   
35.46   Revoking permits
   
35.47   Remunerative deductions allowed to vendors or retailers of other states
   
35.48   Interest and penalties; delinquency
   
35.49   Waiver of interest and penalties
   
35.50   Erroneous payments; claim for refund
   
35.51   Fraudulent returns
   
35.52   Records confidential
   
35.53   Provisions cumulative
 
   
35.99   Penalty
SALES TAX
§ 35.01 TITLE; ORDINANCE HISTORY.
   (A)   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the “City of Beggs
Sales Tax Ordinance.”
   (B)   Following are the sales tax ordinances passed by the city:
 
Ord. No. Date      Amount Effective Date
76-4     - -       2%     - -
87-3     4-6-1987  1.5%   7-1-1987
2002-01  8-20-2002 1%     - -
 
(Prior Code, § 7-201) (Ord. 2002-01, passed 8-20-2002)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 68 O.S. §§ 1350 et seq. and 68 O.S. §§ 2701 et seq.
§ 35.02 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   The definitions of words, terms and phrases contained in the Oklahoma
Sales Tax Code, 68 O.S. § 1352 are hereby adopted by reference and made a part
of this subchapter.
   (B)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition applies
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
      TAX COLLECTOR. The department of the city or the official agency of the
state duly designated according to law or contract and authorized by law to
administer the collection of the tax herein levied.
(Prior Code, § 7-202)
§ 35.03 CLASSIFICATION OF TAXPAYERS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the classification of taxpayers
hereunder shall be as prescribed by state law for purposes of the Oklahoma
Sales Tax Code.
(Prior Code, § 7-203)
§ 35.04 SUBSISTING STATE PERMITS.
   All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the State Tax
Commission pursuant to the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code are, for the purpose of this
subchapter, hereby ratified, confirmed and adopted in lieu of any requirement
for an additional city permit for the same purpose.
(Prior Code, § 7-204)
§ 35.05 PURPOSE OF REVENUES; DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS.
   (A)   It is hereby declared to be the purpose of the revenues generated by
the first and second cent sales taxes levied herein to provide revenues for the
support of the functions of the municipal government of the city.
   (B)   It is hereby declared to be the purpose of the revenues provided by
the additional 1.5% excise tax levied by Ord. 87-3 to provide revenues for the
payment of the principal of and interest on bonded indebtedness to be incurred
by the Public Works Authority, a duly-constituted authority of the city, for
the improvement of the sewer system and for the benefit of the General Fund of
the city.
   (C)   It is hereby declared that the revenues provided by the additional 1%
excise tax levied by Ord. 2002-01 are restricted for emergency services for the
city and shall be utilized by the volunteer Fire Department for the purpose of
purchasing and maintaining firefighting equipment only.
(Prior Code, § 7-205) (Ord. 2002-01, passed 8-20-2002)
§ 35.06 TAX RATE; SALES SUBJECT TO TAX.
   There is hereby levied an excise tax of 4.5% upon the gross proceeds or
gross receipts derived from all sales taxable under the Oklahoma Sales Tax
Code, including, but not exclusive of, the following:
   (A)   Tangible personal property;
   (B)   Natural or artificial gas, electricity, ice, steam or any other
utility or public service, except water and those specifically exempt by this
subchapter;
   (C)   Transportation for hire of persons by common carriers, including
railroads, both steam and electric, motor transportation companies, taxicab
companies, Pullman car companies, airlines and all other means of
transportation for hire;
   (D)   Service by telephone and telegraph companies to subscribers or users,
including the transmission of messages, whether local or long distance. This
shall include all services and rental charges having any connection with the
transmission of any message;
   (E)   Printing or printed matter of all types, kinds and characters and the
service of printing or overprinting, including the copying of information by
mimeograph or multigraph, or by otherwise duplicating written or printed matter
in any manner, or the production of microfiche containing information on
magnetic tapes furnished by customers;
   (F)   Service of furnishing rooms by a hotel, apartment hotel, public
rooming house, motel, public lodging house or tourist camp;
   (G)   Service of furnishing storage or parking privileges by auto hotels and
parking lots;
   (H)   Selling, renting or otherwise furnishing computer hardware or software
or coding sheets, cards or magnetic tapes onto which prewritten programs have
been coded, punched or otherwise recorded;
   (I)   Food, confections and all drinks sold or dispensed by hotels,
restaurants or other dispensers and sold for immediate consumption upon the
premises or delivered or carried away from the premises for consumption
elsewhere;
   (J)   Advertising of all kinds, types and characters, including any and all
devices used for advertising purposes and the servicing of any advertising
devices, except those specifically exempt by this subchapter;
   (K)   Dues or fees to clubs, including free or complimentary dues or fees
which shall have the value equivalent to the charge that would have otherwise
been made, including any fees paid for the use of facilities or services
rendered at a health spa or club or any similar facility or business;
   (L)   Sales of tickets, fees or other charges made for admission to, or
voluntary contributions made to, places of amusement, sports entertainment,
exhibition, display or other recreational events or activities, including free
or complimentary admissions which shall have the value equivalent to the charge
that would otherwise have been made;
   (M)   Charges made for the privilege of entering or engaging in any kind of
activity when no admission is charged to spectators, such as tennis,
racquetball or handball courts;
   (N)   Charges made for the privilege of using items for amusement, sports,
entertainment or recreational activities, such as trampolines or golf carts;
   (O)   The rental of equipment for amusement, sports, entertainment or other
recreational activities, such as bowling shoes, skates, golf carts or other
sports and athletic equipment;
   (P)   The gross receipts from sales through any vending machine without any
deduction for rental to locate the vending machine on the premises of a person
who is not the owner, or any other deductions therefrom;
   (Q)   Gross receipts or gross proceeds from the rental or lease of tangible
personal property, including rental or lease of personal property when the
rental or lease agreement requires the vendor to launder, clean, repair or
otherwise service the rented or leased property on a regular basis, without any
deduction for the cost of the service rendered. Provided, if the rental or
lease charge is based on the retail value of the property at the time of making
the rental or lease agreement and the expected life of the property, and the
rental or lease charge is separately stated from the service cost in the
statement, bill or invoice delivered to the consumer, then the cost of services
rendered shall be deducted from the gross receipts or gross proceeds;
   (R)   Any licensing agreement, rental, lease or other device or instrument
whereby rights to possess or exhibit motion pictures or filmed performances or
rights to receive images, pictures or performances for telecast by any method
are transferred. Provided, persons regularly engaged in the business of
exhibiting motion pictures for which the sale of tickets or admissions is taxed
under this subchapter shall not be deemed to be consumers or users in respect
to the licensing or exhibiting of copyrighted motion picture features, shorts,
cartoons and scenes from copyrighted features and the sale or licensing of such
films shall not be considered a sale within the purview of this subchapter;
   (S)   Flowers, plants, shrubs, trees and other floral items, whether or not
the same was produced by the vendor or sold by persons engaged in florist or
nursery business in the state, including all orders taken by an Oklahoma
business for delivery in another state. Provided, all orders taken outside this
state for delivery within this state shall not be subject to the tax levied by
this subchapter;
   (T)   Tangible personal property sold to persons, peddlers, solicitors or
other salespersons for resale where there is a likelihood that the state will
lose tax revenue due to the difficulty of enforcing this subchapter because of:
      (1)   The operation of the business;
      (2)   The nature of the business;
      (3)   The turnover of independent contractors;
      (4)   The lack of a place of business in which to display a permit or
keep records;
      (5)   The lack of adequate records;
      (6)   The persons are minors or transients;
      (7)   The persons are engaged in service businesses; or
      (8)   Any other reasonable reason.
   (U)   Any taxable services and tangible personal property, including
materials, supplies and equipment sold to contractors for the purpose of
developing and improving real estate even though such real estate is intended
for resale as real property, are hereby declared to be sales to consumers or
users and taxable; and
   (V)   Any taxable services and tangible personal property sold to persons
who are primarily engaged in selling their services, such as repairpeople, are
hereby declared to be sales to consumers or users and taxable.
(Prior Code, § 7-206) (Ord. 2002-01, passed 8-20-2002)
§ 35.07 EXEMPTIONS; SALES SUBJECT TO OTHER TAX.
   There is hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this subchapter
the gross receipts or gross proceeds exempted from the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code
inclusive, but not exclusive, of and derived from the:
   (A)   Sale of gasoline or motor fuel on which the motor fuel tax, gasoline
excise tax or special fuels tax levied by state law has been paid;
   (B)   Sale of motor vehicles, or any optional equipment or accessories
attached to motor vehicles, on which the state motor vehicle excise tax levied
by state law has been paid;
   (C)   Sale of crude petroleum or natural or casinghead gas and other
products subject to a gross production tax under state law. This exemption
shall not apply when such products are sold to consumers or users for
consumption or use, except when used for injection into the earth for the
purpose of promoting or facilitating the production of oil or gas. This
division (C) shall not operate to increase or repeal the gross production tax
levied by the laws of the state; and
   (D)   Sale of aircraft on which the tax levied pursuant to 68 O.S. §§ 6001
through 6004 has been paid.
(Prior Code, § 7-207)
§ 35.08 EXEMPTIONS; GOVERNMENTAL AND NONPROFIT ENTITIES.
   There are hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this
subchapter:
   (A)   Sales of tangible personal property or services to the United States
government or to the State of Oklahoma, any political subdivision of the state
or any agency of a political subdivision of the state. Provided, all sales to
contractors in connection with the performance of any contract with the United
States government, State of Oklahoma or any of its political subdivisions shall
not be exempted from the tax levied by this subchapter, except as hereinafter
provided;
   (B)   Sales of property to agents appointed or contracted with by agencies
or instrumentalities of the United States government if ownership and
possession of such property transfers immediately to the United States
government;
   (C)   Sales made directly by county, district or state fair authorities of
the state, upon the premises of the fair authority, for the sole benefit of the
fair authority;
   (D)   Sales of food in the cafeterias or lunchrooms of elementary schools,
high schools, colleges or universities which are operated primarily for
teachers and pupils and are not operated primarily for the public or for
profit;
   (E)   Dues paid to fraternal, religious, civic, charitable or educational
societies or organizations by regular members thereof, provided that such
societies or organizations operate under what is commonly termed the lodge plan
or system, and provided that such societies or organizations do not operate for
a profit which inures to the benefit of any individual member or members
thereof to the exclusion of other members;
   (F)   Sales of tangible personal property or services to or by churches,
except sales made in the course of business for profit or savings competing
with other persons engaged in the same or similar business;
   (G)   The amount of proceeds received from the sale of admission tickets
which is separately stated on the ticket of admission for the repayment of
money borrowed by any accredited state-supported college or university for the
purpose of constructing or enlarging any facility to be used for the staging of
an athletic event, a theatrical production or any other form of entertainment,
edification or cultural cultivation to which entry is gained with a paid
admission ticket. Such facilities include, but are not limited to, athletic
fields, athletic stadiums, field houses, amphitheaters and theaters. To be
eligible for this sales tax exemption, the amount separately stated on the
admission ticket shall be a surcharge which is imposed, collected and used for
the sole purpose of servicing or aiding in the servicing of debt incurred by
the college or university to effect the capital improvements hereinbefore
described;
   (H)   Sales of tangible personal property or services to City Council
organizations or similar state supervisory organizations of the Boy Scouts of
America, the Girl Scouts of the U.S.A. and the Campfire Girls shall be exempt
from sales tax;
   (I)   Sales of tangible personal property or services to any county,
municipality, public school district, the institutions of the state’s system of
higher education and the Grand River Dam Authority or to any person with whom
any of the above-named subdivisions or agencies of the state have duly entered
into a public contract pursuant to law necessary for carrying out such public
contract, or to any subcontractor to such a public contract. Any person making
purchases on behalf of such subdivision or agency of the state shall certify,
in writing, on the copy of the invoice or sales ticket to be retained by the
vendor that the purchases are made for and on behalf of such subdivision or
agency of the state and set out the name of such public subdivision or agency;
   (J)   Sales of tangible personal property or services to private
institutions of higher education and private elementary and secondary
institutions of education accredited by the State Department of Education or
registered by the State Board of Education for the purpose of participating in
federal programs, or accredited as defined by the State Regents for Higher
Education, which are exempt from taxation pursuant to the provisions of I.R.C.
§ 501(c)(3), including materials, supplies and equipment used in the
construction and improvement of buildings and other structures owned by the
institutions and operated for educational purposes. Any person, firm, agency or
entity making purchases on behalf of any institution, agency or subdivision in
the state shall certify in writing on the copy of the invoice of sales ticket
the nature of the purchases;
   (K)   Tuition and educational fees paid to private institutions of higher
education and private elementary and secondary institutions of education
accredited by the State Department of Education or registered by the State
Board of Education for the purpose of participating in federal programs, or
accredited as defined by the State Regents for Higher Education, which are
exempt from taxation pursuant to the provisions of I.R.C. § 501(c)(3); and
   (L)   Sales of tangible personal property made by public or private schools
for grade levels kindergarten through twelfth grade, a public school district,
public school board, public school student group or organization or public
school district personnel for the purpose of raising funds for the benefit of
such school, school district, school board, student group or organization. For
purposes of this division (L), PUBLIC OR PRIVATE SCHOOL shall mean any public
or private institution of education accredited by the State Department of
Education or registered by the State Board of Education for the purpose of
participating in federal programs. The sale of tangible personal property in
this division (L) shall not include the sale of admission tickets or
concessions at athletic events.
(Prior Code, § 7-208) Penalty, see §
35.99
§ 35.09 EXEMPTIONS; GENERAL.
   There are hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this
subchapter:
   (A)   Transportation of school pupils to and from elementary schools or high
schools in motor or other vehicles;
   (B)   Transportation of persons where the fare of each person does not
exceed $1 or local transportation of persons within the corporate limits of a
municipality, except by taxicab;
   (C)   Carrier sales of newspapers and periodicals made directly to consumers
or other sales of newspapers and periodicals where any individual transaction
does not exceed $0.75. A CARRIER is a person who regularly delivers newspapers
or periodicals to subscribers on an assigned route;
   (D)   (1)   Sales for resale to persons engaged in the business of reselling
the articles purchased, whether within or without the state, provided that such
sales to residents of the state are made to persons to whom sales tax permits
have been issued as provided in this subchapter.
      (2)   This exemption shall not apply to sales of articles made to persons
holding permits when such persons purchase items for their use and which they
are not regularly engaged in the business of reselling; neither shall this
exemption apply to sales of tangible personal property to peddlers, solicitors
and other salespersons who do not have an established place of business and a
sales tax permit;
   (E)   Sales of advertising space in newspapers, periodicals and billboard
advertising services, and any advertising through electronic media, including
radio, television and cable television;
   (F)   (1)   Eggs, feed, supplies, machinery and equipment purchased by
persons regularly engaged in the business of raising worms, fish, any insect or
any other form of terrestrial or aquatic animal life and used for the purpose
of raising the same for marketing.
      (2)   This exemption shall only be granted and extended to the purchaser
when the items are to be used, and in fact are used, in the raising of animal
life as set out above. Each purchaser shall certify, in writing, on the invoice
or sales ticket retained by the vendor that he or she is regularly engaged in
the business of raising such animal life and that the items purchased will be
used only in such business. The vendor shall certify to the State Tax
Commission that the price of the items has been reduced to grant the full
benefit of the exemption;
   (G)   Sales of medicine or drugs prescribed for the treatment of human
beings by a person licensed to prescribe the medicine or drugs. This exemption
shall not apply to proprietary or patent medicines as defined by 59 O.S. §
353.1;
   (H)   Transfers of title or possession of empty, partially filled or filled
returnable oil drums to any person who is not regularly engaged in the business
of selling, reselling or otherwise transferring empty, partially filled or
filled returnable oil drums;
   (I)   Sales of food or food products for home consumption which are
purchased in whole or in part with coupons issued pursuant to the federal
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program as authorized by 7 U.S.C. §§ 2011
through 2029, as to that portion purchased with such coupons. The exemption
provided for such sales shall be inapplicable to such sales upon the effective
date of any federal law that removes the requirement of the exemption as a
condition for participation by the state in the federal Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program; and
   (J)   Nothing herein shall be construed as limiting or prohibiting the city
from levying and collecting taxes on the sale of natural or artificial gas and
electricity, whether sold for residential or commercial purposes. Any sales tax
levied by the city on natural or artificial gas and electricity shall be in
effect regardless of ordinance or contractual provisions referring to
previously imposed state sales tax on such items.
(Prior Code, § 7-209) Penalty, see §
35.99
§ 35.10 EXEMPTIONS; AGRICULTURE.
   There are hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this
subchapter:
   (A)   Sales of agricultural products produced in the state by the producer
thereof directly to the consumer or user when such articles are sold at or from
a farm and not from some other place of business, as follows:
      (1)   Farm, orchard or garden products;
      (2)   Dairy products sold by a dairyperson or farmer who owns all the
cows from which the dairy products offered for sale are produced;
      (3)   Livestock sold by the producer at a special livestock sale; and
      (4)   The provisions of this division (A) shall not be construed as
exempting sales by florists, nurserypersons or chicken hatcheries, or sales of
dairy products by any other business except as set out herein.
   (B)   Livestock, including cattle, horses, mules or other domestic or draft
animals, sold by the producer by private treaty or at a special livestock sale;
   (C)   Sales of baby chicks, turkey poults and starter pullets used in the
commercial production of chickens, turkeys and eggs, provided that the
purchaser certifies, in writing, on the copy of the invoice or sales ticket to
be retained by the vendor that the pullets will be used primarily for egg
production;
   (D)   Sales of salt, grains, tankage, oyster shells, mineral supplements,
limestone and other generally recognized animal feeds for the following
purposes and subject to the following limitations:
      (1)   Feed which is fed to poultry and livestock, including breeding
stock and wool-bearing stock, for the purpose of producing eggs, poultry, milk
or meat for human consumption;
      (2)   Feed purchased in the state for the purpose of being fed to and
which is fed by the purchaser to horses, mules or other domestic or draft
animals used directly in the producing and marketing of agricultural products;
      (3)   Any stock tonics, water-purifying products, stock sprays,
disinfectants or other such agricultural supplies;
      (4)   POULTRY shall not be construed to include any fowl other than
domestic fowl kept and raised for the market or production of eggs;
      (5)   LIVESTOCK shall not be construed to include any pet animals such as
dogs, cats, birds or such other fur-bearing animals; and
      (6)   This exemption shall only be granted and extended where the
purchaser of feed that is to be used, and in fact is used, for a purpose that
would bring about an exemption hereunder executes an invoice or sales ticket in
duplicate on a form to be prescribed by the Tax Commission. The purchaser may
demand and receive a copy of the invoice or sales ticket and the vendor shall
retain a copy.
   (E)   Sales of items to be and in fact used in the production of
agricultural products. Sales of the following items shall be subject to the
following limitations:
      (1)   Sales of agricultural fertilizer to any person regularly engaged,
for profit, in the business of farming or ranching. Each such purchaser shall
certify, in writing, on the copy of the invoice or sales ticket to be retained
by the vendor that he or she is so engaged in farming or ranching and that the
material purchased will be used only in such business;
      (2)   Sales of agricultural fertilizer to any person engaged in the
business of applying such materials on a contract or custom basis to land owned
or leased and operated by persons regularly engaged, for profit, in the
business of farming or ranching. Each such purchaser shall certify, in writing,
on the copy of the invoice or sales ticket to be retained by the vendor that he
or she is engaged in the business of applying such materials to lands owned or
leased and operated by persons regularly engaged, for profit, in the business
of farming or ranching and shall show in the certificate the name or names of
such owner or lessee and operator and the location of the lands on which the
materials are to be applied to each such land, and he or she shall further
certify that his or her contract price has been reduced so as to give the
farmer or rancher the full benefit of this exemption;
      (3)   Sales of agricultural fertilizer, pharmaceuticals and biologicals
to persons engaged in the business of applying such materials on a contract or
custom basis shall not be considered to be sales to contractors under this
subchapter, and the sales shall not be considered to be taxable sales within
the meaning of the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code. As used in this section,
AGRICULTURAL FERTILIZER, PHARMACEUTICALS AND BIOLOGICALS shall mean any
substance sold and used for soil enrichment or soil corrective purposes or for
promoting the growth and productivity of plants or animals;
      (4)   Sales of agricultural seed or plants to any person regularly
engaged, for profit, in the business of farming or ranching. This section shall
not be construed as exempting from sales tax seed which is packaged and sold
for use in noncommercial flower and vegetable gardens;
      (5)   Sales of agricultural chemical pesticides to any person regularly
engaged, for profit, in the business of farming or ranching. For the purposes
of this section, AGRICULTURAL CHEMICAL PESTICIDES shall include any substance
or mixture of substances intended for preventing, destroying, repelling or
mitigating any insect, snail, slug, rodent, bird, nematode, fungus, weed or any
other form of terrestrial or aquatic plant or animal life or virus, bacteria or
other microorganism, except for viruses, bacteria or other microorganisms on or
in living man, or any substance or mixture of substances intended for use as a
plant regulator, defoliant or desiccant; and
      (6)   This exemption shall only be granted and extended to the purchaser
where the items are to be used and in fact are used in the production of
agricultural products. Each purchaser shall certify, in writing, on the copy of
the invoice or sales ticket to be retained by the vendor that the material
purchased will only be used in his or her farming occupation. The vendor shall
certify to the state’s Tax Commission that the contract price of the items has
been reduced to grant the full benefit of the exemption.
   (F)   Sales of farm machinery, repair parts thereto or fuel, oil, lubricants
and other substances used for the operation and maintenance of the farm
machinery to be used directly on a farm or ranch in the production,
cultivation, planting, sowing, harvesting, processing, spraying, preservation
or irrigation of any livestock, poultry, agricultural or dairy products
produced from such lands. Each purchaser of farm machinery, repair parts
thereto or fuel must certify, in writing, on the copy of the invoice or sales
ticket to be retained by the vendor that he or she is engaged in farming or
ranching and that the farm machinery, repair parts thereto or fuel will be used
only in farming or ranching. The exemption provided for herein shall not apply
to motor vehicles. Each purchaser shall certify, in writing, on the copy of the
invoice or sales ticket to be retained by the vendor that the material
purchased will only be used in his or her farming occupation. The vendor shall
certify to the State Tax Commission that the price of the items has been
reduced to grant the full benefit of the exemption.
(Prior Code, § 7-210) Penalty, see §
35.99
§ 35.11 EXEMPTIONS; MANUFACTURERS.
   There are hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this
subchapter:
   (A)   Goods, wares, merchandise and property purchased for the purpose of
being used or consumed in the process of manufacturing, compounding,
processing, assembling or preparing for sale a finished article and such goods,
wares, merchandise or property that become integral parts of the manufactured,
compounded, processed, assembled or prepared products, or that are consumed in
the process of manufacturing, compounding, processing, assembling or preparing
products for resale. The term MANUFACTURING PLANTS shall mean those
establishments primarily engaged in manufacturing or processing operations and
generally recognized as such;
   (B)   Ethyl alcohol when sold and used for the purpose of blending the same
with motor fuel on which a motor foci tax is levied by state law;
   (C)   Sales of machinery and equipment purchased and used by persons
establishing new manufacturing plants in the state and machinery and equipment
purchased and used by persons in the operation of manufacturing plants already
established in the state. This exemption shall not apply unless such machinery
and equipment is incorporated into, and is directly used in, the process of
manufacturing property subject to taxation under this subchapter. The term
MANUFACTURING PLANTS shall mean those establishments primarily engaged in
manufacturing or processing operations and generally recognized as such;
   (D)   Sales of containers when sold to a person regularly engaged in the
business of reselling empty or filled containers or when purchased for the
purpose of packaging raw products of farm, garden or orchard for resale to the
consumer or processor. This exemption shall not apply to the sale of any
containers used more than once and which are ordinarily known as returnable
containers, except returnable soft drink bottles. Each and every transfer of
title or possession of such returnable containers in the state to any person
who is not regularly engaged in the business of selling, reselling or otherwise
transferring empty or filled containers shall be taxable under this subchapter,
and this exemption shall not apply to the sale of labels or other materials
delivered along with items sold but which are not necessary or absolutely
essential to the sale of the sold merchandise;
   (E)   Sales of tangible personal property manufactured in the state when
sold by the manufacturer to a person who transports it to another state for
immediate and exclusive use in some other state; or
   (F)   Machinery, equipment, fuels and chemicals incorporated into and
directly used or consumed in the process of treatment to substantially reduce
the volume or harmful properties of controlled industrial waste at treatment
facilities specifically permitted pursuant to the Oklahoma Hazardous Waste
Disposal Act, being 27A O.S. § 2-7-101, and operated at the place of waste
generation, or facilities approved by the State Department of Health for the
cleanup of a site of contamination. The term HAZARDOUS WASTE may include low-
level radioactive waste for the purpose of this division (F).
(Prior Code, § 7-211)
§ 35.12 EXEMPTIONS; CORPORATIONS AND PARTNERSHIPS.
   There are hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied in this
subchapter:
   (A)   The transfer of tangible personal property, as follows:
      (1)   From one corporation to another corporation pursuant to a
reorganization. As used in this division (A)(1), the term REORGANIZATION means
a statutory merger or consolidation or the acquisition by a corporation of
substantially all of the properties of another corporation when the
consideration is solely all or a part of the voting stock of the acquiring
corporation, or of its parent or subsidiary corporation;
      (2)   In connection with the winding up, dissolution or liquidation of a
corporation only when there is a distribution in kind to the shareholders of
the property of such corporation;
      (3)   To a corporation for the purpose of the organization of such
corporation, where the former owners of the property transferred are
immediately after the transfer in control of the corporation, and the stock or
securities received by each is substantially in proportion to his or her
interest in the property prior to the transfer;
      (4)   To a partnership in the organization of such partnership if the
former owners of the property transferred are immediately after the transfer
members of such partnership, and the interest in the partnership received by
each is substantially in proportion to his or her interest in the property
prior to the transfer; or
      (5)   From a partnership to the members thereof when made in kind in the
dissolution of such partnership.
   (B)   Sales of an interest in tangible personal property to a partner or
other person who, after such sale, owns a joint interest in such tangible
personal property where the state sales or use tax has previously been paid on
such tangible personal property.
(Prior Code, § 7-212)
§ 35.13 TAX DUE AND PAYABLE.
   The tax levied under this subchapter shall be due and payable at the time
and in the manner and form prescribed for payment of the state sales tax under
the sales tax law of the state.
(Prior Code, § 7-213)
§ 35.14 PAYMENT OF TAX; BRACKETS.
   (A)   The tax herein levied shall be paid to the tax collector at the time
and in the form and manner provided for the payment of state sales tax under
the sales tax law of the state.
   (B)   The bracket system for the collection of the city sales tax by the tax
collector shall be as the same is hereafter adopted by the agreement of the
city and the tax collector in the collection of both the city sales tax and the
state sales tax.
(Prior Code, § 7-214)
§ 35.15 TAX CONSTITUTES PRIOR CLAIM.
   Taxes, penalties and interest due hereunder shall at all times constitute a
prior, superior and paramount claim as against the claims of unsecured
creditors and may be collected by suit as any other debt.
(Prior Code, § 7-215)
§ 35.16 VENDOR’S DUTY TO COLLECT TAX.
   (A)   The tax levied hereunder shall be paid by the consumer or user to the
vendor, and each and every vendor shall collect from the consumer or user the
full amount of the tax levied or an amount equal as nearly as possible or
practicable to the average equivalent thereof.
   (B)   Vendors shall add the tax imposed hereunder, or the average equivalent
thereof, to the sales price or charge. When added, such tax shall constitute a
part of such price or charge, shall be a debt from the consumer or user to the
vendor until paid and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as other
debts.
   (C)   No vendor shall:
      (1)   Willfully or intentionally fail, neglect or refuse to collect the
full amount of the tax levied;
      (2)   Willfully or intentionally fail, neglect or refuse to comply with
the provisions of this subchapter;
      (3)   Remit or rebate to a consumer or user, either directly or
indirectly, and by whatever means, all or any part of the tax herein levied; or
      (4)   Make in any form of advertising, verbally or otherwise, any
statement which infers that he or she is absorbing the tax or paying the tax
for the consumer or user by an adjustment of prices or at a price including the
tax, or in any manner whatsoever.
(Prior Code, § 7-216) Penalty, see §
35.99
§ 35.17 RETURNS AND REMITTANCES; DISCOUNTS.
   Returns and remittances of the tax herein levied and collected shall be made
to the tax collector at the time and in the manner, form and amount as
prescribed for returns and remittances required by the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code,
and remittances of the tax collected hereunder shall be subject to the same
discount as may be allowed by the Code for the collection of state sales taxes.
(Prior Code, § 7-217)
§ 35.18 INTEREST AND PENALTIES; DELINQUENCY; DISCOUNT FORFEITURE.
   (A)   68 O.S. § 217 is adopted and made a part of this subchapter.
   (B)   Interest and penalties at the rates and in amounts specified in the
state statute cited in division (A) above are hereby levied and shall be
applicable in cases of delinquency in reporting and paying the tax levied by
this subchapter.
   (C)   The failure or refusal of any taxpayer to make and transmit the
reports and remittances of tax in the time and manner required by this
subchapter shall cause such tax to be delinquent.
   (D)   If such delinquency continues for a period of five days, then the
taxpayer shall forfeit his or her claim to any discount allowed under this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 7-218) Penalty, see §
35.99
§ 35.19 WAIVER OF INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   The interest or penalty, or any portion thereof, accruing by reason of
a taxpayer’s failure to pay the city tax herein levied may be waived or
remitted in the same manner as provided for the waiver or remittance as applied
in administration of the state sales tax provided in 68 O.S. § 220.
   (B)   To accomplish the purposes of this section, the applicable provisions
of 68 O.S. § 220 are adopted by reference and made a part of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 7-219)
§ 35.20 ERRONEOUS PAYMENTS; CLAIM FOR REFUND.
   (A)   Refund of an erroneous payment of the city sales tax herein levied may
be made to any taxpayer making such erroneous payment in the same manner and
procedure, and under the same limitations of time, as provided for
administration of the state sales tax as set forth in 68 O.S. § 227.
   (B)   To accomplish the purposes of this section, the applicable provisions
of 68 O.S. § 227 are adopted by reference and made a part of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 7-220)
§ 35.21 FAILURE TO FILE; FRAUDULENT RETURNS.
   (A)   No person shall:
      (1)   Intentionally fail or refuse to make tax reports and remittances as
required under this subchapter; or
      (2)   Intentionally make false and fraudulent tax reports for the purpose
of avoiding or escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof due under this
subchapter.
   (B)   Any person required to collect and remit sales tax pursuant to the
Oklahoma Sales Tax Code or this code of ordinances who engages in any of the
callings, trades, avocations, professions, businesses or occupations for which
a license is required by the city, and applying for such license, must submit
proof, as a condition precedent to issuing such license, of a valid sales tax
permit number issued by the state.
   (C)   Any license issued by the city to any person engaging in any of the
callings, trades, avocations, businesses, professions or occupations for which
a license is required by this code of ordinances may be suspended or revoked
for failure to maintain a lawful sales tax license or to collect and remit
sales tax if and as required by the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code or this code of
ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 7-221) Penalty, see §
35.99
§ 35.22 TAX RECORDS CONFIDENTIAL.
   The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning
the administration of the city sales tax is legislatively recognized and
declared, and to protect the same, the provisions of 68 O.S. § 205 of the
Oklahoma Sales Tax Code, and all subsections thereof, are hereby adopted by
reference and made fully effective and applicable to the administration of the
city sales tax as if herein set forth in full.
(Prior Code, § 7-222)
§ 35.23 PROVISIONS CUMULATIVE.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall be cumulative and in addition to any
and all other taxing provisions of the city’s ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 7-223)
§ 35.24 AMENDMENT BY CITY COUNCIL.
   The City Council, by ordinance duly enacted, is authorized to make such
administrative and technical changes or additions in the method and manner of
the administration and enforcing of this subchapter as may be necessary or
proper for efficiency and fairness, except the rate of the tax herein provided
shall not be changed without approval of the qualified electors of the city, as
provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 7-224)
USE TAX
§ 35.35 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Beggs, Oklahoma Use
Tax Resolution.”
(Prior Code, § 7-501) (Res. 2007-05, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 35.36 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   The definitions of words, terms and phrases contained in the Oklahoma
Tax Code, 68 O.S. § 1401, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of
this subchapter.
   (B)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
      MUNICIPALITY. The City of Beggs, Oklahoma.
      TAX COLLECTOR. As used herein, the department of the municipality or the
official agency of the state duly designated according to law or by contract
authorized by law to administer the collection of the use tax herein levied.
      TRANSACTION. Sale.
(Prior Code, § 7-517) (Res. 2007-05, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 35.37 CLASSIFICATION OF TAXPAYERS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the classification of taxpayers
hereunder shall be as prescribed by state law for the purposes of the state use
tax code.
(Prior Code, § 7-518) (Res. 2007-05, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 35.38 SUBSISTING STATE PERMITS.
   All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the State Tax
Commission pursuant to the Oklahoma Tax Code are, for the purpose of this
subchapter, hereby ratified, confirmed and adopted in lieu of any requirement
for an additional municipal permit for the same purpose.
(Prior Code, § 7-519) (Res. 2007-05, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 35.39 PURPOSES OF REVENUES.
   It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this subchapter to provide
revenues for the support of the functions of the municipal government of the
city, and any and all revenues derived hereunder may be expended by the City
Council for any purpose for which funds may be lawfully expended and
authorized.
(Prior Code, § 7-520) (Res. 2007-05, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 35.40 TAX IMPOSED.
   (A)   There is hereby levied, and there shall be paid by every person
storing, using or otherwise consuming within the city tangible personal
property purchased or brought into the municipality, an excise tax on the
storage, use or consumption otherwise within the municipality of such property
at the rate of 4.5% of the purchase price of such property. Such tax shall be
paid by every person storing, using or otherwise consuming within the
municipality tangible personal property that is purchased or brought into the
municipality.
   (B)   The additional tax levied hereunder shall be paid at the time of
importation or storage of the property within the municipality and shall be
assessed to only property purchased outside the state, provided that the tax
levied herein shall not be levied against tangible personal property which is
intended solely for use outside the municipality but is stored in the
municipality pending shipment outside the municipality, or which is temporarily
retained in the maintenance of other service.
   (C)   Any person liable for payment of the use tax authorized herein may
deduct from such use tax any county or municipal sales tax previously paid on
such goods or services, provided that the amount deducted shall not exceed the
amount that would have been due if the taxes imposed by the municipality had
been levied on the sale of such goods or services.
(Prior Code, § 7-502) (Res. 2007-05, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 35.41 EXEMPTIONS.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply:
   (A)   In respect to the use of an article of tangible personal property
brought into the municipality by a nonresident individual visiting in the
municipality for his or her personal use or enjoyment while within the
municipality;
   (B)   In respect to the use of tangible personal property purchased for
resale before being used;
   (C)   (1)   In respect to the use of any article of tangible personal
property on which a tax equal to or in excess of that levied by both the state
use tax code and the municipality’s use tax resolution has been paid by the
person using such tangible personal property in the municipality, whether such
tax was levied under the laws of this state or some other state, municipality
or county of the United States; and
      (2)   If any article of tangible personal property has already been
subjected to a tax by this state or any other state or county in respect to its
sale or use in an amount less than the tax imposed by both the state use tax
code and the municipality’s use tax resolution, and the rate by which the
previous tax upon the sale or use was computed, provided that no credit shall
be given for taxes paid in another state, municipality or county if that state,
municipality or county does not grant like credit for taxes paid in this state
and the municipality.
   (D)   In respect to the use of machinery and equipment purchased and used by
persons establishing new manufacturing or processing plants in the
municipality, and machinery and equipment purchased and used by persons in the
operation of manufacturing plants already established in the municipality,
which machinery and equipment is incorporated into and directly used in the
process of manufacturing property subject to taxation under the Sales Tax Code
of the city. The term MANUFACTURING PLANTS shall mean those establishments
primarily engaged in manufacturing or processing operations and generally
recognized as such;
   (E)   In respect to the use of tangible personal property now specifically
exempted from taxation under the Sales Tax Code of the city;
   (F)   In respect to the use of any article of tangible personal property
brought into the municipality by an individual with the intent to become a
resident of the municipality, where such personal property is for such
individual’s personal use or enjoyment;
   (G)   In respect to the sum of any article of tangible personal property
used, or to be used, by commercial airlines or railroads; or
   (H)   In respect to livestock purchased outside the state and brought into
the municipality for feeding or breeding purposes, and which is later resold.
(Prior Code, § 7-503) (Res. 2007-05, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 35.42 TIME DUE; RETURNS; PAYMENT.
   The tax levied by this subchapter is due and payable at the time and in the
manner and form prescribed for payment of the state use tax under the state use
tax code.
(Prior Code, § 7-504) (Res. 2007-05, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 35.43 TAX CONSTITUTES DEBT.
   Such taxes, penalties or interest due hereunder shall at all times
constitute a prior, superior and paramount claim as against the claims of
unsecured creditors and may be collected by suit as with any other debt.
(Prior Code, § 7-505) (Res. 2007-05, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 35.44 COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILER OR VENDOR.
   (A)   Every retailer or vendor maintaining places of business both within
and without the state and making sales of tangible personal property from a
place of business outside the state for use in the city shall, at the time of
making such sales, collect the use tax levied by this subchapter from the
purchaser and give to the purchaser a receipt therefor in the manner and form
prescribed by the State Tax Commission if said Tax Commission shall, by
regulation, require such receipt.
   (B)   Each retailer or vendor operating in the municipality shall list the
location of any and all distribution or sales houses or offices or other places
of business in the municipality.
(Prior Code, § 7-506) (Res. 2007-05, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 35.45 COLLECTION BY RETAILER OR VENDOR WITH NO PLACE OF BUSINESS WITHIN
STATE, OR BOTH WITHIN AND WITHOUT STATE; PERMITS.
   (A)   The State Tax Commission may, at its discretion, upon application,
authorize the collection of the use tax herein levied by any retailer or vendor
not maintaining a place of business within the state but who makes sales of
tangible personal property for use in the municipality, and by the out-of-state
place of business of any retailer or vendor maintaining places of businesses
both within and without the state and making sales of tangible personal
property at such out-of-state place of business for use in the municipality.
   (B)   Such retailer or vendor may be issued, without charge, a permit to
collect such taxes by said Tax Commission in such a manner and subject to such
regulations and agreements as it shall prescribe. When so authorized, it shall
be the duty of such retailer or vendor to collect the use tax upon all tangible
personal property sold, to his or her knowledge, for use within the
municipality. Such authority and permit may be canceled when, at any time, said
Tax Commission considers that such use tax can more effectively be collected
from the person using such property in the municipality.
   (C)   Provided, however, with delivery to the purchaser within the
municipality by the retailer or vendor in such retailer’s or vendor’s vehicle,
whether owned or leased (not by common carrier), such sales or transactions
shall continue to be subject to the applicable municipal sales tax at the point
of delivery, and the tax shall be collected and reported under the taxpayer’s
sales tax permit number accordingly.
(Prior Code, § 7-507) (Res. 2007-05, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 35.46 REVOKING PERMITS.
   Whenever any retailer or vendor not maintaining a place of business in the
state, or both within and without the state, authorized to collect the use tax
herein levied fails to comply with any of the provisions of this subchapter or
the state use tax code, or any orders, rules or regulations of the State Tax
Commission, the Tax Commission may, upon notice and hearing as provided for in
68 O.S. § 1408, by order revoke the use tax permit, if any, issued to such
retailer or vendor, and if any such retailer or vendor is a corporation
authorized to do business in the state, may, after the notice and hearing above
provided, cancel said corporation’s license to do business in the state, and
the Tax Commission shall issue a new license only when such corporation has
complied with the obligations under this subchapter, the state use tax code or
any orders, rules or regulations of the State Tax Commission.
(Prior Code, § 7-508) (Res. 2007-05, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 35.47 REMUNERATIVE DEDUCTIONS ALLOWED TO VENDORS OR RETAILERS OF OTHER
STATES.
   Returns and remittances of the use tax herein levied and collected shall be
made to the State Tax Commission at the time and in the manner, form and amount
prescribed for returns and remittances required by the state use tax code.
Remittances of use taxes collected hereunder shall be subject to the same
discount as may be allowed by said Code for the collection of state use taxes.
(Prior Code, § 7-509) (Res. 2007-05, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 35.48 INTEREST AND PENALTIES; DELINQUENCY.
   (A)   68 O.S. § 217 is hereby adopted and made a part of this subchapter,
and interest and penalties at the rates and in the amounts as therein specified
are hereby levied and shall be applicable in cases of delinquency in reporting
and paying the use tax levied by this subchapter.
   (B)   Provided, the failure or refusal of any retailer or vendor to make and
transmit the reports and remittances of use tax in the time and manner required
by this subchapter shall cause such tax to be delinquent. In addition, if such
delinquency continues for a period of five days, then the retailer or vendor
shall forfeit his or her claim to any discount allowed under this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 7-510) (Res. 2007-05, passed 4-2-2007) Penalty, see §
35.99
§ 35.49 WAIVER OF INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   The interest or penalty, or any portion thereof, accruing by reason of
a retailer’s or vendor’s failure to pay the use tax herein levied may be waived
or remitted in the same manner as provided for said waiver or remittance as is
applied in the administration of the state use tax provided in 68 O.S. § 227.
   (B)   To accomplish the purposes of this section, the applicable provisions
of said § 227 are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 7-511) (Res. 2007-05, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 35.50 ERRONEOUS PAYMENTS; CLAIM FOR REFUND.
   Refund of an erroneous payment of the municipal use tax herein levied may be
made to any taxpayer making such erroneous payment in the same manner and
procedure and under the same limitations of time as provided for in the
administration of the state use tax as set forth in 68 O.S. § 227. To
accomplish the purposes of this section the applicable provisions of said § 227
are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 7-512) (Res. 2007-05, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 35.51 FRAUDULENT RETURNS.
   In addition to all civil penalties provided by this subchapter, the willful
failure or refusal of any taxpayer to make the reports and remittances herein
required, or the making of any false and fraudulent report for the purpose of
avoiding or escaping payment of any use tax, or portion thereof, rightfully due
under this subchapter shall be an offense.
(Prior Code, § 7-513) (Res. 2007-05, passed 4-2-2007) Penalty, see §
35.99
§ 35.52 RECORDS CONFIDENTIAL.
   The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning
the administration of the municipal use tax is legislatively recognized and
declared, and to protect the same, the provisions of 68 O.S. § 205 (1998) of
the state use tax code, and each subsection thereof, is hereby adopted by
reference and made fully effective and applicable to the administration of the
municipal use tax as if herein set forth in full.
(Prior Code, § 7-514) (Res. 2007-05, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 35.53 PROVISIONS CUMULATIVE.
   The provisions hereof shall be cumulative and in addition to any and all
other taxing provisions of municipal resolutions and regulations.
(Prior Code, § 7-515) (Res. 2007-05, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 35.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99(A) of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any person who wrongfully or erroneously certifies that
purchases are for any of the subdivisions or agencies of the state named in §
35.08(I) of this chapter, or who otherwise violates §
35.08 of this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be fined an amount equal to double the amount of the sales tax
involved or incarcerated for not more than 60 days, or both.
      (2)   Violation of the requirement, per §
35.08(J) of this chapter, to certify in writing on the copy of the invoice of
sales ticket the nature of the purchases shall be a misdemeanor as set forth in
division (B)(1) above.
(Prior Code, § 7-208)
   (C)   Violation of §
35.09(F) of this chapter by the purchaser or vendor shall be a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 7-209)
   (D)   (1)   Violation of §
35.10(E)(6) of this chapter by the purchaser or vendor shall be a misdemeanor,
and, upon violation and conviction for a second offense, the State Tax
Commission shall revoke the vendor’s sales tax permit.
      (2)   Violation of §
35.10(F) of this chapter by the purchaser or vendor shall be a misdemeanor,
and, upon violation and conviction for a second offense, the State Tax
Commission shall revoke the vendor’s sales tax permit.
(Prior Code, § 7-210)
   (E)   In addition to all civil penalties provided by §§
35.01 through
35.24 of this chapter, any violation of §
35.21 of this chapter shall subject the offending taxpayer to the penalty set
forth in §
10.99(A) of this code. Each day of such violation shall be considered a
separate offense and charged separately.
(Prior Code, § 7-221)
   (F)   Any violation of §§
35.35 through
35.53 of this chapter shall be liable for a fine not to exceed $200 per day, or
the maximum legal limit.
(Prior Code, § 7-521)
   (G)   Upon conviction of an offense under §
35.51 of this chapter, the offending taxpayer shall be punished by a fine of
not more than $200. Each day of noncompliance with §§
35.35 through
35.53 of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 7-513)
(Res. 2007-05, passed 4-2-2007)
CHAPTER 36: GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE POLICIES
Section
General Provisions
   
36.01   City officers, employees under federal Social Security
Firefighters Pension and Retirement System
   
36.15   System created
   
36.16   System to be operated in accordance with law
City Records
   
36.30   Appointment of official custodian
   
36.31   Designation of additional record custodians
   
36.32   Duties of custodians
   
36.33   Requests to be directed to custodians
   
36.34   Procedures regarding both inspection and copying of open public records
   
36.35   Procedures regarding inspection of open public records
   
36.36   Procedures regarding copies of open public records
   
36.37   Fees
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 36.01 CITY OFFICERS, EMPLOYEES UNDER FEDERAL SOCIAL SECURITY.
   (A)   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to extend, at the
earliest date, to the employees and officials thereof not excluded by law or
this section, and whether employed in connection with a governmental or
proprietary function, the benefits of the system of federal old-age and
survivors insurance as authorized by the federal Social Security Act, being 42
U.S.C. §§ 401 et seq., and amendments thereto. In pursuance of this policy, the
city shall take such action as may be required by applicable state or federal
laws or regulations.
   (B)   The Mayor is hereby authorized and directed to execute all necessary
agreements and amendments thereto with the State Department of Human Services,
as agent or agency, to secure the coverage of employees and officials as
provided in division (A) above.
   (C)   Withholdings from the salaries or wages of employees and officials for
the purpose provided in division (A) above are hereby authorized to be made in
the amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal
laws or regulations and shall be paid over to the state or federal agency
designated by the laws or regulations.
   (D)   There shall be appropriated from available funds such amounts at such
times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations for
employer’s contributions, which shall be paid over to the state or federal
agency designated by said laws or regulations.
   (E)   The city shall keep such records and make such reports as may be
required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations.
   (F)   There is hereby excluded from this section any authority to make any
agreement with respect to any position or any employee or official now covered,
or authorized to be covered, by any other ordinance creating any retirement
system for any employee or official of the city.
   (G)   There is hereby excluded from this section any authority to make an
agreement with respect to any position or any employee or official the
compensation for which is on a fee basis, or any position or any employee or
official not authorized to be covered by applicable state or federal laws or
regulations.
(Prior Code, § 2-201)
FIREFIGHTERS PENSION AND RETIREMENT SYSTEM
§ 36.15 SYSTEM CREATED.
   There is hereby created, for the purpose of providing pension retirement
allowance and other benefits for firefighters of the city, a firefighters
pension and retirement system. It is declared to be the official policy of the
city to participate in the pension system as provided by state law.
(Prior Code, § 2-211)
Statutory reference:
   Firefighters Pension System, see 11 O.S. §§ 49-101 et seq.
§ 36.16 SYSTEM TO BE OPERATED IN ACCORDANCE WITH LAW.
   (A)   The Firefighters Pension and Retirement System, as established by 11
O.S. §§ 49-100.1 et seq., is hereby adopted by reference.
   (B)   The local Board of the Firefighters Pension and Retirement System
servicing the firefighters of the city shall be constituted as provided by
state law and shall have the powers and duties prescribed thereby.
(Prior Code, § 2-212)
CITY RECORDS
§ 36.30 APPOINTMENT OF OFFICIAL CUSTODIAN.
   (A)   The following city official is hereby appointed as official custodian
for the purposes of the Oklahoma Open Records Act: City Clerk.
   (B)   The city official listed in division (A) above is charged with the
responsibility for compliance with the Act with respect to the following listed
public records: all public records kept and maintained in the City Clerk’s
office and all other public records not provided for elsewhere in this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 2-301)
Statutory reference:
   Oklahoma Open Records Act, see 51 O.S. §§ 24.A.1 et seq.
§ 36.31 DESIGNATION OF ADDITIONAL RECORD CUSTODIANS.
   (A)   Each of the official custodians appointed in §
36.30 of this chapter is hereby authorized to designate any subordinate
officers or employees to serve as record custodians. The record custodians
shall have such duties and powers as are set out in the Oklahoma Open Records
Act, 51 O.S. §§ 24.A.1 et seq.
   (B)   Whenever an official custodian shall appoint another person as a
record custodian, he or she shall notify the City Clerk of such designation,
and the City Clerk shall maintain a register of all such designations.
(Prior Code, § 2-302)
§ 36.32 DUTIES OF CUSTODIANS.
   All city officials and employees appointed or designated under this
subchapter shall:
   (A)   Protect public records from damage and disorganization;
   (B)   Prevent excessive disruption of the essential functions of the city;
   (C)   Provide assistance and information upon request;
   (D)   Ensure efficient and timely action and response to all applications
for inspection of public records; and
   (E)   Carry out the procedures adopted by the city for inspecting and
copying open public records.
(Prior Code, § 2-303)
§ 36.33 REQUESTS TO BE DIRECTED TO CUSTODIANS.
   (A)   All members of the public, in seeking access to or copies of a public
record in accordance with the provisions of the State Open Records Act, shall
address their request to the custodian charged with responsibility for the
maintenance of the record sought to be inspected or copied.
   (B)   Whenever any city official or employee appointed or designated as a
custodian under this subchapter is presented with a request for access to or a
copy of a public record, which record the custodian does not have in his or her
possession and which he or she has not been given responsibility to keep and
maintain, the custodian shall so advise the person requesting the record. The
person making the request shall be informed as to which custodian the request
should be addressed to if such is known by the custodian receiving the request.
(Prior Code, § 2-304)
§ 36.34 PROCEDURES REGARDING BOTH INSPECTION AND COPYING OF OPEN PUBLIC
RECORDS.
   The following procedures are hereby adopted and shall be applied by each
official custodian and record custodian:
   (A)   Consistent with the policy, duties and procedures established by the
State Open Records Act, record custodians shall provide full access and
assistance in a timely and efficient manner to persons who request access to
open public records;
   (B)   Record custodians shall protect the integrity and organization of
public records with respect to the manner in which such records are inspected
and copied;
   (C)   Record custodians may prevent excessive disruptions of essential
functions and provide the record at the earliest possible time;
   (D)   All inspections and copying of open public records shall be performed
by or under the supervision of the record custodian responsible for such
records;
   (E)   All persons requesting the inspection of or copies of open public
records shall make such request in writing prior to the request being honored,
except that no form shall be required for requests made for records which have
been reproduced for free public distribution;
   (F)   All record inspection and copying forms are to be completed by the
person requesting the record. The record custodian may demand reasonable
identification of any person requesting a record;
   (G)   Any fees for record inspection or for copies are due at the time the
records, or copies thereof, are provided to the requester unless the record
custodian has demanded that prepayment of all or part of such fees be made.
Fees are to be paid to the record custodian or City Clerk;
   (H)   The record custodian or City Clerk shall demand full or partial
prepayment of fees whenever the estimate for such fees exceeds the amount set
out in §
36.37 of this chapter;
   (I)   No record search or copying fee shall be assessed against officers or
employees of the city who make requests which are reasonably necessary to the
performance of their official duties;
   (J)   The hours for making requests for inspection or copying shall be all
regular working hours for each day the office maintains regular office hours;
   (K)   Removal of open public records from the office where kept and
maintained for the purpose of inspection or the making of copies shall not be
permitted; and
   (L)   The above procedures, as well as any other inspection and copying
procedures, shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the office of the record
custodian.
(Prior Code, § 2-305)
§ 36.35 PROCEDURES REGARDING INSPECTION OF OPEN PUBLIC RECORDS.
   The following procedures are hereby adopted and shall be applied by every
official custodian and record custodian:
   (A)   Record custodians shall handle all inspection requests in accordance
with their duties to protect and preserve public records and to assist persons
requesting inspection of open public records;
   (B)   All request forms must be completed by the party requesting the
record. In all cases, the party so requesting must sign his or her individual
name to the form. Written requests shall be made on the form provided by the
record custodian and presented to the record custodian;
   (C)   A written request is sufficient if it reasonably describes the record
sought. In instances where the requester cannot provide sufficient information
to identify a record, the custodian shall assist in making such identification;
and
   (D)   The record custodian shall, upon making a denial of an inspection
request, forward a copy of the denial to the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 2-306)
§ 36.36 PROCEDURES REGARDING COPIES OF OPEN PUBLIC RECORDS.
   The following procedures apply regarding copies of records:
   (A)   Record custodians shall handle all copy requests in accordance with
their duties to protect and preserve public records and to assist persons
requesting copies of open public records;
   (B)   All request forms must be completed by the party requesting the
copies. In all cases, the party so requesting must sign his or her individual
name to the form. Written requests shall be made on the form provided by the
record custodian;
   (C)   Mechanical reproduction of a record shall not be undertaken when it is
the judgment of the record custodian that any available means of mechanically
reproducing the subject record is likely to cause damage to such record; and
   (D)   No copy fee shall be assessed when multiple copies of the record
requested have been prepared for free public distribution or when the record
custodian determines that the cost of charging and handling the fee exceeds the
cost of providing a copy without charge.
(Prior Code, § 2-307)
§ 36.37 FEES.
   (A)   Where a request has been made for the inspection of an open public
record, no fee shall be charged.
   (B)   A fee per page, as set by the Council by motion or resolution, shall
be charged for photocopying an open public record, such fee to cover the cost
of labor, materials and equipment.
   (C)   For copying any open public record which cannot be reproduced by
photocopying, such as a computer printout or a blueprint, the requester shall
be charged the actual cost to the city, including the cost of labor, materials
and equipment.
   (D)   A search fee shall be charged to a requester who is using the record
solely for a commercial purpose. Such fee shall be the actual cost to the city
of producing the record, including the cost of labor, materials and equipment.
   (E)   A record custodian may demand prepayment of a fee whenever the
estimated amount exceeds $20. The prepayment amount shall be an estimate of the
cost of copying, mechanical reproduction or searching for the record. Any
overage or underage in the prepayment amount shall be settled prior to
producing the requested record or delivering the copy or mechanical
reproduction of the record.
(Prior Code, § 2-308)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
51.   GARBAGE
      
52.   WATER AND SEWER
      
53.   WATER SHORTAGE
CHAPTER 50: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
50.01   Utilities leased to Public Works Authority
   
50.02   Authority rules adopted by reference
   
50.03   Rates, water and sewer
 
   
50.99   Penalty
§ 50.01 UTILITIES LEASED TO PUBLIC WORKS AUTHORITY.
   The city hereby consents and agrees to the lease of the city’s water,
sanitary sewerage and refuse systems and facilities, and all future additions
thereto, to the Public Works Authority, as authorized by statute, to be
effective at the time and upon the terms and conditions specified in a certain
“lease” prepared under the direction of the City Council and filed in the
office of the City Clerk. The Mayor of the city is hereby authorized and
directed, on behalf of the city, to execute and deliver the lease to the Public
Works Authority.
(Prior Code, § 17-101)
§ 50.02 AUTHORITY RULES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   Rules and regulations adopted by the Public Works Authority are hereby
adopted and incorporated herein by reference, applicable as if herein set out
in full.
(Prior Code, § 17-102) Penalty, see §
50.99
Editor’s note:
   See the minutes and resolutions of the City Council and the Public Works
Authority rules and regulations for regulations governing utilities, rates and
payment procedures for municipal utilities by the Authority.
§ 50.03 RATES, WATER AND SEWER.
   (A)   The water and wastewater rate schedules, as recommended by the Public
Works Authority, are hereby adopted and put into full force and effect, and the
Public Works Authority is hereby authorized to make proper provisions to
implement the schedules and to change the same as may be required from time to
time by resolution.
(Prior Code, § 17-103)
   (B)   The following rates are hereby established and placed into effect.
      (1)   Water rates.
Gallons Rate
Gallons         Rate
0 to 1,000      $35.00 (minimum usage)
1,000 to2,000   $6.00 per 1,000 gallons
2,000 to 3,000  $6.25 per 1,000 gallons
3,000 to 4,000  $6.50 per 1,000 gallons
4,000 to 5,000  $6.75 per 1,000 gallons
5,000 to 6,000  $7.00 per 1,000 gallons
6,000 to 7,000  $7.25 per 1,000 gallons
7,000 to 8,000  $7.50 per 1,000 gallons
8,000 to 9,000  $8.00 per 1,000 gallons
9,000 to 10,000 $9.00 per 1,000 gallons
10,000 plus     $10.00 per 1,000 gallons
 
      (2)   Sewer rates.
Gallons Rate
Gallons         Rate
0 to 1,000      $35.00 (minimum usage)
1,000 to2,000   $6.00 per 1,000 gallons
2,000 to 3,000  $6.25 per 1,000 gallons
3,000 to 4,000  $6.50 per 1,000 gallons
4,000 to 5,000  $6.75 per 1,000 gallons
5,000 to 6,000  $7.00 per 1,000 gallons
6,000 to 7,000  $7.25 per 1,000 gallons
7,000 to 8,000  $7.50 per 1,000 gallons
8,000 to 9,000  $8.00 per 1,000 gallons
9,000 to 10,000 $9.00 per 1,000 gallons
10,000 plus     $10.00 per 1,000 gallons
 
      (3)   Capital improvement fee. The sum per water customer per month:
$17.50.
(Ord. 2019-01, passed 4-8-2019; Ord. 2025-02, passed 1-13-2025)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99(A) of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any violation of the rules and regulations of the Authority adopted as
per §
50.02 of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in §
10.99(A) of this code.
(Prior Code, § 17-102)
CHAPTER 51: GARBAGE
Section
   
51.01   Mandatory refuse collection for water users
 
   
51.99   Penalty
§ 51.01 MANDATORY REFUSE COLLECTION FOR WATER USERS.
   It is mandatory for each occupied business and residence within the city
that must be legally connected to the water delivery system delivered by the
Public Works Authority to utilize the refuse service furnished and contracted
by the city.
(Ord. 2015-03, passed 9-14-2015) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   Any violation of this chapter is punishable as provided in §
10.99(A) of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 17-202)
CHAPTER 52: WATER AND SEWER
Section
General Provisions
   
52.01   Mandatory water/sewer connection
Discharge Standards and Grease Trap/Interceptor Requirements
   
52.15   Discharge standards and prohibitions
   
52.16   Grease trap and grease interceptor requirements
   
52.17   Time requirement for installing grease trap or interceptor
 
   
52.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Water and sewer rates, see
Ch. 50
   Water users required to use refuse service, see
Ch. 51
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 52.01 MANDATORY WATER/SEWER CONNECTION.
   (A)   Each occupied residence and each commercial business in the city shall
connect, at the owner’s expense, to the city’s sanitary sewer system if the
system is within 150 feet of the wastewater system.
   (B)   In the event that a business or a residence is within 150 feet of a
water or sewer line, but a highway bore will be required of more than 75 feet
through paved road, then connection by the property owner in question shall not
be mandatory.
   (C)   In the event that a property owner can show extreme financial
hardship, then a variance of this requirement or an extension of time to hook
up may be granted by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 17-301) Penalty, see §
52.99
DISCHARGE STANDARDS AND GREASE TRAP/INTERCEPTOR REQUIREMENTS
§ 52.15 DISCHARGE STANDARDS AND PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   (1)   No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the
sanitary sewer system of the city, either directly or indirectly, any pollutant
or waste product which causes pass-through interference to the sewer and
wastewater lines of the city.
      (2)   These general prohibitions apply to all industrial users of the
system whether they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any
other national, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
   (B)   In addition, the following pollutants shall not be introduced into the
wastewater or sewer lines of the city:
      (1)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the municipal
wastewater collection system, including, but not limited to, waste streams with
a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140°F, or 60°C, using the test methods
specified in 40 C.F.R. § 261.21. At no time shall two consecutive readings on
an explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the system or at any
point within the system, be more than 5%, nor any single reading be more than
10% of the lower explosive limit of the meter;
      (2)   Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction
of the flow in the system resulting in interference, but in no case solids of
greater than one-half inch;
      (3)   Any wastewater having a pH of less than 5.5 or more than 12 SU, or
otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the system or equipment or
endangering city personnel;
      (4)   Any wastewater containing pollutants, including oxygen-demanding
pollutants such as BOD and the like, released in a discharge at a flow rate of
pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other
pollutants, will cause interference with either the system or any wastewater
treatment or sludge process which will constitute a hazard to human or animal
life;
      (5)   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids or other
wastewaters which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are
sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or to endanger entry
into the sewer for maintenance and repair;
      (6)   Any substance which may cause the wastewater or the residue found
within the wastewater, such as sludges or scums, to be unsuitable for
reclamation and reuse, or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case
shall a substance discharged into the system be in noncompliance with the Solid
Waste Disposal Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq., as adopted within the
United States, the state or the city;
      (7)   Any wastewater which imparts color that cannot be removed in the
treatment process and which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant’s
effluent;
      (8)   Any wastewater which has a temperature of 150°F, or 65°C, or
greater shall be considered a violation of this subchapter because it
interferes with the wastewater process used by the city;
      (9)   Any wastewater introduced into the system which contains any
radioactive waste or component unless specifically allowed pursuant to state or
federal regulations;
      (10)   Any free or emulsified fat, wax, grease or oil of animal or
vegetable origin in excess of 200 mg/L which may solidify or become viscous at
temperatures between 32°F and 150°F, or 0°C to 65°C, or which appears, in the
opinion of the PWA Superintendent, probable of blocking, obstructing or
interfering with the required actions of the wastewater treatment process
utilized by the city’s wastewater system;
      (11)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded; and
      (12)   Any salts of heavy metals that are of such a concentration so as
to be toxic to the wastewater treatment process.
(Ord. 2014-01, passed 2-10-2014) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.16 GREASE TRAP AND GREASE INTERCEPTOR REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   (1)   Grease, oil and sand traps or interceptors shall be provided
when, in the opinion of the Public Works Superintendent, they are necessary for
the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or
any flammable wastes, sands or other harmful ingredients, except that such
interceptors and/or traps shall not be required for private dwelling quarters
or residential units.
      (2)   All interceptors or traps shall be of a type and capacity approved
by the PWA Superintendent and shall be located in such a manner and location so
as to be readily and easily accessible for both inspection and cleaning.
   (B)   Such interceptors or traps shall be constructed of impervious
materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature.
They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped with easily-
removable covers which, when bolted in place, shall be both gastight and
watertight.
   (C)   Such grease traps and interceptors, when required, shall be maintained
by the owner at the owner’s expense in a proper and continuous manner so as to
provide efficient operation.
   (D)   Such grease traps and interceptors shall be available to the employees
and agents of the city at all reasonable times and places.
(Ord. 2014-01, passed 2-10-2014) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.17 TIME REQUIREMENT FOR INSTALLING GREASE TRAP OR INTERCEPTOR.
   (A)   When the PWA Superintendent determines that a business within said
city is discharging pollutants that are in violation of §
52.15 of this chapter, the owner of the business and the property owner, if
different entities, shall be notified of such violation in writing.
   (B)   Once such notification is made, the business/property owner shall be
given a reasonable time to install an appropriate grease trap/interceptor. Said
grace period shall not be in excess of six months unless otherwise so provided
by the Public Works Authority.
   (C)   Once said grace period has passed, then, in the event that the
required interceptor or trap has not been properly installed and approved by
the PWA Superintendent, the owner shall be considered in violation of this
subchapter and shall be subject to punishment as herein provided.
(Ord. 2014-01, passed 2-10-2014) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99(A) of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any violation of §
52.01 of this chapter is punishable as provided in §
10.99(A) of this code.
(Prior Code, § 17-302)
   (C)   Any violation of §§
52.15 through
52.17 of this chapter shall be deemed a misdemeanor and shall be punishable in
accordance with the provisions of the general penalty ordinance as shown in §
10.99(A) of this code. Any violation shall be determined as a continuing
violation, with each day of occurrence constituting a separate violation.
(Ord. 2014-01, passed 2-10-2014)
CHAPTER 53: WATER SHORTAGE
Section
   
53.01   Definitions
   
53.02   Response to water shortage
   
53.03   Water conservation Stage I—voluntary conservation
   
53.04   Water conservation Stage II—continuing voluntary conservation
   
53.05   Water conservation Stage III—moderate mandatory conservation
   
53.06   Water conservation Stage IV—severe mandatory conservation
   
53.07   Water conservation Stage V—stringent mandatory conservation
   
53.08   Water conservation Stage VI—rationing
   
53.09   Scope and duration of conservation measures
   
53.10   Violation; enforcement
 
   
53.99   Penalty
§ 53.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of Beggs, Beggs Public Works Authority.
   CUSTOMER. Any person who is an owner, occupant or user of real property to
which water is supplied by the city. CUSTOMER shall also refer to any person
who uses water supplied by the city, or to any person who is billed for the
supply of water from the city, or to any person who is responsible for or
otherwise has the right or permission to utilize the supply of water provided
by the city.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Beggs Public Works Authority.
   PERSON. Any natural person, any group of persons, any firm, partnership,
association, corporation or company or any other organization or entity.
   SHALL. The word is always mandatory and never directory.
   WATER. All water, except wastewater, supplied by the city to any customer.
   WATER SHORTAGE. Shall be deemed to exist when the ordinary demands and
requirements of water customers served by the city cannot be satisfied without
depleting the water supply to or below a CRITICAL LEVEL, which is the level at
which the continued availability of water for human consumption, sanitation and
fire protection is jeopardized.
(Prior Code, § 17-401) (Ord. 2006-01, passed 9-5-2006)
§ 53.02 RESPONSE TO WATER SHORTAGE.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Director to report to the Mayor conditions
adversely affecting the city’s water supply that could result in a water
shortage.
   (B)   Upon receiving such report, and upon determining that water
conservation measures are necessary to adequately address the water shortage,
the Mayor may declare any stage of water conservation described herein to be in
force. The imposition of each stage of water conservation shall be reported to
the City Council as soon as possible following such imposition. The Mayor,
Director or City Council may terminate any stage of water conservation upon
determining that it is no longer necessary.
(Prior Code, § 17-402) (Ord. 2006-01, passed 9-5-2006)
§ 53.03 WATER CONSERVATION STAGE I—VOLUNTARY CONSERVATION.
   Customers shall be encouraged to observe water conservation measures to
reduce the wasting of water as follows.
   (A)   Check plumbing and toilets for leaks annually, and if necessary,
repair them.
   (B)   Repair leaking faucets whenever they develop.
   (C)   Store drinking water in the refrigerator to avoid trying to run it
cool at the tap.
   (D)   Use a shower for bathing purposes or reduce the depth of water used
for tub baths. Limit showers to four minutes, where possible.
   (E)   Refrain from running faucets while shaving, rinsing dishes or brushing
teeth.
   (F)   Install water flow-restrictive devices in showerheads.
   (G)   Install water-saving devices such as plastic bottles or commercial
units in toilet tanks.
   (H)   Wash full loads in clothes washers and dishwashers.
   (I)   Review water uses and, where feasible, install recycle systems,
particularly for commercial and industrial customers.
(Prior Code, § 17-404) (Ord. 2006-01, passed 9-5-2006)
§ 53.04 WATER CONSERVATION STAGE II—CONTINUING VOLUNTARY CONSERVATION.
   Customers shall be encouraged to observe the recommendations of Stage I and
to increase the level of conservation efforts as follows.
   (A)   Limit the use of clothes washers and dishwashers, and, when used,
operate such fully loaded.
   (B)   Reduce the flushing of toilets to the minimum whenever practical.
   (C)   Limit lawn watering to only when grass shows signs of withering and
apply water as slowly as possible to achieve deep penetration.
   (D)   Limit shrubbery watering to the minimum, reusing household water when
possible.
   (E)   Limit car washing to the minimum.
   (F)   Limit wash-downs of outside areas such as sidewalks, patios, driveways
or other similar purposes.
   (G)   Limit the hours of operation of water-cooled air conditioners.
   (H)   Use biodegradable, disposable dishes and utensils for both residential
and commercial purposes, where feasible.
   (I)   Avoid the peak! Set automatic sprinkler systems to come on from either
3:30 a.m. to 5:30 a.m. or from 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. Water only two to three
times per week.
(Prior Code, § 17-404) (Ord. 2006-01, passed 9-5-2006)
§ 53.05 WATER CONSERVATION STAGE III—MODERATE MANDATORY CONSERVATION.
   (A)   Customers shall be encouraged to observe the recommendations of Stage
I and II, and the level of conservation efforts shall be increased to require
the mandatory measures in division (B) below.
   (B)   No person shall:
      (1)   Use automatic, underground sprinklers to water lawns, grass, trees,
shrubbery, flowers, golf greens or vegetable gardens, except during the hours
specified by the Director. Those hours shall, unless otherwise varied by the
Director, be between 3:30 a.m. and 5:30 a.m. or 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. On
each designated day, customers shall water during only one of the allowed
periods. When adjustments are made by the Director to the above times, they
shall be published in the local newspapers of general circulation and set forth
on the city’s website, where appropriate;
      (2)   Introduce water into wading pools or swimming pools, except to the
extent necessary to replenish losses due to evaporation or spillage and to
maintain the operation of chemical feed equipment;
      (3)   Use water to wash down outside areas such as sidewalks, patios or
driveways, or for other similar purposes;
      (4)   Introduce water into any decorative fountain, pool or pond, except
where the water is recycled;
      (5)   Serve water in a restaurant or similar establishment, except upon
request;
      (6)   Use water for any unnecessary purpose or intentionally waste water;
or
      (7)   Wash the exterior of a motor vehicle, except where a private well
system is used, or where 50% or more of the water is recycled, or where it can
be demonstrated that 30 gallons of water or less are used to wash the vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 17-404) (Ord. 2006-01, passed 9-5-2006) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.06 WATER CONSERVATION STAGE IV—SEVERE MANDATORY CONSERVATION.
   (A)   Customers shall be encouraged to observe the conservation measures in
Stages I and II and required to continue observing the mandatory requirements
in Stage III, except to the extent that such mandatory requirements are
modified by the restrictions regarding Stage IV conservation. The level of
conservation efforts shall increase to require the additional mandatory
measures in division (B) below.
   (B)   No person shall:
      (1)   Water or sprinkle any lawns, grass, trees, golf greens or flowers,
provided, however, that a person regularly engaged in the sale of plants shall
be permitted to use water for the irrigation of their commercial stock in trade
using the minimal amount for survival. State-, county- and city-licensed
landscape contractors may continue to water plantings which are under written
warranty by handheld hose, container or drip irrigation;
      (2)   Water any vegetable garden or ornamental shrubs, except by handheld
hose, container or drip irrigation system during hours specified by the
Director. Those hours shall, unless varied by the Director, be between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. or 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. On each designated
day, customers shall water during only one of the allowed periods. When
adjustments are made by the Director to the above times, they shall be
published in local newspapers of general circulation and set forth on the
city’s website, where appropriate;
      (3)   Fill any wading pool or swimming pool or replenish any filled pool,
except to the minimum essential for the operation of chemical feed equipment;
      (4)   Make nonessential use of water for commercial or public use;
      (5)   Operate water-cooled air conditioners or other equipment that does
not recycle cooling water, except when health and safety are adversely
affected; or
      (6)   Wash any motor vehicle or other type of mobile equipment, provided,
however, that any person regularly engaged in the business of washing motor
vehicles and any commercial car wash facility shall be permitted to use water
for such purposes when 50% water savings are documented.
(Prior Code, § 17-404) (Ord. 2006-01, passed 9-5-2006) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.07 WATER CONSERVATION STAGE V—STRINGENT MANDATORY CONSERVATION.
   (A)   Customers shall be encouraged to observe the conservation measures in
Stages I and II and required to continue observing the mandatory requirements
in Stages III and IV. The level of conservation efforts shall increase to
require the additional mandatory measures in divisions (B) and (C) below.
   (B)   No person shall:
      (1)   Use water outside a structure, except in an emergency involving
fire;
      (2)   Operate evaporative air conditioning units that recycle water,
except during the operating hours of the business;
      (3)   Use any swimming pool or wading pool; or
      (4)   Wash any motor vehicle, including commercial washing, unless a
private well is used.
   (C)   In addition to the conservation measures enumerated above, customers
shall use plates, glasses, cups and eating utensils that are disposable and
biodegradable.
(Prior Code, § 17-404) (Ord. 2006-01, passed 9-5-2006) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.08 WATER CONSERVATION STAGE VI—RATIONING.
   (A)   Customers shall be encouraged to observe the conservation measures in
Stages I and II and required to continue observing the mandatory requirements
of Stages III, IV and V. The level of conservation efforts shall increase to
require the following mandatory measures.
      (1)   Fire protection will be maintained but, where possible, tank trucks
shall use raw water.
      (2)   All industrial uses of water shall be prohibited.
      (3)   All other uses of water will be limited to those necessary to meet
the minimum health and safety needs of the customers, as determined by the
Director.
   (B)   Failure to act in accordance therewith or the use of water in any
manner or attempt to evade or avoid water rationing restrictions shall be
unlawful.
(Prior Code, § 17-404) (Ord. 2006-01, passed 9-5-2006) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.09 SCOPE AND DURATION OF CONSERVATION MEASURES.
   Water conservation measures shall be applicable to all users of the system,
including users located outside the city. Conservation measures shall be in
force until they are terminated by the Mayor, Director or City Council. Notice
of conservation measures shall be broadly reported to the media and shall,
where feasible, be included on customers’ utility bills.
(Prior Code, § 17-405) (Ord. 2006-01, passed 9-5-2006)
§ 53.10 VIOLATION; ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Violation. In the event that the Mayor shall declare one or more
stages of water conservation as set forth, it shall be unlawful for any person
to use or to permit the use of water supplied by the city in violation of any
mandatory restrictions instituted.
   (B)   Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the Police Department to
investigate violations of the mandatory restrictions and to issue orders
consistent with the purpose and intent of this chapter. All customers shall
cease any violation of the mandatory restrictions upon order of the Police
Department.
(Prior Code, § 17-403) (Ord. 2006-01, passed 9-5-2006) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any customers who violate any provision of this chapter, or who shall
violate or fail to comply with any order made hereunder, shall be subject to
penalty or to a combination of the penalties as follows.
      (1)   The city, Public Works Authority, will discontinue water service
immediately to any structure(s) or parcel(s) when found to be in violation of
this chapter.
      (2)   When found to be in violation pursuant to the provisions of this
section and §
53.10 of this chapter, a fine of $500 will be levied against the person or
persons responsible.
      (3)   Upon payment of the fine, a reconnect fee will be required of the
customer before service is reconnected.
   (B)   The imposition of one or more penalties for any violation shall not
excuse any violation or permit it to continue.
(Prior Code, § 17-403) (Ord. 2006-01, passed 9-5-2006)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS; ADMINISTRATION
      
71.   TRAFFIC CONTROL
      
72.   VEHICLE OPERATION
      
73.   PARKING AND LOADING
      
74.   IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES
      
75.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
      
76.   RAILROADS
      
77.   PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS; ADMINISTRATION
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   Adoption of state traffic code
   
70.02   Definitions
   
70.03   Application of regulations
   
70.04   Application to animal-drawn vehicles
   
70.05   Insurance or certificate required; exceptions
   
70.06   Vehicle equipment generally
   
70.07   Size, weight of vehicles; vehicles more than ten tons
   
70.08   Opening and closing vehicle doors
   
70.09   Boarding and alighting from vehicles
   
70.10   Riding unlawfully on portions of vehicle
   
70.11   Securing loads
   
70.12   Working on streets; exceptions
   
70.13   Authorized emergency vehicle exemptions
   
70.14   Approach of authorized emergency vehicle; driver response
   
70.15   Following fire apparatus prohibited
   
70.16   Crossing fire hose restricted
   
70.17   Accidents; duty to stop; leaving scene of accident
   
70.18   Authorizing or permitting violations prohibited
Administration
   
70.30   Duty of police
   
70.31   Inspection of vehicles by officers
   
70.32   Issuance of citation tags
   
70.33   Failure to obey traffic citation
   
70.34   Failure to comply with traffic citation attached to parked vehicle
   
70.35   Illegal cancellation of traffic citation
   
70.36   Disposition and records of traffic citations, warrants and complaints
   
70.37   Court records, abstract to be sent to State Department of Public Safety
 
   
70.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 ADOPTION OF STATE TRAFFIC CODE.
   The provisions of the Uniform Vehicle Code, 47 O.S. §§ 1-101 et seq., and
the rules of the road, 47 O.S. §§ 11-101 et seq., are hereby adopted and
incorporated herein by reference and are enforceable by the city within the
city limits as fully as if set out at length herein.
(Prior Code, § 15-125)
§ 70.02 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For any words and phrases used in Title VII which are not defined in
this section but are defined in the laws of the state regulating traffic, the
definitions in the laws of the state shall be deemed to apply to the words and
phrases used in Title VII.
   (B)   For the purpose of Title VII, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly requires a different meaning.
      ALLEY. A public passageway or street which affords only a secondary means
of vehicular access to abutting property, and having no legal or official name
other than ALLEY.
      BICYCLE. Every device propelled by human power upon which any person may
ride having two or three tandem wheels, any of which is more than 20 inches in
diameter.
      COMMERCIAL VEHICLE. Every vehicle designed, maintained or used primarily
for the transportation of property.
      CURB LOADING ZONE. A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive
use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.
      DRIVER. Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
      EMERGENCY VEHICLES. Vehicles of fire departments, police vehicles and
ambulances.
      INTERSECTION. The area embraced within the lateral boundary lines of the
roadways of two streets or highways which join one another at, or approximately
at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different
streets or highways joining at any other angle may come into conflict.
      LANED ROADWAY. A roadway which is divided into two or more clearly marked
lanes for vehicular traffic.
      MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle
which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but
not those operated upon rails.
      MOTORCYCLE. Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of
the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with
the ground, but excluding a tractor.
      OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD. Whenever certain hours are named herein, they
shall mean standard time or daylight saving time, as may be in current use in
the city.
      OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES. All signs, signals, markings and
devices not inconsistent with Title VII placed or erected by authority of a
public body or official having jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating,
warning or guiding traffic.
      PARK or PARKING. The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the
loading or unloading of merchandise or passengers.
      PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot.
      POLICE OFFICER. Any officer of the City Police Department or any other
officer authorized by law to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for
violations of traffic regulations.
      PRIVATE ROAD OR ROADWAY. Every way or place in private ownership and used
for vehicular travel by the owner, and by those having express or implied
permission from the owner, but not by other persons.
      RAILROAD. A carrier of persons or property upon cars, other than
streetcars, operated upon stationary rails.
      RAILROAD TRAIN. A steam engine, or electric or other motor, with or
without cars coupled thereto, which is operated upon rails, except streetcars.
      RIGHT-OF-WAY. The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway.
      ROADWAY. The portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used
for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a street
includes two or more separate roadways, the term ROADWAY as used herein shall
refer to any such roadway separately but not to all such roadways collectively.
      SIDEWALK. The portion of a street between the curblines or lateral lines
of a roadway and the adjacent property lines which is intended for the use of
pedestrians.
      STAND or STANDING. The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or
discharging passengers.
      STOP.
         (a)   When required, a complete cessation from movement; or
         (b)   When prohibited, STOP or STOPPING means any halting, even
momentarily, of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a
police officer or traffic-control sign or signal.
      STREET or HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of every
way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public
for purposes of vehicular travel.
      THROUGH STREET. Every street or portion thereof on which vehicular
traffic is given preferential right-of-way, and at the entrances to which
vehicular traffic from intersecting streets is required by law to yield the
right-of-way to vehicles on such THROUGH STREET in obedience to either a stop
sign or a yield sign, when such signs are erected as provided in Title VII.
      TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars and
other conveyances, either singly or together, while using any street for
purposes of travel.
      TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL. Any device, whether manually, electrically or
mechanically operated, by which traffic alternately is directed to stop and
permitted to proceed.
      VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except for devices moved by human
power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
(Prior Code, § 15-101)
Statutory reference:
   Definitions, state traffic laws, see 47 O.S. §§ 1-101 et seq.
§ 70.03 APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS.
   The provisions of Title VII shall apply to every street, highway, alley,
roadway, sidewalk, driveway, park area and every other public way, either
within or outside the corporate limits of the city, the use of which the city
has jurisdiction and authority to regulate, including, but not limited to:
   (A)   Those dedicated to or acquired by the public for public use;
   (B)   Those upon land owned by the city;
   (C)   Those upon land owned by any other governmental unit, but the
regulation of the use of which has been given to the city; and
   (D)   Those upon private property the regulation of the use of which has
been given to the city.
(Prior Code, § 15-102)
§ 70.04 APPLICATION TO ANIMAL-DRAWN VEHICLES.
   Every person propelling any pushcart or riding an animal upon a roadway and
every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle shall be subject to the
provisions of Title VII applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except for
those provisions of Title VII which by their very nature can have no
application.
(Prior Code, § 15-111)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-104
§ 70.05 INSURANCE OR CERTIFICATE REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions apply unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
      COMPULSORY INSURANCE LAW. The law requiring liability insurance in
conjunction with the operation of a motor vehicle in the state as found in 47
O.S. § 7-606 and Title 47, Oklahoma Statutes, Art. VI, Ch. 7, being the
Oklahoma Temporary Motorist Liability Plan, 47 O.S. §§ 7-621 through 7-628.
      OPERATOR’S POLICY. An operator’s policy of liability insurance which
shall insure the named person against loss from the liability imposed upon him
or her by law for damages arising out of the operation or use by him or her of
any motor vehicle not owned by him or her, subject to the same limits of
liability as required in an owner’s policy.
      OWNER’S POLICY. An owner’s policy of liability insurance which:
         (a)   Shall designate by explicit description or by appropriate
reference all vehicles with respect to which coverage is thereby to be granted;
         (b)   Shall insure the person named therein, and insure any other
person, except as provided in division (c) below, using an insured vehicle with
the express or implied permission of the named insured, against loss from the
liability imposed by law for damages arising out of the ownership, maintenance,
operation or use of such vehicle;
         (c)   May provide for exclusions from coverage in accordance with
existing laws; and
         (d)   Shall be issued by an authorized carrier providing coverage in
accordance with 47 O.S. § 7-204.
      SECURITY.
         (a)   A policy or bond meeting the requirements of 47 O.S. § 7-204;
         (b)   A deposit of cash or securities having the equivalency of limits
required under 47 O.S. § 7-204 as acceptable limits for a policy or bond; or
         (c)   Self-insurance, pursuant to the provisions of 47 O.S. § 7-503,
having the equivalency of limits required under 47 O.S. § 7-204 as acceptable
limits for a policy or bond.
      SECURITY VERIFICATION FORM. A form, approved by the State Board for
Property and Casualty Rates, verifying the existence of security required by
the State Compulsory Insurance Law.
   (B)   Owner requirements. The owner of a motor vehicle registered in the
state and operating the vehicle within the city’s boundaries shall carry in
such vehicle at all times a current owner’s security verification form listing
the vehicle, or an equivalent form which has been used by the State Department
of Public Safety, which shall be produced by any driver thereof upon request
for inspection by any law enforcement officer, and, in the case of a collision,
the form shall be shown upon request to any person affected by the collision.
   (C)   Operator requirements. Every operator of a motor vehicle registered in
the state shall, while operating or using such vehicle within the city’s
boundaries, carry either an operator’s or an owner’s security verification form
issued by a carrier, providing the operator is not excluded from coverage
thereon, or an equivalent form issued by the Department of Public Safety,
reflecting liability coverage.
   (D)   Exceptions. The following shall not be required to carry an owner’s or
operator’s security verification form, or an equivalent form from the
Department, during operation of the vehicle and shall not be required to
surrender such form for vehicle registration purposes:
      (1)   Any vehicle owned or leased by the federal or state government, or
any agency or political subdivision thereof;
      (2)   Any vehicle bearing the name, symbol or logo of the business,
corporation or utility on the exterior and which is in compliance with the
Compulsory Insurance Law according to the records of the Department of Public
Safety which reflect a deposit, bond, self-insurance or fleet policy;
      (3)   Any vehicle authorized for operation under a permit number issued
by the Interstate Commerce Commission or the State Corporation Commission;
      (4)   Any licensed taxicab; and
      (5)   Any vehicle owned by a licensed motor vehicle dealer.
(Prior Code, § 15-126) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.06 VEHICLE EQUIPMENT GENERALLY.
   (A)   Every vehicle operated upon the streets of the city shall be equipped
as required by law.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Operate a vehicle which is not equipped as required by law upon a
street of the city;
      (2)   Fail to use such equipment in the manner required by law, or to use
it in a manner prohibited by law; or
      (3)   Operate a vehicle which has equipment prohibited by law upon a
street in the city.
(Prior Code, § 15-103) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Equipment of vehicles, see 47 O.S. §§ 12-101 et seq.
§ 70.07 SIZE, WEIGHT OF VEHICLES; VEHICLES MORE THAN TEN TONS.
   No person shall drive on or convey through any street any vehicle the width,
height, length, weight or load of which exceeds that authorized by state law,
except in accordance with a permit issued by state authority or by the Police
Chief. No vehicle weighing more than ten tons shall be operated upon the
streets, alleys and other public ways within the city, except on state
highways.
(Prior Code, § 15-104) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Size, weight, load of vehicles, see 47 O.S. §§ 14-101 et seq.
§ 70.08 OPENING AND CLOSING VEHICLE DOORS.
   No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available to
moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, nor shall any
person leave a door open on the side of a motor vehicle available to moving
traffic for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload
passengers.
(Prior Code, § 15-107) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-1105
§ 70.09 BOARDING AND ALIGHTING FROM VEHICLES.
   No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in
motion.
(Prior Code, § 15-108) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.10 RIDING UNLAWFULLY ON PORTIONS OF VEHICLE.
   (A)   No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not
designed or intended for the use of passengers.
   (B)   This provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary
discharge of a duty, or to persons riding within truck bodies in spaces
intended for merchandise.
(Prior Code, § 15-109) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.11 SECURING LOADS.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any street or alley unless the
vehicle is so constructed or loaded so as to prevent any of its load from
dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that sand or
salt may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction or water or other
substances may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or maintaining the
roadway.
   (B)   No person shall operate on any street or alley any vehicle with any
load unless the load, and any covering thereon, is securely fastened so as to
prevent the covering or load from becoming loose, detached or in any manner a
hazard to other users of the street or alley.
   (C)   This section shall not apply to trucks loaded only with livestock,
poultry or agricultural products, except for baled agricultural products, but
any such truck shall be constructed or loaded so as to prevent the livestock or
poultry from escaping therefrom.
(Prior Code, § 15-105) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.12 WORKING ON STREETS; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   City employees or contractors, while repairing or improving the
streets of the city, and utility company personnel, when installing, improving
or repairing lines or other utility facilities in the streets, are hereby
authorized, as necessary and subject to control by the Council, to close any
street or section thereof to traffic during such repair, maintenance or
construction. In exercising such authority, the employees, personnel or
contractors shall erect or cause to be erected proper control devices and
barricades to warn and notify the public that the street has been closed to
traffic.
   (B)   When any street has been closed to traffic under the provisions of
division (A) above and traffic- control devices or barricades have been
erected, it is unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle through, under,
over or around the traffic-control devices or barricades or to otherwise enter
the closed area. The provisions of this division (B) shall not apply to persons
while engaged in the construction, maintenance and repair, nor to persons
entering therein for the protection of lives or property. Persons having their
places of residence or places of business within the closed area may travel,
when possible to do so, through the area at their own risk.
   (C)   Whenever construction, repair or maintenance of any street, utility
line or facility is being performed under traffic, the employees, personnel or
contractors concerned shall erect or cause to be erected traffic-control
devices to warn and guide the public. Every person using the street shall obey
all signs, signals, markings, flagpersons or other traffic-control devices
which are placed to regulate, control and guide traffic through the
construction or maintenance area.
(Prior Code, § 15-112) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.13 AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   The provisions of Title VII shall not apply to the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle when responding to an emergency call, or when in
the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, or when responding
to, but not upon returning from, a fire alarm.
      (2)   The exemptions herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle
shall apply only when the driver of the vehicle sounds an audible signal by
bell, siren or exhaust whistle, as may be reasonably necessary, while in
motion, and when the vehicle is equipped with at least one lighted lamp
displaying a red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a
distance of 500 feet to the front of the vehicle, except that an authorized
emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle need not be equipped with or
display a red light visible from in front of the vehicle.
   (B)   These provisions shall not relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of
his or her reckless disregard for the safety of others.
(Prior Code, § 15-113) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-106
§ 70.14 APPROACH OF AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE; DRIVER RESPONSE.
   Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making use of
audible and visual signals meeting the requirements of the laws of the state,
or of a police vehicle properly and lawfully making use of an audible signal
only, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and
immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to, the
right-hand edge or curb of the roadway clear of any intersection, and shall
stop and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle has
passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer.
(Prior Code, § 15-114) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-405
§ 70.15 FOLLOWING FIRE APPARATUS PROHIBITED.
   The driver of any vehicle, other than when on official business, shall not
follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than 500
feet nor drive into or park such vehicle within the block where a fire
apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
(Prior Code, § 15-115) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-1108(a)
§ 70.16 CROSSING FIRE HOSE RESTRICTED.
   No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the Fire Department
when laid down on any street or private driveway to be used at any fire or
alarm of fire without the consent of the Fire Department official in command.
(Prior Code, § 15-116) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-1109
§ 70.17 ACCIDENTS; DUTY TO STOP; LEAVING SCENE OF ACCIDENT.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury
to or the death of any person or damage to any vehicle or property shall
immediately stop his or her vehicle at the scene of such accident, or as close
thereto as possible, and return to and remain at the scene of the accident
until he or she has given his or her name and address and the registration of
his or her vehicle, and shall exhibit his or her driver’s license to the person
injured or to the driver or occupant of or person attending any vehicle
collided with upon request, and shall render to any person injured in such
accident reasonable assistance, including the carrying of, or making
arrangements for the carrying of, such person to a physician, surgeon or
hospital for medical and surgical treatment if it is apparent that this
treatment is necessary, or if such is requested by the injured person. Each
such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is necessary.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle which is in any manner involved in an accident
resulting in bodily injury to or the death of any person, or in which it is
apparent that damage to one vehicle or to the property is in excess of $300,
shall, as soon as practicable, report such accident to a police officer or to
the Police Department. If a driver makes out a written report of the accident
in the office of the Police Department as soon as practicable after the
accident, which report is to be forwarded to the State Department of Public
Safety in accordance with state law, then the driver shall be deemed to be in
compliance with this section.
(Prior Code, § 15-118) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Accident reports, see 47 O.S. §§ 10-101 et seq.
§ 70.18 AUTHORIZING OR PERMITTING VIOLATIONS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall authorize or knowingly permit a vehicle owned by him
or her, registered in his or her name or under his or her control to be driven,
parked or stopped in violation of any provision of Title VII.
   (B)   No parent of any child or guardian of any ward shall cause, authorize
or knowingly permit such child or ward to violate any provision of Title VII.
(Prior Code, § 15-110) Penalty, see §
70.99
ADMINISTRATION
§ 70.30 DUTY OF POLICE.
   (A)   The Police Department shall have the power to enforce the street
traffic regulations of the city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to
street traffic in the city, to make arrests for traffic violations, to
investigate accidents and to cooperate with the officers of the city in the
administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve
traffic conditions.
   (B)   Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene of a fire or other
emergency, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic there or in the
immediate vicinity.
(Prior Code, § 15-117)
§ 70.31 INSPECTION OF VEHICLES BY OFFICERS.
   Police officers have authority to inspect and test any vehicle upon the
streets of the city at any time to determine whether it is safe, whether it is
properly equipped and whether its equipment is in proper adjustment or repair.
(Prior Code, § 15-106)
§ 70.32 ISSUANCE OF CITATION TAGS.
   (A)   The Police Chief is hereby authorized and directed to supply police
officers with citation tags in sets, each set consisting of an original and at
least two duplicate copies, for the purpose of giving notice to persons
violating any provision of Title VII.
   (B)   Notice may be given by delivering the tag to the violator or by
affixing it to the vehicle involved in the violation.
   (C)   Each citation tag shall direct the violator to appear and to present
such tag at a designated place on or before a date and hour specified thereon.
Each tag shall bear the registration number of the vehicle.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to abridge the power of a
police officer to arrest any violator and take him or her into custody.
   (E)   The City Council may require that police officers use citation tags
furnished by the Finance Department and that such tags are serially numbered,
and may regulate the use and handling of the citation tags.
(Prior Code, § 15-119)
§ 70.33 FAILURE TO OBEY TRAFFIC CITATION.
   It is unlawful and an offense for any person to violate his or her written
promise to appear given to an officer upon the issuance of a traffic citation
regardless of the disposition of the charge for which such citation was
originally issued.
(Prior Code, § 15-120) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.34 FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH TRAFFIC CITATION ATTACHED TO PARKED VEHICLE.
   If a violator of the restrictions on stopping, standing or parking under the
traffic laws or ordinances does not appear in response to a traffic citation
affixed to such motor vehicle within a period of five days, then the Clerk of
the Municipal Court may send to the owner of the motor vehicle to which the
traffic citation was affixed a letter informing him or her of the violation and
warning him or her that in the event that such letter is disregarded for a
period of five days, a warrant of arrest may be issued. On any occasion where
two or more such traffic citations have been affixed on the same motor vehicle
and the traffic citations have been disregarded, a warrant of arrest may be
issued without sending the letter provided in this section.
(Prior Code, § 15-121) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.35 ILLEGAL CANCELLATION OF TRAFFIC CITATION.
   It is unlawful for any person to cancel or to solicit the cancellation of
any traffic citation in any manner other than as is provided by this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 15-122) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.36 DISPOSITION AND RECORDS OF TRAFFIC CITATIONS, WARRANTS AND COMPLAINTS.
   (A)   Every police officer, upon issuing a traffic citation to an alleged
violator of any provision of the motor vehicle laws of the state or any traffic
law of the city, shall deposit the original and a duplicate copy of the
citation with his or her immediate superior officer, who shall cause the
original to be delivered to the Municipal Court.
   (B)   Upon the filing of the original citation in the Municipal Court, the
citation may be disposed of only by trial in the Court or by other official
action by a judge of the Court, including by forfeiture of bail or payment of a
fine.
   (C)   The Police Chief shall maintain a record of all warrants issued by the
Municipal Court which are delivered to the Police Department for service, and
of the final disposition of the warrants.
   (D)   No member of the Police Department or other officer or public employee
shall dispose of, alter or deface a traffic citation, or any copy thereof, or
the record of the issuance or disposition of any traffic citation, complaint or
warrant in a manner other than as required in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 15-123) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.37 COURT RECORDS, ABSTRACT TO BE SENT TO STATE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC
SAFETY.
   (A)   The Municipal Court Clerk shall keep a record of every traffic
citation deposited with or presented to the Court and shall keep a record of
every official action by the Court or its Traffic Violations Bureau in
reference thereto, including, but not limited to, a record of every conviction,
forfeiture of bail and judgment of acquittal and the amount of fine or
forfeiture.
   (B)   Within ten days after the conviction or forfeiture of bail of a person
upon a charge of violating any provision of this chapter or other law
regulating the operation of vehicles on highways, the municipal judge or clerk
of the court in which the conviction was had or the bail was forfeited shall
prepare and immediately forward to the State Department of Public Safety a
certified abstract of the court’s record of the case. An abstract need not be
made of any conviction involving the illegal parking or standing of a vehicle.
   (C)   The abstract must be made upon a form furnished by the State
Department of Public Safety, and shall include the name and address of the
party charged, the number of his or her operator’s or chauffeur’s license, the
registration number of the vehicle involved, the nature of the offense, the
date of the hearing, the plea, the judgment, whether bail was forfeited and the
amount of the fine or forfeiture.
(Prior Code, § 15-124)
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of Title VII for which no specific
penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99(A) of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   An owner or operator who fails to produce for inspection a valid
and current security verification form, or an equivalent form which has been
issued by the Department, as per §
70.05 of this chapter upon the request of any peace officer of the Department
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a
fine as provided in §
10.99(A) of this code.
      (2)   A sentence imposed for any violation of §
70.05 of this chapter may be suspended or deferred in whole or in part by the
Court.
      (3)   Any person producing proof in court that a current security
verification form, or equivalent form which has been issued by the Department,
reflecting the liability coverage for such person was in force as per §
70.05 of this chapter at the time of the alleged offense shall be entitled to a
dismissal of such charge.
      (4)   Upon conviction, bond forfeiture or deferral of sentence, the Court
Clerk shall forward an abstract to the State Department of Public Safety within
ten days reflecting the action taken by the Court.
(Prior Code, § 15-126)
   (C)   Any person failing to stop or to comply with any of the requirements
of §
70.17 of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be fined as provided in §
10.99(A) of this code.
(Prior Code, § 15-118)
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC CONTROL
Section
   
71.01   Obedience to devices
   
71.02   Interference with devices, signs or signals
   
71.03   Necessity of signs for enforcement
   
71.04   Presumption of legality
   
71.05   Ratification of existing devices
   
71.06   Colors of lights in traffic-control signals
   
71.07   Flashing signals; meaning and procedures
   
71.08   Stop sign procedures
   
71.09   Yield sign procedures
   
71.10   Driving within traffic lanes
   
71.11   One-way street or alley designation
   
71.12   Through street designation; signage requirements
§ 71.01 OBEDIENCE TO DEVICES.
   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official
traffic-control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the
provisions of Title VII unless otherwise directed by a traffic or police
officer, subject to the exceptions granted to the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle in Title VII.
(Prior Code, § 15-301) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-201(a)
§ 71.02 INTERFERENCE WITH DEVICES, SIGNS OR SIGNALS.
   No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter,
deface, injure, knock down or remove any official traffic-control device, any
railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon, or any
other part thereof.
(Prior Code, § 15-303) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-207
§ 71.03 NECESSITY OF SIGNS FOR ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   No provision of Title VII for which official traffic-control devices
are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and
place of the alleged violation, an official device is not in proper position
and sufficiently legible so as to be seen by an ordinarily-observant person.
   (B)   Whenever a particular section does not state that official traffic-
control devices are required, such section shall be effective even though no
devices are erected or in place.
(Prior Code, § 15-302)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-201(b)
§ 71.04 PRESUMPTION OF LEGALITY.
   (A)   Whenever official traffic-control devices are placed in position
approximately conforming to the requirements of this chapter, such devices
shall be presumed to have been so placed by the official act or direction of
lawful authority unless the contrary shall be established by competent
evidence.
   (B)   Any official traffic-control device placed pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter and purporting to conform to the lawful requirements pertaining
to such devices shall be presumed to comply with the requirements of this
chapter unless the contrary shall be established by competent evidence.
(Prior Code, § 15-304)
§ 71.05 RATIFICATION OF EXISTING DEVICES.
   All traffic-control signs, signals, devices and markings placed or erected
prior to the adoption of Title VII and in use for the purpose of regulating,
warning or guiding traffic are hereby affirmed, ratified and declared to be
official traffic-control devices, provided that such traffic-control devices
are not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter or state law.
(Prior Code, § 15-305)
§ 71.06 COLORS OF LIGHTS IN TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNALS.
   (A)   Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting
different colored lights, or colored lighted arrows, successively one at a time
or in combination, only the colors green, red and yellow shall be used, except
for special pedestrian signals carrying a word legend.
   (B)   These lights shall indicate appropriate action and apply to drivers of
vehicles and pedestrians as provided by applicable state law.
(Prior Code, § 15-306)
§ 71.07 FLASHING SIGNALS; MEANING AND PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Whenever an illuminated, flashing red or yellow signal is used in a
traffic sign or signal, it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as
follows.
      (1)   Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated with
rapid, intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the
nearest crosswalk at an intersection, or at a limit line, when marked, or if
none, then before entering the intersection. The right to proceed shall be
subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.
      (2)   Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated
with rapid, intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the
intersection or past such signal only with caution.
   (B)   This section shall not apply at railroad grade crossings.
(Prior Code, § 15-307) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-204
§ 71.08 STOP SIGN PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-control
signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by
a stop sign shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, shall stop at a clearly
marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting
roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting
roadway before entering the intersection.
   (B)   After having stopped at a stop sign, the driver of a vehicle shall
yield the right-of-way to any vehicle which has entered the intersection from
another street or which is approaching so closely on the street so as to
constitute an immediate hazard. The driver, having so yielded, may proceed, and
the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection shall yield the
right-of-way to the vehicle so proceeding.
(Prior Code, § 15-312) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 47 O.S. §§ 11-403(b) and 11-703(d)
§ 71.09 YIELD SIGN PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign, if required for
safety to stop, shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of
the intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, the driver shall stop
at a clearly marked stop line or, if no stop line, then at the point nearest
the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on
the intersecting roadway.
   (B)   The driver approaching a yield sign shall yield the right-of-way to
any pedestrian legally crossing the roadway on which he or she is driving and
to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another highway so closely
so as to constitute an immediate hazard. The driver, having so yielded, may
proceed, and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection
shall yield to the vehicle so proceeding. Provided, however, if such driver is
involved in a collision with a pedestrian in a crosswalk or a vehicle in the
intersection after driving past a yield sign without stopping, then such
collision shall be deemed prima facie evidence of his or her failure to yield
the right-of-way.   
(Prior Code, § 15-313) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 47 O.S. §§ 11-403(c) and 11-703(c)
§ 71.10 DRIVING WITHIN TRAFFIC LANES.
   (A)   Where traffic lanes have been marked, it shall be unlawful for the
driver of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the
boundaries of any such lane, except when lawfully passing another vehicle, or
preparatory to making a lawful turning movement, or as otherwise authorized by
ordinance.
   (B)   Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked
lanes for traffic, the following rules, in addition to all others consistent
herewith, shall apply.
      (1)   A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely within
a single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has first
ascertained that such movement can be made with safety.
      (2)   Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes, a vehicle shall
not be driven in the center lane except when overtaking and passing another
vehicle where the roadway is clearly visible and such center lane is clear of
traffic within a safe distance, or in preparation for a left turn, or where
such center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the
direction the vehicle is proceeding and is signposted to give notice of such
allocation.
      (3)   Official signs may be erected directing slow-moving traffic to use
a designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a
particular direction regardless of the center of the roadway, and drivers of
vehicles shall obey the directions of every such sign.
(Prior Code, § 15-308) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-309
§ 71.11 ONE-WAY STREET OR ALLEY DESIGNATION.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the city designates any one-
way street or alley, the appropriate city personnel shall place and maintain
signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless
the signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic
movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the
opposite direction is prohibited.
   (B)   Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys designated
as one-way streets or alleys, vehicular traffic shall move only in the
indicated direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected
and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction
is prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 15-309) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 47 O.S. §§ 11-308 and 15-102(a)
§ 71.12 THROUGH STREET DESIGNATION; SIGNAGE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The Council, by motion or resolution, may designate any street or part
of a street a through street.
(Prior Code, § 15-310)
   (B)   Whenever a through street is designated by the Council, the
appropriate city personnel shall be directed to place and maintain a stop sign
or, on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation at any
intersection, a yield sign on each and every street intersecting such through
street unless traffic at any such intersection is controlled at all times by
traffic-control signals.
(Prior Code, § 15-311)
Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to designate through streets, see 47 O.S. § 15-108
CHAPTER 72: VEHICLE OPERATION
Section
General Requirements
   
72.01   Operation of vehicles generally
   
72.02   Driver’s license required
   
72.03   Vehicle license required
   
72.04   Display of inspection sticker
   
72.05   Seat belts and child passenger restraints required
   
72.06   Starting a parked vehicle
   
72.07   Limitations on backing vehicle
   
72.08   Emerging from alley, driveway or building
   
72.09   Driving on right side of roadway; exceptions
   
72.10   Right-of-way generally
   
72.11   Vehicle turning left
   
72.12   Driving on sidewalk
   
72.13   Corner cutting
   
72.14   Reckless driving
   
72.15   Texting while driving
   
72.16   Driving while impaired or under the influence
   
72.17   Engine or compression brakes prohibited
Turning and Signaling
   
72.30   Intersections; required position, method of turning
   
72.31   Turns and U-turns
   
72.32   Signals required for turning, stopping
Speeding
   
72.45   Speed regulations generally
   
72.46   Maximum speed limit generally
   
72.47   School zones; speed, designation
 
   
72.99   Penalty
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
§ 72.01 OPERATION OF VEHICLES GENERALLY.
   Every person operating a vehicle in the city shall at all times operate the
vehicle in a prudent and careful manner and in compliance with the laws of the
city and state, having due regard for other vehicles, the rights of pedestrians
and the property of others.
(Prior Code, § 15-201) Penalty, see §
72.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 47 O.S. §§ 11-101 et seq.
§ 72.02 DRIVER’S LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person who does not have a driver’s license, as
required by state law for the operation of a vehicle upon the state highways,
to operate a motor vehicle within the city, or to operate a motor vehicle
within the city in violation of any restriction applied to the driver’s
license.
(Prior Code, § 15-202) Penalty, see §
72.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 47 O.S. §§ 6-101 et seq.
§ 72.03 VEHICLE LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall drive, propel, move or park on the streets of the city any
motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer unless the motor vehicle, trailer or
semitrailer is licensed as required by state law and the license is
conspicuously displayed thereon.
(Prior Code, § 15-203) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.04 DISPLAY OF INSPECTION STICKER.
   No motor vehicle shall be operated on the streets of the city which does not
have displayed thereon an official inspection sticker as required.
(Prior Code, § 15-205) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.05 SEAT BELTS AND CHILD PASSENGER RESTRAINTS REQUIRED.
   (A)   (1)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition
applies unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
         PASSENGER CAR. Shall mean VEHICLE as defined in 47 O.S. § 1102, except
that PASSENGER CAR shall not include trucks, truck-tractors, recreational
vehicles, motorcycles, motorized bicycles or vehicles used primarily for farm
use and licensed pursuant to the provisions of 47 O.S. § 1134.
      (2)   Every operator and front-seat passenger of a passenger car operated
in the city shall wear a properly adjusted and fastened safety belt system,
required to be installed in the motor vehicle when manufactured pursuant to
federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard 208.
   (B)   Division (A) above shall not apply to an operator or passenger of a
passenger car in which the operator or passenger possesses a written
verification from a physician licensed in the state that he or she is unable to
wear a safety belt system for medical reasons. The issuance of such
verification by a physician in good faith shall not give rise to, nor shall
such physician thereby incur, any liability whatsoever, in damages or
otherwise, to any person injured by reason of such failure to wear a safety
seat belt system.
   (C)   Division (A) above shall not apply to an operator of a motor vehicle
who is a route carrier of the U.S. Postal Service.
   (D)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any vehicle that is
not required to be equipped with seat belts under state or federal laws, or to
emergency vehicles, or to children who, for medical reasons, are unable to be
placed in such devices, or where the child weighs more than 40 pounds and is
being transported in a back seat in a vehicle that is not equipped with
combination lap and safety belts.
   (E)   Every driver, while transporting a child under the age of six years in
a motor vehicle on the roadways, streets or highways within the corporate
limits of the city, shall, for the purpose of protecting said child, properly
use a CHILD SUPPORT RESTRAINT SYSTEM, being an infant or child passenger
restraint system that meets the federal standards set by 49 C.F.R. § 571.213,
as amended.
   (F)   Children at least six years of age but younger than 13 shall be
protected by a child passenger restraint system or a seat belt.
   (G)   Law enforcement officers are authorized to stop a vehicle if it
appears that the driver of the vehicle is violating the provisions of this
section and to give an oral warning to said driver. The warning shall advise
the driver of the dangers resulting from the failure to install and utilize
child passenger restraint systems or seat belts in the motor vehicle.
   (H)   The failure of a driver to equip and utilize such a seat belt or child
safety restraint system shall not be admissible in any civil action for
damages, or in any manner to attempt to prove aggravation of damages in such a
suit.
   (I)   The Department of Public Safety shall not record or assess points for
a violation of this section on any license holder’s traffic record maintained
by the Department.
(Prior Code, § 15-216) (Ord. 2005-6, passed 11-7-2005) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.06 STARTING A PARKED VEHICLE.
   No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing or parked unless
and until such movement can be made in safety.
(Prior Code, § 15-206) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.07 LIMITATIONS ON BACKING VEHICLE.
   The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement can be
made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic.
(Prior Code, § 15-213) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.08 EMERGING FROM ALLEY, DRIVEWAY OR BUILDING.
   The driver of a vehicle within a business or residence district emerging
from an alley, driveway or building shall stop the vehicle immediately prior to
driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway
or driveway and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian as may be
necessary to avoid collision, and, upon entering the roadway, shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway.
(Prior Code, § 15-215) Penalty, see §
72.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-704
§ 72.09 DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven upon
the right half of the roadway, except:
      (1)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction under the rules governing such movement; or
      (2)   When the right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under
construction or repair.
   (B)   Upon all roadways, any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal
speed of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then existing
shall be driven in the right-hand lane, when available for traffic, or as close
as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway, except when
overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction or when
preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or
driveway.
(Prior Code, § 15-207) Penalty, see §
72.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-301
§ 72.10 RIGHT-OF-WAY GENERALLY.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection shall yield the
right-of-way to a vehicle which has entered the intersection from a different
street, provided that the driver of a vehicle on a street which is not a state
or federal highway approaching an intersection with a state or federal highway
shall stop and yield the right-of-way to a vehicle which has entered the
intersection or which is so close thereto so as to constitute an immediate
hazard.
   (B)   When two vehicles enter or approach an intersection from different
highways at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left
shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right.
(Prior Code, § 15-208) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.11 VEHICLE TURNING LEFT.
   The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn left shall
yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction
which is within the intersection or so close thereto so as to constitute an
immediate hazard. The driver, having so yielded and having given a signal when
and as required by Title VII, may make such left turn, and the drivers of all
other vehicles approaching the intersection from such opposite direction shall
yield the right-of-way to the vehicle making the left turn.
(Prior Code, § 15-209) Penalty, see §
72.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-402
§ 72.12 DRIVING ON SIDEWALK.
   The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area, except for
at a permanent or temporary driveway.
(Prior Code, § 15-212) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.13 CORNER CUTTING.
   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle through any service drive or upon any
parking facility, except with the intent of availing himself or herself of the
services offered on the premises served by the service drive or parking
facility.
   (B)   No person shall drive a vehicle through any service drive or across
any parking facility for the purpose of shortening his or her travel distance,
avoiding a traffic-control device, avoiding using the streets for travel or
turning a vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction on the street from
which it entered the drive.
(Prior Code, § 15-214) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.14 RECKLESS DRIVING.
   It is unlawful for any person to drive recklessly in the city. Reckless
driving shall include any person who drives a motor vehicle in willful or
wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property or at a heedless or
dangerous rate of speed.
(Prior Code, § 15-210) Penalty, see §
72.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-901
§ 72.15 TEXTING WHILE DRIVING.
   (A)   The operation of a handheld communication device for the purpose of
manually composing, sending or reading a text message while operating a motor
vehicle on the streets or highways of the city is prohibited. There shall
specifically exist an exception to such provision allowing the operation of
such a handheld electronic communication device at any time when an emergency
situation exists whereby it would be necessary for the operator of a motor
vehicle to manually text, compose, send or read a text message in any emergency
situation for the purpose of contacting an emergency response operator, 911
operator, medical provider, physician, hospital, ambulance, fire department or
law enforcement agency, where such contact is for the sole emergency purpose
stated herein.
   (B)   Specifically excepted from the provisions of this section is the
operation of any electronic device that allows for the transmission of such
messages by means of a totally hands-free device.
(Ord. 2015-05, passed 11-24-2015) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.16 DRIVING WHILE IMPAIRED OR UNDER THE INFLUENCE.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person who is under the influence of
intoxicating liquor to drive, operate or be in actual physical control of any
motor vehicle within the city.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person whose ability to drive, operate or be in
actual physical control of any motor vehicle is impaired due to the consumption
of intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beverages.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person who is a habitual user of or under the
influence of any narcotic, drug, barbiturate, amphetamine or marijuana, or who
is under the influence of any other drug to a degree which renders him or her
incapable of safely driving a motor vehicle, to drive a motor vehicle within
the city. The fact that any person charged with a violation of this division
(C) is or has been lawfully entitled to use such narcotic drug, barbiturate,
amphetamine, marijuana or other drug shall not constitute a defense against any
charge of violating this division (C).
(Prior Code, § 15-211) Penalty, see §
72.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 47 O.S. §§ 11-751 and 11-902
§ 72.17 ENGINE OR COMPRESSION BRAKES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The use of any device that is used in the nature of an engine brake or
compression brake system within the corporate limits of the city is hereby
declared unlawful and a violation of the ordinances of said city because of the
undue, excessive and unacceptable noise produced by the use of such devices.
   (B)   Emergency vehicles so equipped are specifically excepted from the
provisions of this section.
(Prior Code, § 15-217) (Ord. 2006-04, passed 5-1-2006) Penalty, see §
72.99
TURNING AND SIGNALING
§ 72.30 INTERSECTIONS; REQUIRED POSITION, METHOD OF TURNING.
   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as
follows.
   (A)   Right turns. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall
be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
   (B)   Left turns on two-way roadways. At any intersection where traffic is
permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the intersection,
an approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of
the roadway nearest the center line thereof and by passing to the right of such
center line where it enters the intersection, and, after entering the
intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to
the right of the center line of the roadway being entered. Whenever
practicable, the left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to
the left of the center of the intersection.
(Prior Code, § 15-250) Penalty, see §
72.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-601
§ 72.31 TURNS AND U-TURNS.
   (A)   The Council may determine those intersections at which drivers of
vehicles shall not make a right, left or U-turn and shall place proper signs at
such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain
hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event, the same shall
be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are
permitted.
   (B)   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right, left
or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of
any such sign.
(Prior Code, § 15-251) Penalty, see §
72.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to prohibit turning at intersections, see 47 O.S. § 15-102(a)
§ 72.32 SIGNALS REQUIRED FOR TURNING, STOPPING.
   (A)   No person shall turn a vehicle to the right or left except upon giving
a signal of intention, as provided in this section, in the event that any other
traffic may be affected by such movement.
   (B)   A signal of intention to turn right or left, when required, shall be
given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by the
vehicle before turning.
   (C)   No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle
except upon the giving of a signal of intention, as provided herein, to the
driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is an opportunity to
give such signal.
(Prior Code, § 15-252) Penalty, see §
72.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-604
SPEEDING
§ 72.45 SPEED REGULATIONS GENERALLY.
   (A)   Any person driving a vehicle on a street shall drive the same at a
careful and prudent speed not greater than nor less than is reasonable and
proper, having due regard to the traffic, surface and width of the street and
any other condition then existing. No person shall drive any vehicle upon a
highway at a speed greater than that which will permit him or her to bring it
to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead.
   (B)   The driver of every vehicle shall, consistent with the requirements of
division (A) above, drive at an appropriate reduced speed when approaching and
crossing an intersection or railway grade crossing, when approaching and going
around a curve, when approaching a hillcrest, when driving upon any narrow or
winding roadway and when a special hazard exists with respect to pedestrians or
other traffic, or by reason of weather or highway conditions.
(Prior Code, § 15-220) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.46 MAXIMUM SPEED LIMIT GENERALLY.
   No vehicle, unless specifically authorized by some other section of this
code or by posted signs, shall be driven at a speed greater than 25 mph upon
any street within the city. The Council may determine that certain other speed
regulations shall be applicable upon specified streets in certain areas, in
which event, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a speed
in excess of any speed so declared when signs are in place giving notice
thereof.
(Prior Code, § 15-221) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.47 SCHOOL ZONES; SPEED, DESIGNATION.
   No person shall operate a motor vehicle in excess of 15 mph between the
hours or times as posted over or upon any portion of the public streets of the
city which have been designated as school zones and marked as school zones in
the manner provided by the statutes and regulations of the state.
(Prior Code, § 15-222) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
70.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   The fine and court costs for violating the provisions of §
72.05(A) of this chapter shall not exceed $20.
      (2)   Any person convicted of violating §
72.05(E) or (F) of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of $50 and shall
pay all court costs thereof. The fine shall be suspended, and court costs
limited to the sum of $15, in the case of a first offense upon the proof of
purchase or acquisition by loan of a child passenger restraint system meeting
the standards of the federal act referenced in §
72.05 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 15-216)
   (C)   The penalty for using a handheld electronic device for purposes
prohibited as per §
72.15 of this chapter at any time the motor vehicle is in motion shall be a
fine in the amount of $100, in conformity with 47 O.S. § 11-901.
   (D)   A violation of §
72.17 of this chapter shall be punished in accordance with §
70.99 of this code.
(Prior Code, § 15-217)
(Ord. 2005-6, passed 11-7-2005; Ord. 2015-05, passed 11-24-2015)
CHAPTER 73: PARKING AND LOADING
Section
   
73.01   Unlicensed vehicles unlawful to park
   
73.02   Obstructing traffic or driveways prohibited
   
73.03   Park within indicated space
   
73.04   Parallel parking; proximity to curb
   
73.05   Angle parking; designation, rules
   
73.06   Loading zones; designation; stopping, standing and parking
   
73.07   Handicapped parking; enforcement on public or private property
   
73.08   Truck and other large vehicle parking restrictions
   
73.09   Presumption in reference to illegal parking
 
   
73.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Prohibited parking in specific areas, see
Ch. 77
   Truck parking area, see
Ch. 77
§ 73.01 UNLICENSED VEHICLES UNLAWFUL TO PARK.
   It is unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle not bearing a
current motor vehicle license tag or tags on any street or highway within the
city.
(Prior Code, § 15-204) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.02 OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC OR DRIVEWAYS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall park any vehicle upon a street or alley in such a
manner or under such conditions so as to leave available less than ten feet of
the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic.
   (B)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within a street or alley
in such a position so as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting
property.
(Prior Code, § 15-230) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.03 PARK WITHIN INDICATED SPACE.
   In an area where parking spaces have been marked off on the surface of the
street, a driver parking a vehicle shall park it within a parking space as thus
marked off and not on or over a line delineating a space.
(Prior Code, § 15-231) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.04 PARALLEL PARKING; PROXIMITY TO CURB.
   Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway shall be so stopped or parked
in the direction of lawful traffic movement, with the curbside wheels of the
vehicle parallel to and within 18 inches of the curb or roadway edge.
(Prior Code, § 15-232) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.05 ANGLE PARKING; DESIGNATION, RULES.
   (A)   (1)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition
applies unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
         ANGLE PARKING. Parking at the curb at approximately a 45-degree angle
between the right side of the vehicle and the curb.
      (2)   The Council may determine upon what streets angle parking is
permitted and shall direct the marking or signing of the streets. Angle parking
shall not be indicated or permitted at any place where passing traffic would
thereby be caused or required to drive upon the left side of the street.
(Prior Code, § 15-233)
   (B)   (1)   On those streets which have been signed or marked for angle
parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the
curb or edge of the roadway indicated by the signs or markings, with the front
of the vehicle directed toward the curb or edge of the roadway.
      (2)   No person shall park or stand a vehicle in angle parking spaces
designated by markings upon the pavement unless the vehicle is positioned
within the confines of an individually marked space.
      (3)   The vehicle shall not be of such length, or positioned in such a
manner, so as to protrude into the street a distance which would cause or
require passing traffic to change lanes or drive on the left side of the
street.
(Prior Code, § 15-234)
Penalty, see §
73.99
Statutory reference:
   Angle parking designation, see 47 O.S. § 11-1004(c)
§ 73.06 LOADING ZONES; DESIGNATION; STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING.
   (A)   The Council may determine the location of passenger and freight curb
loading zones and shall place and maintain appropriate signs indicating the
same and stating the hours during which the provisions of this section are
applicable.
(Prior Code, § 15-236)
   (B)   (1)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or
period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of
passengers in any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during the
hours when the regulations applicable to such curb loading zone are effective,
and then only for a period not to exceed three minutes.
      (2)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or
length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup
and loading of materials in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone
during the hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In
no case shall the stop for the loading and unloading of materials exceed 30
minutes.
      (3)   The driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily at a place
marked as a freight curb loading zone for the purpose of, and while actually
engaged in, loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not
interfere with any motor vehicle used for the transportation of materials which
is waiting to enter or about to enter the zone.
(Prior Code, § 15-237)
Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.07 HANDICAPPED PARKING; ENFORCEMENT ON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   It is unlawful for any person to place or park a motor vehicle in any
parking space on private property accessible to the public and where the public
is invited or on public property that is designated and posted as a reserved
area for the parking of motor vehicles of physically disabled persons unless
such person has a physical disability insignia, as under the provisions of 47
O.S. § 15-112, and such insignia is displayed as provided in 47 O.S. § 15-112
or regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
(Prior Code, § 15-240) Penalty, see §
73.99
Statutory reference:
   Handicapped insignia, application and display on vehicles, see 47 O.S. § 15-
112
§ 73.08 TRUCK AND OTHER LARGE VEHICLE PARKING RESTRICTIONS.
   The parking of trucks, trailers, recreational vehicles, industrial tractors,
mowers and other related equipment, and of any vehicle exceeding two axles, on
any street or alley within a district zoned residential is prohibited, except
for the immediate loading or unloading of persons or materials. No commercial
truck exceeding two axles or in excess of a length of 15 feet, or both, shall
be allowed to park in any area of the city zoned as a residential district.
(Prior Code, § 15-241) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.09 PRESUMPTION IN REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING.
   (A)   In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation
governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular
vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any law or
regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was
at the time of the parking the registered owner of the vehicle, shall
constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of
the vehicle was the person who parked or placed the vehicle at the point where,
and for the time during which, the violation occurred.
   (B)   The presumption in division (A) above shall apply only when the
procedure as prescribed in this chapter has been followed.
(Prior Code, § 15-239)
§ 73.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
70.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of §
73.07 of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punishable as provided in §
70.99 of this code.
(Prior Code, § 15-240)
CHAPTER 74: IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES
Section
   
74.01   Purpose and effect of impoundment provisions
   
74.02   Police authority to impound vehicles
   
74.03   Place of impoundment
   
74.04   Duration of impoundment
   
74.05   Vehicle blocking fire exit or hydrant
   
74.06   Vehicle parked overtime
   
74.07   Vehicle constituting a traffic hazard
   
74.08   Vehicle parked in intersection
   
74.09   Vehicle disabled
   
74.10   Vehicle on bridge
   
74.11   Vehicle illegally trespassing
   
74.12   Driver of vehicle arrested or detained
   
74.13   Vehicles with outstanding traffic citations
   
74.14   Stolen vehicles; recovery by police
   
74.15   Inventory of impounded vehicles
§ 74.01 PURPOSE AND EFFECT OF IMPOUNDMENT PROVISIONS.
   The impoundment of vehicles under authority of the provisions of this
chapter shall be construed as an enforcement procedure for the protection of
the public peace, safety and welfare and the safeguarding of property, and
shall be used generally for the prevention and removal of traffic hazards, the
prevention and abatement of public nuisances arising from traffic law
violations, the protection of public rights in the use of streets and
thoroughfares from obstructions placed and left in derogation of those rights
and for safeguarding and protecting recovered stolen vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 15-501)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 47 O.S. §§ 954A and 955
§ 74.02 POLICE AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND VEHICLES.
   Members of the Police Department are hereby authorized within the limits set
forth in this chapter to impound vehicles under the circumstances hereinafter
enumerated. No impoundment shall be valid unless made under order of an
authorized police officer and in strict adherence with the procedures required
in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 15-504)
§ 74.03 PLACE OF IMPOUNDMENT.
   Every vehicle that is impounded under the provisions of this chapter shall
be removed to the nearest garage or place of safekeeping designated by the City
Council and to no other place.
(Prior Code, § 15-502)
§ 74.04 DURATION OF IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided, any vehicle impounded under the
authority of this chapter shall be stored and held safely until an order for
its release is received from an officer of the Traffic Violations Bureau or
other proper police officer.
   (B)   The order of release of an impounded vehicle shall be conditioned upon
payment by the person to whom the release is issued of all impoundment costs
and accrued storage charges assessed against the vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 15-503)
§ 74.05 VEHICLE BLOCKING FIRE EXIT OR HYDRANT.
   Any vehicle illegally parked in such a manner that it blocks a fire escape
ladder, device or exit or blocks ready access to a fire hydrant shall be
impounded.
(Prior Code, § 15-511) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.06 VEHICLE PARKED OVERTIME.
   Any unattended vehicle which has been parked for more than one hour in
excess of the time allowed for parking in any place shall be impounded, and any
vehicle parked in violation of Title VII regarding more than 24 hours shall be
impounded.
(Prior Code, § 15-510) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.07 VEHICLE CONSTITUTING A TRAFFIC HAZARD.
   A vehicle left unattended upon any street, alley or thoroughfare and parked
illegally so as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal
movement of traffic shall be impounded.
(Prior Code, § 15-508) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.08 VEHICLE PARKED IN INTERSECTION.
   (A)   Any unattended vehicle illegally parked in any street intersection
shall be impounded.
   (B)   A disabled vehicle in an intersection with the person in charge of the
vehicle being present shall be moved out of the intersection and to the nearest
available legal parking space at the street curbing.
(Prior Code, § 15-512) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.09 VEHICLE DISABLED.
   A disabled vehicle upon a street or highway may be impounded under the
following circumstances:
   (A)   If left unattended and improperly parked on a street or highway and it
constitutes a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic;
or
   (B)   If the person in charge of the vehicle is physically incapacitated to
such an extent so as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal and the
vehicle is disabled so as to constitute an obstruction to traffic or a hazard.
(Prior Code, § 15-505) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.10 VEHICLE ON BRIDGE.
   An unattended vehicle left upon any bridge, viaduct or causeway or in any
tube or tunnel, where the vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic or a
hazard, may be impounded.
(Prior Code, § 15-506) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.11 VEHICLE ILLEGALLY TRESPASSING.
   (A)   An unattended vehicle found to be in violation of this section may be
impounded when the required complaint has been properly made and filed as
provided in this section.
   (B)   If a violation of the provisions of this section occurs, the owner or
legal occupant who complains shall sign a complaint against the person parking
the vehicle on the owner’s or legal occupant’s property, or, if the identity of
the person parking the vehicle is unknown, then the complaint may be filed
against the registered owner of the vehicle. The complaint shall be verified
and shall allege that the complaining party is the owner or legal occupant of
the property upon which the vehicle is parked or standing.
   (C)   Upon filing of the complaint by the property owner or legal occupant,
and if there appears to be proper cause to believe the provisions of this
section have been violated, the Police Department shall cause the vehicle to be
impounded from the property and placed in storage.
(Prior Code, § 15-509) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.12 DRIVER OF VEHICLE ARRESTED OR DETAINED.
   Whenever the driver or person in charge of any vehicle is placed under
arrest and taken into custody and detained by police under circumstances which
leave or will leave a vehicle unattended on any street or highway, the vehicle
may be impounded.
(Prior Code, § 15-507)
§ 74.13 VEHICLES WITH OUTSTANDING TRAFFIC CITATIONS.
   Any vehicle for which two or more citations have been issued for violation
of an ordinance, and have not been presented as required, may be impounded if
parked in violation of any provision of Title VII.
(Prior Code, § 15-514) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.14 STOLEN VEHICLES; RECOVERY BY POLICE.
   (A)   Whenever a stolen vehicle is located by police and the registered
owner cannot be found within a reasonable time not exceeding one hour, or
cannot be determined from the registration papers or other identifying media in
the vehicle or from records or information available from reports of stolen
cars, the vehicle may be removed to the nearest authorized place of
impoundment, and the registered owner of the vehicle shall be notified of the
location of the place of impoundment as soon as possible by the Police
Department.
   (B)   If the registered owner is identified, located and notified of the
recovery of the stolen vehicle, the owner shall be given the right to make his
or her own arrangement for the removal of the vehicle within the period of one
hour from the time he or she is actually notified of its recovery, and if the
owner is unable or unwilling to effect the removal within the time specified,
then the vehicle may be impounded.
(Prior Code, § 15-513)
§ 74.15 INVENTORY OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLES.
   Any vehicle impounded for any reason shall be inventoried by two or more
persons for the protection of the owner and his or her property, the protection
of city law enforcement personnel and the protection of the garage or wrecker
service moving or holding the vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 15-515)
CHAPTER 75: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
General Provisions
   
75.01   Roller skates, coasters and the like
Bicycles
   
75.15   Regulations applicable generally
   
75.16   Traffic laws and regulations apply
   
75.17   Obedience to traffic-control devices
   
75.18   Speed limits
   
75.19   Riding on right side of roadway
   
75.20   Riding method and carrying capacity
   
75.21   Riding on sidewalks
   
75.22   Riding abreast
   
75.23   Light and reflector requirements
 
   
75.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 75.01 ROLLER SKATES, COASTERS AND THE LIKE.
   Coasters, roller skates, skateboards, scooters and similar devices are
hereby restricted from use within the immediate downtown area, being defined as
both the surfaced streets and sidewalks from Third to Fifth Streets running
north and south and from Choctaw and Osage Streets running east and west, to
and including all public areas within the same with the exclusion of the city
park area within the fence surrounding the same.
(Prior Code, § 15-410) (Ord. 2000-01, passed 2-7-2000) Penalty, see §
75.99
BICYCLES
§ 75.15 REGULATIONS APPLICABLE GENERALLY.
   It is unlawful for any person to do any act or to fail to perform any act
required by the provisions of this subchapter. The parent of any child or the
guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or
ward to violate any of the provisions of this subchapter. The provisions of
this subchapter are applicable to bicycles operated upon any street or highway
or upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
(Prior Code, § 15-401) Penalty, see §
75.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-1201
§ 75.16 TRAFFIC LAWS AND REGULATIONS APPLY.
   Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the
rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a
vehicle by the laws of the state declaring rules of the road applicable to
vehicles or by the traffic ordinances of the city applicable to the driver of a
vehicle, except as to special regulations in this subchapter and except as to
those provisions of law and ordinances which, by their nature, can have no
application.
(Prior Code, § 15-402)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-1202
§ 75.17 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official
traffic-control signals, signs and other control devices applicable to vehicles
unless otherwise directed by a police officer. Whenever authorized signs are
erected indicating that no right or left or U-turn is permitted, no person
operating a bicycle shall disobey the direction of any such sign, except where
such person dismounts from the bicycle to make any such turn, in which event,
such person shall then obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians. Any
person may walk bicycles, and such person shall then be subject to all laws
applicable to pedestrians.
(Prior Code, § 15-403) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.18 SPEED LIMITS.
   No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and
prudent under the conditions then existing.
(Prior Code, § 15-407) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.19 RIDING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY.
   Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to the
right side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing a
standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.
(Prior Code, § 15-405) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.20 RIDING METHOD AND CARRYING CAPACITY.
   (A)   A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a
permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
   (B)   No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the
number for which it is designed and equipped.
(Prior Code, § 15-404) Penalty, see §
75.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-1203
§ 75.21 RIDING ON SIDEWALKS.
   Bicycles may not be ridden upon any sidewalk within the city.
(Prior Code, § 15-408) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.22 RIDING ABREAST.
   Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two abreast,
except for on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of
bicycles.
(Prior Code, § 15-406) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.23 LIGHT AND REFLECTOR REQUIREMENTS.
   Every bicycle, when in use at nighttime, shall be equipped with a lamp on
the frame, which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least
500 feet to the front, and with a red reflector on the rear of a type approved
by the State Department of Public Safety, which shall be visible from all
distances from 300 to 500 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful
upper beams of the headlamps of a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light
visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in addition to the
red reflector.
(Prior Code, § 15-409) Penalty, see §
75.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-1207(a)
§ 75.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
70.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any violation of §
75.01 of this chapter shall be a violation of the ordinances of the city,
punishable as provided in §
70.99 of this code.
(Prior Code, § 15-410)
(Ord. 2000-01, passed 2-7-2000)
CHAPTER 76: RAILROADS
Section
   
76.01   Definition
   
76.02   Blocking traffic at railroad/roadway intersections
   
76.03   Exceptions
 
   
76.99   Penalty
§ 76.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition applies unless the
context clearly requires a different meaning.
   RAILROADS. The operation of any mechanical or electrical device, vehicle or
series of vehicles on any track or cable device that transports freight,
persons, livestock, materials, oil, gas or any other material through the
corporate limits of the city.
(Ord. 2019-03, passed 8-12-2019)
§ 76.02 BLOCKING TRAFFIC AT RAILROAD/ROADWAY INTERSECTIONS.
   As provided pursuant to state statutes, it shall be unlawful for any
railroad or a corporation, firm or individual operating as such to block
vehicular traffic at any roadway intersection where railroad tracks cross in
the corporate limits of the city for a period of time in excess of ten minutes,
except where the train is moving at a continuous speed in either a forward or
backward direction, or where the train is stopped for an emergency condition,
including accident, derailment, critical mechanical failure, track or bridge
washout, storm, flood or other such emergency situation.
(Ord. 2019-03, passed 8-12-2019) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.03 EXCEPTIONS.
   A one-time exception to the regulation in §
76.02 of this chapter shall be permitted that shall allow for an additional
ten-minute time period of blocking the intersection under the following
situations:
   (A)   Where the train and crew are operating under federal railroad
administration rules and are unable to complete a switching maneuver within the
allotted ten-minute time period;
   (B)   Where a train is stopped to allow for the passage of a second train;
   (C)   Where a train is stopped for a red train light signal; or
   (D)   When a train is separated and uncoupled to prevent a roadway
intersection from being blocked and it takes more than the allotted ten-minute
time limit to recouple the train.
(Ord. 2019-03, passed 8-12-2019)
§ 76.99 PENALTY.
   As provided pursuant to 66 O.S. § 190(B), the fine and penalty for any
violation as provided herein shall be an amount not to exceed the sum of $1,000
per violation. Seventy-five percent of any collected fine shall be deposited in
the General Fund of the municipality, with the remaining 25% to be deposited in
the Corporation Commission Revolving Fund pursuant to 17 O.S. § 180.7.
(Ord. 2019-03, passed 8-12-2019)
CHAPTER 77: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   Prohibited parking in specific areas
   
II.   Truck parking area
SCHEDULE I. PROHIBITED PARKING IN SPECIFIC AREAS.
   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance
with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control
device, no person shall:
   (A)   Stop, stand or park a vehicle:
      (1)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of a street, except as authorized otherwise in this schedule;
      (2)   On a sidewalk;
      (3)   Within an intersection;
      (4)   On a crosswalk;
      (5)   Along or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
      (6)   On any railroad tracks; or
      (7)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping or parking.
   (B)   Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except momentarily
to pick up or discharge a passenger or passengers:
      (1)   In front of a public or private driveway;
      (2)   Within ten feet of a fire hydrant;
      (3)   Within ten feet of a crosswalk at an intersection, except in marked
parking spaces;
      (4)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop sign
or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway;
      (5)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station;
      (6)   At any place where official signs prohibit standing; or
      (7)   On Fifth Street from Lowe Avenue to Broadway.
(Prior Code, § 15-235) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-1003
SCHEDULE II. TRUCK PARKING AREA.
   (A)   Because of the restriction on the parking of large motor vehicles
within the city along the rights- of-way, the city provides accessible and
suitable parking between Main Street and Seventh Street on the railroad right-
of-way on the west side of the railroad track. Large vehicles are required to
utilize this designated area for parking.
(Prior Code, § 15-242)
   (B)   All large vehicles parked in this designated parking area are limited
and restricted to its use for periods of not more than 72 hours per use. Any
vehicle utilizing said parking facility being left unattended for a period in
excess of said 72 hours shall subject said vehicle to ticketing and/or towing
and removal at the owner’s expense.
(Ord. 2021-01, passed 5-10-2021) Penalty, see §
70.99
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
      
92.   HEALTH AND SAFETY; NUISANCES
      
93.   WEEDS, GRASS AND TRASH
      
94.   WRECKED OR INOPERABLE VEHICLES OR TRAILERS
      
95.   PARKS AND RECREATION
      
96.   CEMETERIES
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
90.001   Definitions
   
90.002   Zoning ordinance to prevail
   
90.003   Prohibited animals
   
90.004   Control of animals required; regulations
   
90.005   Running at-large; owners cited; enclosures
   
90.006   Buildings/structures for animals; location
   
90.007   Kennels
   
90.008   Pasturing in public areas illegal
   
90.009   Noisy animals; nuisance; vicious animals
   
90.010   Cruelty to animals unlawful
   
90.011   Poisoning animals unlawful
   
90.012   Encouraging animals to fight unlawful
   
90.013   Investigation of violations by enforcing officers
   
90.014   Records kept by enforcing officers
Potentially Dangerous or Vicious Dogs
   
90.025   Potentially dangerous dogs
   
90.026   Dangerous dogs
   
90.027   Regulations pertaining to potentially dangerous/dangerous dogs
   
90.028   Registration and liability insurance required
   
90.029   Vicious dogs
Licensing and Vaccination
   
90.040   Rabies vaccination required; vaccination certificate; tags
   
90.041   License required
Rabies and Animal Bites
   
90.055   Animal bites; rabies examination; quarantine
   
90.056   Rabies diagnosis; quarantine of city; time limit
   
90.057   Killing or removing rabid animal prohibited
   
90.058   Report of bite cases by medical practitioners, veterinarians
Impoundment
   
90.070   Impoundment; disposition of animals
   
90.071   Redemption, adoption of animals
   
90.072   Breaking pound or interfering with officers unlawful
 
   
90.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.001 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
      ANIMAL. Any horse, mule, donkey, pony, cow, sheep, goat, hog, dog, cat,
rabbit, turkey or other animal or fowl.
      AT-LARGE.
         (a)   Not securely confined by a fence or other means on premises
under the control of, or occupied by, the owner; or
         (b)   Not under the control of the owner, a member of his or her
immediate family over 12 years of age or an agent of the owner by a leash not
more than six feet in length if off the premises of the owner.
      FOWL. Chickens, guineas, geese, ducks and pigeons.
      LIVESTOCK. Cattle (cows, bulls, steers, heifers, calves), horses (mares,
stallions, geldings, ponies), sheep, goats and similar animals.
      OWNER or KEEPER. Any person, group of persons or corporation owning,
keeping, maintaining or harboring, or having care or custody of, an animal or
animals or fowl or birds.
      PROVOKE or PROVOCATION. With respect to an attack by an animal, that the
animal was hit, kicked or struck by a person with an object or part of the
person’s body, or that any part of the animal’s body is pulled, pinched or
squeezed by a person.
      VICIOUS ANIMAL. An animal which has bitten, or attempted to bite, any
person without undue provocation, or which attacks, or barks or growls at and
acts as if it intends to attack or bite, or bites a person or persons when not
unduly provoked, and includes a pit bull.
      WITHOUT PROVOCATION. An animal was not teased, tormented or abused, and
where the animal was not protecting its owner or owner’s property from criminal
activity by the perpetrator of a crime.
   (B) All other words or phrases used herein shall be defined and interpreted
according to their common usage.
(Prior Code, § 4-101) (Ord. 2006-01-01, passed 3-1-2007)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 11 O.S. § 22-115
§ 90.002 ZONING ORDINANCE TO PREVAIL.
   In the case of any conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the
zoning ordinance, the zoning ordinance shall prevail.
(Prior Code, § 4-151) (Ord. 2006-01-01, passed 3-1-2007)
§ 90.003 PROHIBITED ANIMALS.
   (A)   It is unlawful to keep or maintain or to permit to be kept or
maintained in the city any cattle, swine, bull, stallion, mare, gelding, jack,
cow, sheep, goat or any related animal unless otherwise permitted pursuant to
this chapter.
   (B)   Any animal as listed herein may be pastured within the city limits on
the basis of one animal per acre if the animal and surroundings are properly
maintained so as to limit offensive odors and noise.
   (C)   No other animals may be kept within the city limits unless an
exception has been previously applied for and properly approved through the
city.
   (D)   Any animal such as listed herein may be pastured in any area zoned as
agricultural as long as proper steps are taken and maintained to limit
offensive odors and noise.
(Prior Code, § 4-108) (Ord. 2008-05, passed 11-3-2008) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.004 CONTROL OF ANIMALS REQUIRED; REGULATIONS.
   It is unlawful for any owner or person to:
   (A)   Fail to prevent any animal from running at-large within the city;
   (B)   Perform, do or carry out any inhumane treatment against any animal;
   (C)   Keep, possess, own, control, maintain, use or otherwise exercise
dominion over any animal or animals which, by reason of noise, odor or sanitary
conditions, become offensive to a reasonable and prudent person of ordinary
tastes and sensibilities, or which constitute or become a health hazard as
determined by the Health Officer or Animal Control Officer; or
   (D)   Turn any animal at-large or release an animal which is restrained or
confined in an enclosure as required by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 4-103) (Ord. 2006-01-01, passed 3-1-2007) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.005 RUNNING At-LARGE; OWNERS CITED; ENCLOSURES.
   (A)   No owner shall permit any animal, including fowl, owned, harbored or
kept by him or her to be at-large within the city. It is unlawful for any
animal to be at-large within the city.
   (B)   (1)   Any animal running at-large in the city may be taken up and
impounded at the animal shelter.
      (2)   The Animal Control Officer may, at his or her discretion, cite the
owner of such animal to appear in Municipal Court to answer charges of
violation of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 4-102) (Ord. 2006-01-01, passed 3-1-2007) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.006 BUILDINGS/STRUCTURES FOR ANIMALS; LOCATION.
   (A)   Every building or place where any animal or fowl is kept shall be
constructed of such material and in such a manner that it can be kept clean and
sanitary at all times.
   (B)   No kennel or other place where an animal is kept shall be kept closer
than 100 feet to the premises of an apartment, hotel, boarding house,
restaurant, food store or building used for educational, religious or hospital
purposes or a dwelling other than that occupied by the owner or occupant of the
premises upon which the animal is kept.
   (C)   (1)   The Animal Control Officer or Health Officer shall inspect any
structure or place where an animal is kept on his or her own initiative or upon
complaint.
      (2)   He or she may issue any such reasonable order as he or she may deem
necessary to the owner of such animal to cause the animal to be kept as
required in this chapter or in a manner so as not to constitute a nuisance.
      (3)   He or she may make a complaint before the City Court against any
person for violation of any provision of this chapter or of any such reasonable
order.
(Prior Code, § 4-104) (Ord. 2006-01-01, passed 3-1-2007) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.007 KENNELS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition applies
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
      KENNEL. Any premises upon which are kept, bred, trained or sold three or
more dogs six months of age or more. KENNELS shall comply with all of the
provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   It is unlawful to maintain a kennel within the city, except upon a
license issued by the City Council in accordance with compliance with the
regulations of the Council and payment of a license fee.
(Prior Code, § 4-107) (Ord. 2006-01-01, passed 3-1-2007) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.008 PASTURING IN PUBLIC AREAS ILLEGAL.
   It is unlawful for any person to pasture any animal on any public property
or private property without the consent of the person owning or controlling the
property.
(Prior Code, § 4-106) (Ord. 2006-01-01, passed 3-1-2007) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.009 NOISY ANIMALS; NUISANCE; VICIOUS ANIMALS.
   (A)   No person shall keep any animal which causes frequent or long-
continued noise, or otherwise, so as to disturb the comfort or repose of any
person in the vicinity. Any violation of this section is declared to be a
nuisance and, as such, may be abated.
   (B)   No person shall keep any animal which is a nuisance or is vicious as
defined in this chapter.
   (C)   (1)   Keeping any animal in violation of this chapter is also hereby
declared to be a nuisance.
      (2)   The city may summarily abate any such nuisance after notice to the
owner of the premises where the kennel is located and an opportunity for such
person to be heard, if such can be given.
      (3)   The city may, in the alternative and in the discretion of the City
Council, pursue the abatement thereof by suit in District Court or enforce as a
misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 4-105) (Ord. 2006-01-01, passed 3-1-2007) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.010 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS UNLAWFUL.
   It is unlawful for any person, willfully and maliciously, to pour on or
apply to any animal any drug or other thing which inflicts pain on the animal,
to knowingly treat an animal in a cruel or inhumane manner or to knowingly
neglect an animal belonging to him or her or in his or her custody in a cruel
or inhumane manner.
(Prior Code, § 4-141) (Ord. 2006-01-01, passed 3-1-2007) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.011 POISONING ANIMALS UNLAWFUL.
   It is unlawful for a person willfully to poison any dog or other animal,
except for a noxious, nondomesticated animal, or to knowingly expose poison so
that the same may be taken by an animal.
(Prior Code, § 4-142) (Ord. 2006-01-01, passed 3-1-2007) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.012 ENCOURAGING ANIMALS TO FIGHT UNLAWFUL.
   It is unlawful for any person to instigate or encourage a fight between
animals or to encourage one animal to attack, pursue or annoy another animal,
except for a noxious, nondomesticated animal, or to keep a house, pit or other
place used for fights between animals.
(Prior Code, § 4-143) (Ord. 2006-01-01, passed 3-1-2007) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.013 INVESTIGATION OF VIOLATIONS BY ENFORCING OFFICERS.
   (A)   For the purpose of discharging the duties imposed by this chapter and
to enforce its provisions, the Animal Control Officer or Health Officer is
empowered to call upon the residents of any premises upon which a dog, cat or
small animal is kept or harbored and to demand the exhibition by the owner of
such dog, cat or small animal.
   (B)   The Animal Control Officer or Health Officer, in the manner authorized
by law, may enter the premises where any animal is kept in a reportedly cruel
or inhumane manner and demand to examine such animal, and to take possession of
such animal when, in his or her opinion, it requires humane treatment. The
officer may demand, at the front door of any residence, exhibition by the owner
of current animal licenses at any time.
(Prior Code, § 4-165) (Ord. 2006-01-01, passed 3-1-2007)
§ 90.014 RECORDS KEPT BY ENFORCING OFFICERS.
   The Animal Control Officer shall keep or cause to be kept:
   (A)   An accurate and detailed record of the licensing, impounding and
disposition of all animals coming into his or her custody; and
   (B)   An accurate and detailed record of all bite cases reported to the
city, with a complete report of the investigation of each case.
(Prior Code, § 4-166) (Ord. 2006-01-01, passed 3-1-2007)
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS DOGS
§ 90.025 POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS.
   (A)   (1)   A dog is hereby declared to be POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS under the
animal regulations of the city when the animal has, without cause or
provocation, chased, threatened or otherwise interfered with the normal
activities of human beings or domesticated animals when said humans or other
animals were in the process of normal activities on their own property or in
public areas.
      (2)   In order for an animal to be declared POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS, the
animal needs to be of a size that a normal person would believe could subject
said individual, or animal under the control of said individual, substantial
bodily harm.
   (B)   (1)   At any time such behavior by a dog has been witnessed and
determined by an officer of the Police Department, or by the Animal Control
Officer, then the owner of such animal may be cited for having a potentially
dangerous dog at-large and not under physical control within the city.
      (2)   If such offense is determined by the Municipal Court, then the
owner or person harboring said dog shall be subject to fine, penalty and such
other conditions as provided herein, and the dog may be ordered confined as
provided for herein.
(Ord. 2016-02, passed 7-11-2016) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.026 DANGEROUS DOGS.
   If a dog of a size necessary to inflict serious injury inflicts injury
without provocation on a human being or domestic animal within the city when
said individual or domestic animal is within its own property or on public
property within the city, and said injury without provocation is proven in any
court of jurisdiction over the city, then the owner of said animal shall be
subject to fine and penalty for the injury in question and may also be subject
to civil suit for the injury inflicted. Said animal may be ordered destroyed if
there have been previous convictions for such injuries in other incidents or,
in the alternative, shall be subject to confinement and other conditions as
provided herein.
(Ord. 2016-02, passed 7-11-2016) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.027 REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS/DANGEROUS DOGS.
   (A)   Upon a finding by the Municipal Court that a dog is declared, pursuant
to these provisions, to be a potentially dangerous dog or is determined to be a
dangerous dog, then the special regulations concerning said animal in division
(B) below shall automatically come into effect.
   (B)   Any individual owning or harboring said animal shall:
      (1)   Identify said animal by attaching a phosphorescent collar with tag,
available on a fee basis from the Police Department;
      (2)   The premises where said animal is located shall be clearly and
conspicuously posted with a notice stating that the dog is a dangerous animal
in language and/or symbols sufficient to notify an adult or child and from a
distance sufficient to warn any passers-by not to get close to the animal;
      (3)   The animal will be further identified by a special coded tag,
purchased through the Police Department, that identifies the dog as a dangerous
animal. This tag must be worn by the dog at all times along with the regular
dog tag from the city and the vaccination tag so issued;
      (4)   In the event that the dog is sold, disposed of or dies, then the
owner and/or person harboring said animal must notify the Police Department in
writing of that event within 24 hours of its occurring, along with the name,
address and phone number of any individual who has been given possession of the
animal;
      (5)   An annual fee in the amount of $25 shall be paid to the City Clerk
each year as a registration fee for said animal;
      (6)   The animal shall be kept indoors or in a secure enclosure, as
approved by the Animal Control Officer or by said designee, that contains at
least 150 square feet of space per animal that is over six months of age, and
that has a secure top, sides and bottom that are constructed in such a manner
so as to prevent the animal from escaping, and that also adequately provides
for the needs of the animal; and
      (7)   At any time the animal is being moved and is outside, then the
animal must be secured on a six-foot chain leash that is controlled at all
times by an individual that is over 16 years of age. The animal must be muzzled
when being so transported.
   (C)   The violation of any of these conditions shall serve as rebuttable
proof of a violation of the dangerous dog provisions by the owner or person
harboring said animal.
(Ord. 2016-02, passed 7-11-2016) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.028 REGISTRATION AND LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIRED.
   (A)   At the time of the registration of the animal with the City Clerk as a
dangerous dog, the owner or person harboring said animal must provide the City
Clerk with a certificate of liability insurance, properly existing and issued
by an insurance firm licensed to do business in the state, proving that said
animal is fully insured from all harm caused by said animal in an amount of not
less than $50,000 per incident, exclusive of interest and costs, covering any
damage or injury caused by said animal. The certificate of insurance shall be
provided to the City Clerk and the Police Department at the same time each year
as the registration fee shown herein is paid.
   (B)   Likewise, each year at the time of the registration, the premises
where the animal is confined shall be inspected by the Police Department to
assure that the premises meets the requirements of this subchapter.
(Ord. 2016-02, passed 7-11-2016)
§ 90.029 VICIOUS DOGS.
   (A)   Any dog of a sufficient size as necessary to inflict serious injury
that has been guilty of an unprovoked attack on any individual or domestic
animal when said individual or animal was on its own property or upon public
property, in the event of a second such unprovoked attack that is proven in
court beyond a reasonable doubt, shall be declared a VICIOUS DOG.
   (B)   In the event of such a finding by any court of competent jurisdiction,
the animal in question shall be subject to destruction, and any owner of said
animal or any individual found to be harboring said animal shall be subject to
the maximum fine and penalty provided for herein.
(Ord. 2016-02, passed 7-11-2016) Penalty, see §
90.999
LICENSING AND VACCINATION
§ 90.040 RABIES VACCINATION REQUIRED; VACCINATION CERTIFICATE; TAGS.
   (A)   No person shall own, keep or harbor any dog or cat within the city
limits unless such dog or cat six months of age or older is vaccinated for
rabies annually.
   (B)   Unless the owner of any dog or cat furnishes written proof that the
dog or cat has been vaccinated for rabies by a licensed veterinarian in the
past 12 months, the owner shall be guilty of an offense.
   (C)   When a veterinarian vaccinates a dog or cat against rabies, he or she
shall issue to the owner of such dog or cat a metal tag or check evidencing
such vaccination and the year of vaccination.
   (D)   It shall be the duty of the owner of the dog or cat to attach the tag
or check issued to him or her pursuant to division (C) above to the dog or cat,
and it shall be unlawful for any person to remove such tag or check without the
owner’s consent.
(Prior Code, § 4-121) (Ord. 2006-01-01, passed 3-1-2007) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.041 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall own, keep, harbor or have custody of any dog over six
months of age without first obtaining a license from the City Clerk and paying
the required fee.
   (B)   The annual license fee for dogs shall be as set by the City Council by
motion or resolution.
   (C)   This section shall not apply to the keeping of animals temporarily
brought or kept within the city, nor to a “seeing eye” dog when such dog is
actually used to aid a blind person.
(Prior Code, § 4-122) (Ord. 2006-01-01, passed 3-1-2007) Penalty, see §
90.999
RABIES AND ANIMAL BITES
§ 90.055 ANIMAL BITES; RABIES EXAMINATION; QUARANTINE.
   (A)   Every animal that bites or scratches a person shall be reported within
four hours to the Animal Control Officer and shall thereupon be securely
quarantined at a veterinary hospital for a period of ten days from the date the
person was bitten, and such animal shall not be released from such quarantine
except by permission of the Animal Control Officer of the city and the
veterinarian in charge of the quarantined animal. Such quarantine may be at any
veterinary hospital chosen by the owner. Failure of the owner or keeper to
quarantine his or her animal within the four-hour period herein will make him
or her guilty of an offense.
   (B)   The owner, upon demand by any city officer or the Animal Control
Officer, shall surrender any animal that has bitten or scratched a human, or
which is suspected of having been exposed to rabies, for supervised quarantine
testing or euthanasia, the expense for which shall be borne by the owner. The
animal may be reclaimed by the owner if adjudged free of rabies.
(Prior Code, § 4-161) (Ord. 2006-01-01, passed 3-1-2007) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.056 RABIES DIAGNOSIS; QUARANTINE OF CITY; TIME LIMIT.
   (A)   When an animal under quarantine has been diagnosed as being rabid, or
is suspected by a licensed veterinarian as being rabid, and dies while under
such observation, the Animal Control Officer or veterinarian shall immediately
send the head of such animal to the State Health Department for pathological
examination, and shall notify the proper public health officer of reports of
human contact and the diagnosis made of the suspected animal.
   (B)   When one or both reports give a positive diagnosis of rabies, the
Health Officer or Animal Control Officer of the city may recommend a citywide
quarantine for a period of six months, and upon the invoking of such
quarantine, no animal shall be taken into the streets or permitted to be in the
streets during such period of quarantine. During such quarantine, no animal
shall be taken or shipped from the city without written permission of the
Animal Control Officer of the city.
   (C)   During such period of rabies quarantine as herein designated, every
animal bitten by an animal adjudged to be rabid shall be treated for such
rabies infection by a licensed veterinarian or held under a six months’
quarantine by the owner in the same manner as other animals are quarantined.
   (D)   In the event that there are additional positive cases of rabies
occurring during the period of quarantine, such period of quarantine may be
extended for an additional six months.
(Prior Code, § 4-162) (Ord. 2006-01-01, passed 3-1-2007) Penalty, see §
90.999
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 63 O.S. § 1-508
§ 90.057 KILLING OR REMOVING RABID ANIMAL PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall kill or cause to be killed any rabid animal, any
animal suspected of having been exposed to rabies or any animal biting or
scratching a human, except as herein provided, nor remove the animal from the
city limits without written permission from the Health Officer of the city or
the Animal Control Officer.
   (B)   The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies shall, upon demand,
be surrendered to the Animal Control Officer.
   (C)   The Animal Control Officer shall direct the disposition of any animal
found to be infected with rabies.
   (D)   No person shall fail or refuse to surrender any animal for quarantine
or destruction as required herein when demand is made therefor by an employee
empowered to enforce this chapter. Such refusal shall be deemed an offense.
(Prior Code, § 4-163) (Ord. 2006-01-01, passed 3-1-2007) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.058 REPORT OF BITE CASES BY MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS, VETERINARIANS.
   (A)   It is the duty of every physician, veterinarian or other practitioner
to report to the Animal Control Officer the names and addresses of persons
treated for bites inflicted by animals, together with such other information as
will be helpful in rabies control.
   (B)   It is the duty of every licensed veterinarian to report to the Animal
Control Officer his or her diagnosis of any animal observed by him or her to be
a rabid suspect.
(Prior Code, § 4-164) (Ord. 2006-01-01, passed 3-1-2007)
IMPOUNDMENT
§ 90.070 IMPOUNDMENT; DISPOSITION OF ANIMALS.
   (A)   The city may operate on its own or contract with an outside agency to
serve as the city’s animal shelter or pound to provide for the impoundment of
animals pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   Any animal found running at-large shall be picked up and immediately
impounded in the animal shelter, and there confined in a humane manner. The
owner or keeper who desires to reclaim the same may do so by paying an
impounding fee and daily boarding costs.
   (C)   Fees for impoundment shall be as provided by the shelter or the City
Council. In computing the fee, a fraction of a day during which an animal has
been fed shall be deemed a full day.
(Prior Code, § 4-131) (Ord. 2006-01-01, passed 3-1-2007)
§ 90.071 REDEMPTION, ADOPTION OF ANIMALS.
   (A)   An owner of an impounded animal or his or her agent may redeem the
animal prior to its sale or destruction, as provided for herein, by paying the
required fees against the animal and meeting any other requirements which may
be prescribed in this chapter. If the owner or his or her agent has not
redeemed the animal within two working days after the impoundment of the
animal, then the animal is eligible for adoption. After the expiration of a
third working day, if not adopted, the animal may be otherwise disposed of as
provided for herein.
   (B)   A person desiring to adopt an animal from impoundment shall pay an
adoption fee, the costs of any necessary vaccinations and a deposit to
guarantee the neutering or spaying of the dog or cat, and shall sign an
agreement with the city ensuring that the dog or cat will be spayed or
neutered.
(Prior Code, § 4-133) (Ord. 2006-01-01, passed 3-1-2007)
§ 90.072 BREAKING POUND OR INTERFERING WITH OFFICERS UNLAWFUL.
   (A)   If any person breaks open or in any manner, directly or indirectly,
aids in or counsels or advises the breaking open of any pound of the city or
contract pound, or hinders, delays or obstructs any person duly authorized in
taking up or taking to the city’s pound any animal liable to be impounded, then
he or she shall be guilty of an offense.
   (B)   No person shall interfere with, hinder or molest any agent of the city
in the performance of any duty of such agent, nor seek to release any animal in
the custody of the city or its agents, except as provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 4-132) (Ord. 2006-01-01, passed 3-1-2007) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, except as
set out in division (B) below, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as
provided in §
10.99(A) of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 4-171)
   (B)   Any person who owns, harbors, keeps, possesses or maintains or who has
the care, custody and control of any potentially dangerous or dangerous dog, as
declared under §§
90.025 through
90.029 of this chapter, who is convicted of or who pleads guilty to a violation
of §§
90.025 through
90.029 of this chapter shall be subjected to a mandatory and nonsuspendable
fine of $200, and such dog may be banned from the city. Each day that such a
violation is found to have occurred shall be potentially considered a separate
violation for the terms of this division (B) and subject again to said fine and
penalty.
(Ord. 2006-01-01, passed 3-1-2007; Ord. 2016-02, passed 7-11-2016)
CHAPTER 91: FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Section
General Provisions
   
91.01   Fire Prevention Code, Life Safety Code adopted
   
91.02   Modifications to adopted codes
   
91.03   Determining permit requirements for new materials, processes or
occupancies
   
91.04   Appeal upon permit denial
Fire and Explosives Management
   
91.15   Open burning restrictions; burn permits
   
91.16   Fireworks restrictions
   
91.17   Public fireworks displays
 
   
91.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.01 FIRE PREVENTION CODE, LIFE SAFETY CODE ADOPTED.
   (A)   There is hereby adopted, for the purpose of prescribing regulations
governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion,
that certain code known as the Fire Prevention Code recommended by the National
Fire Protection Association, and that certain code known as the Life Safety
Code recommended by the National Fire Protection Association, being
particularly the latest editions thereof and the whole thereof, save and except
for such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended by this
chapter.
   (B)   At least one copy of the Fire Prevention Code and the Life Safety Code
are on file in the office of the City Clerk. The Fire Prevention Code and the
Life Safety Code are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at
length herein, and from the date on which this code of ordinances shall take
effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the
city.
(Prior Code, § 13-101) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.02 MODIFICATIONS TO ADOPTED CODES.
   (A)   (1)   The City Council shall have the power to modify any of the
provisions of the Fire Prevention Code and the Life Safety Code upon
application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his or her duly-authorized
agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the
strict letter of the codes, provided that the spirit of the codes shall be
observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done.
      (2)   The particulars of such modification, when granted or allowed, and
the decision of the Fire Chief and Council thereon shall be entered upon the
records of the Council, and a signed copy shall be furnished to the applicant.
   (B)   The limits in the Fire Prevention Code in which the storage of
flammable liquids in aboveground tanks, new bulk plants for flammable liquids,
the bulk storage of LPG and the storage of explosives and blasting agents are
prohibited in the city limits of Beggs, Oklahoma.
(Prior Code, § 13-102) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.03 DETERMINING PERMIT REQUIREMENTS FOR NEW MATERIALS, PROCESSES OR
OCCUPANCIES.
   The City Council may act as a committee to determine and specify, after
giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials,
processes or occupancies which shall require permits in addition to those now
enumerated in said codes. The Fire Chief shall post such list in a conspicuous
place in his or her office and distribute copies thereof to interested persons.
(Prior Code, § 13-103)
§ 91.04 APPEAL UPON PERMIT DENIAL.
   Whenever the Fire Chief shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a
permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the codes do
not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the codes have been
misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision
of the Fire Chief to the City Council within 30 days from the date of the
decision appealed.
(Prior Code, § 13-104)
FIRE AND EXPLOSIVES MANAGEMENT
§ 91.15 OPEN BURNING RESTRICTIONS; BURN PERMITS.
   (A)   It is unlawful to burn any fire outside of any enclosed building in
the city for the purpose of burning grass, trash, leaves, weeds, papers,
refuse, garbage or any other substance, except for in an approved incinerator,
or by obtaining a permit and payment of such fee as set by the city, or by
approval by the Fire Department as may be allowed by the City Fire Code and any
applicable state or city regulations.
   (B)   Upon written application for a permit to burn such debris as
hereinabove specified, filed with the office of the City Clerk, the Clerk will
notify the Mayor and the Fire Department that a request for a burn permit has
been made.
   (C)   Following such request, the Mayor and/or Fire Department will inspect
the premises over which the burn permit has been requested. In the event that
such inspection indicates that a burn can thereupon be safely conducted, a burn
permit shall be issued.
   (D)   Such burn permit shall require that before such burn is conducted, the
Fire Department shall be notified in such a manner that a determination may be
made as to whether the wind and weather conditions are such so as to provide
for proper safety in making the burn in question at that time, and further, so
as to provide that the Fire Department may take any necessary action as it may
determine necessary so as to further ensure public safety for the burn.
   (E)   After the issuance of such permit, no burn will be scheduled if any
intervening event, such as a local or state burn ban, has been placed into
effect, or if the Fire Department deems the scheduled time for such burn as to
be unsafe.
   (F)   Any individual requesting or conducting such a burn will be
responsible for any damage that may be caused to persons or property as a
result of such burn.
(Prior Code, § 8-113) (Res. 2008-01, passed 2-7-2008) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.16 FIREWORKS RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition applies
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
      FIREWORKS. Shall have the same meaning as in state law, 68 O.S. § 1622.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to manufacture, display, sell, possess
or expose for sale, possess, use or discharge fireworks within the city except
as provided in this section and in §§
113.15 through
113.17 of this chapter.
   (C)   (1)   Pyrotechnic or fireworks displays may be authorized in
accordance with the City Fire Code when under proper control and the time,
place and manner of the display is permitted by the city. Organizations shall
contact the city for permission for a display.
      (2)   Any public display shall be inspected and approved by the Fire
Chief or, in his or her absence, the Assistant Fire Chief. Notification shall
be given to the Fire Chief not less than seven days prior to any public
fireworks display.
   (D)   The discharging or use of fireworks is permitted from July 1 through
July 3 between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m., midnight, except:
      (1)   No fireworks may be discharged or used on any city streets or
business parking lots within 100 feet of any public building of assembly,
within 100 feet of any business or within one 100 feet of any fireworks stand;
and
      (2)   Fireworks may only be discharged on privately-owned, leased or
rented property, and only during the hours specified in this section.
   (E)   A parent is responsible for all actions of his or her children under
the age of 18 regarding fireworks. Parents may be cited for any violations of
this section committed by their children under the age of 18.
(Prior Code, § 10-329) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.17 PUBLIC FIREWORKS DISPLAYS.
   (A)   Any person or organization conducting a fireworks display open to the
public must contact the city for permission in advance under the conditions of
this section.
   (B)   Any public display of fireworks shall be inspected and approved by the
Fire Chief or, in his or her absence, the Assistant Chief in advance of the
display.
   (C)   Notification shall be given to the Fire Chief not less than one week
prior to the public display of fireworks.
(Prior Code, § 10-330) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99(A) of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of the codes
adopted per §§
91.01 through
91.04 of this chapter or who fails to comply therewith, or who violates or
fails to comply with any order made thereunder, or who builds in violation of
any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved
thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no
appeal has been taken, or who fails to comply with such an order as affirmed or
modified by the City Council or by a court of competent jurisdiction within the
time fixed therein, shall severally for every such violation and noncompliance,
respectively, be guilty of an offense punishable as provided in §
10.99(A) of this code. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall
not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and all such persons shall
be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable
time.
      (2)   When not otherwise specified, each ten days that prohibited
conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
      (3)   The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent
the enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
(Prior Code, § 13-105)
   (C)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of §
91.15 of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereon, be punished as provided
in §
10.99(A) of this code.
(Prior Code, § 8-122)
   (D)   A penalty not to exceed $70 and not less than $15 shall be imposed for
each citation issued by the Police Department or Fire Department for any
violation of §§
91.16 and
91.17 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 10-332)
CHAPTER 92: HEALTH AND SAFETY; NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
   
92.01   Definitions
   
92.02   Nuisances prohibited
   
92.03   Successive owners responsible for continuing nuisances
   
92.04   Time does not legalize nuisances
   
92.05   Certain public nuisances defined
   
92.06   Smoking in public places and indoor workplaces
   
92.07   Toilet facilities required
   
92.08   Littering prohibited generally
   
92.09   Unauthorized dumping, depositing or disposal of trash on property of
another
   
92.10   Abandoned refrigerators
   
92.11   Junkyards prohibited
   
92.12   Salvage yards prohibited
Abatement and Remedies
   
92.25   City has power to define and summarily abate nuisances
   
92.26   Obstructing health or enforcement officers
   
92.27   Summary abatement of nuisances
   
92.28   Abatement by suit in District Court
   
92.29   Health nuisances; abatement
   
92.30   City actions not to jeopardize private action
   
92.31   Remedies against public nuisances
   
92.32   Remedies against private nuisances
   
92.33   Procedures cumulative
 
   
92.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 50 O.S. §§ 1 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 92.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly requires a different meaning.
   NUISANCE. Unlawfully doing an act or omitting to perform a duty, or is any
thing or condition which either:
      (1)   Annoys, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety
of others;
      (2)   Offends decency;
      (3)   Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct or
render dangerous for passage any lake or navigable river, stream, canal or
basin, or any public park, square, street or other public property; or
      (4)   In any way renders other persons insecure in life or in the use of
property.
   PRIVATE NUISANCE. Every nuisance not included in the definition of public
nuisance herein.
   PUBLIC NUISANCE. A nuisance which affects, at the same time, an entire
community or neighborhood or any considerable number of persons, or three or
more properties under separate ownership in the vicinity of such nuisance,
although the extent of the annoyance or damage inflicted upon the individuals
may be unequal.
(Prior Code, § 8-101)
§ 92.02 NUISANCES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall create or maintain a nuisance within the city or permit a
nuisance to remain on a premises under his or her control within the city.
(Prior Code, § 8-103) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.03 SUCCESSIVE OWNERS RESPONSIBLE FOR CONTINUING NUISANCES.
   Every successive owner of property who neglects to abate a continuing
nuisance upon or in the use of such property that was created by a former owner
is liable therefor in the same manner as the person who first created it.
(Prior Code, § 8-104)
§ 92.04 TIME DOES NOT LEGALIZE NUISANCES.
   No lapse of time can legalize a public nuisance amounting to an actual
obstruction of public right.
(Prior Code, § 8-105)
§ 92.05 CERTAIN PUBLIC NUISANCES DEFINED.
   (A)   In addition to other public nuisances declared by other sections of
this code or law, the following are hereby declared to be public nuisances:
      (1)   The sale or offering for sale of unwholesome food or drink, or the
keeping of a place where such sales or offerings are made;
      (2)   The sale, offering for sale or furnishing of intoxicating liquor in
violation of state law or ordinances of the city, or the keeping of a place
where intoxicating liquor is sold, offered for sale or furnished in violation
of state law or ordinances of the city;
      (3)   The exposure, display, sale or distribution of obscene pictures,
books, pamphlets, magazines, papers, documents or objects, or the keeping of a
place where such are exposed, displayed, sold or distributed;
      (4)   The keeping of a place where persons gamble, whether by cards, slot
machines, punchboards or otherwise;
      (5)   The keeping of a place where prostitution, illicit sexual
intercourse or other immoral acts are practiced;
      (6)   The keeping of a place where activities in violation of state law
or ordinance are practiced or carried on;
      (7)   The public exposure of a person having a contagious disease;
      (8)   The continued making of loud or unusual noises, music or sounds, or
of strong vibrations, which annoy persons of ordinary sensibilities, or the
keeping of an animal which makes such noises;
      (9)   The operation or use of any electrical apparatus or machine which
materially and unduly interferes with radio or television reception by others;
      (10)   Any use of a street or sidewalk, or a place adjacent thereto,
which causes crowds of people to gather so as to obstruct traffic on such
street or sidewalk, or which otherwise obstructs traffic thereon, except as may
be authorized by law or ordinances;
      (11)   Permitting water or other liquid to flow or fall, or ice or snow
to fall, from any building or structure upon any street or sidewalk where
mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed, or which are so constructed, formed,
conditioned or situated so as to endanger the public safety;
      (12)   All wells, pools, cisterns, bodies or containers of water in which
mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed, or which are so constructed, formed,
conditioned or situated as to endanger the public safety;
      (13)   Rank weeds or grass, carcasses, accumulations of manure, refuse or
other things which are, or are likely to be, breeding places for flies,
mosquitoes, vermin or disease germs, and the premises on which such exist;
      (14)   Any building or structure which is dangerous to the public health
or safety because of damage, decay or other condition;
      (15)   Any pit, hole or other thing which is constructed, formed,
conditioned or situated so as to endanger the public safety;
      (16)   Any fire or explosion hazard which endangers the public safety;
      (17)   Any occupation or activity which endangers the public peace,
health, morals, safety or welfare;
      (18)   Permitting bagworms to be upon any trees or other plants within
the city;
      (19)   Permitting foul, noxious or offensive odors to escape from
premises, or unusual quantities of dust or other deleterious substances to
escape from or emanate across the property line upon which the same originates;
      (20)   Any stable or other place where animals are kept that may become
obnoxious or annoying to any resident of the city by reason of any noise or
noises made by the animal therein, or by reason of lack of sanitation;
      (21)   The keeping, in violation of Ch. 90 of this code, of any dog
kennels within the city for the breeding and raising of dogs that shall become
offensive or annoying to the public by reason of the barking and noise made by
the animals therein contained;
      (22)   Any vault, cesspool or sink used to receive human excrement,
slops, garbage, refuse or other filthy substances;
      (23)   Any pond, slop, trash, refuse, cobs, manure or decayed or decaying
vegetable matter that is left, kept or maintained in such a condition so as to
endanger the public health;
      (24)   The keeping of any hog pen within the limits of the city in
violation of this code;
      (25)   Every privy or water closet which shall be in an overflowing,
leaking or filthy condition, or in a condition dangerous, injurious or annoying
to the comfort, health and welfare of any resident of the city;
      (26)   Any green or unsalted hides of any animal kept in any exposed or
open place within the limits of the city;
      (27)   Any unclean, foul, leaking, broken or defective ditch, drain,
gutter, slop, garbage or manure barrel, box or other receptacle in the city;
and
      (28)   Every building or other structure that shall become unsafe and
dangerous from fire, decay or other cause, or shall become hazardous from fire,
by reason of age, decay, construction, location or other cause, or shall be
detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the city or its inhabitants
from any cause.
   (B)   The enumeration in division (A) above of certain public nuisances
shall be cumulative and not limit other provisions of law or ordinances
defining public or private nuisances either in more general or more specific
terms.
(Prior Code, § 8-102) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.06 SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES AND INDOOR WORKPLACES.
   (A)   The possession of lighted tobacco in any form is a public nuisance and
dangerous to public health and is hereby prohibited when such possession is in
any indoor place used by or open to the public, public transportation or any
indoor workplace, except where specifically allowed by law.
   (B)   All buildings, or portions thereof, owned or operated by the state
shall be designated as nonsmoking, provided, however, that each building may
have one designated smoking room. As used in this section, BUILDINGS shall not
include up to 25% of any hotel or motel rooms rented if the guestrooms are
properly ventilated so that smoke is not circulated to nonsmoking areas.
   (C)   All buildings, or portions thereof, owned or operated by a county or
municipal government, at the discretion of the county or municipal governing
body, may be designated as entirely nonsmoking or may be designated as
nonsmoking with one designated smoking room.
   (D)   A smoking room as provided for in divisions (B) and (C) above:
      (1)   Shall not be used for the conduct of public business;
      (2)   Shall not be in a location which is fully enclosed, directly
exhausted to the outside, under negative air pressure so smoke cannot escape
when a door is opened, and no air is recirculated to nonsmoking areas of the
building. No smoking exhaust shall be located within 25 feet of any entrance,
exit or air intake; and
      (3)   Shall be verified for compliance with the provisions of this
section by the Department of Central Services for State Buildings by a county
entity designated by the Board of County Commissioners for County Buildings, or
by a municipal entity designated by the municipal governing body for municipal
buildings.
   (E)   No smoking shall be allowed within 25 feet of the entrance or exit of
any building specified in divisions (B) or (C) above.
   (F)   The entrances, exits and air intakes shall be signed with
“BreatheEasy,” “No Smoking Within 25 Feet Of Doorway” decals.
   (G)   The City Hall at 108 North Broadway is designated as a smoke-free
building.
(Prior Code, § 8-123) (Ord. 2007-05, passed 7-12-2007) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.07 TOILET FACILITIES REQUIRED.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
      HUMAN EXCREMENT. The bowel and kidney discharge of human beings.
      SANITARY PIT PRIVY. A privy which is built, rebuilt or constructed so as
to conform with the specifications approved by the State Health Department.
      SANITARY WATER CLOSET. A flush-type toilet which is connected with a
sanitary sewer line of such capacity and construction so as to carry away the
contents at all times.
   (B)   (1)   Every owner of a residence or other building in which humans
reside, are employed or congregate within the city shall install, equip and
maintain adequate sanitary facilities for the disposal of human excrement by
use of a sanitary water closet or a sanitary pit privy.
      (2)   The closets and toilets hereby required shall be of the sanitary
water closet type when located within 150 feet of a sanitary sewer and
accessible thereto and of the sanitary water closet type (notwithstanding a
greater distance from a sanitary sewer) or the water closet type emptying into
a septic tank system or the pit privy type. A septic tank system or a pit privy
may be used in such cases only if it meets the standards of and is approved by
the State Health Department.
   (C)   All human excrement disposed of within the city shall be disposed of
by depositing it in closets and privies of the types provided for in this
section. It is unlawful for any owner of property within the city to permit the
disposal of human excrement thereon in any other manner, or for any person to
dispose of human excrement within the city in any other manner.
   (D)   All privies shall be kept clean and sanitary at all times, and the
covers of the seats of privies shall be kept closed at all times when the
privies are not being used. No wash water, kitchen slop or anything other than
human excrement and toilet paper shall be emptied into a privy. No excrement
from any person suffering from typhoid fever, dysentery or other serious bowel
disease shall be deposited in any sanitary pit privy or sanitary water closet
until it is disinfected in such a manner as may be prescribed by the Health
Officer.
   (E)   (1)   All facilities for the disposal of human excrement in a manner
different from that required by this section and all privies and closets
constructed, situated or maintained so as to endanger the public health are
hereby declared to be public nuisances and may be dealt with and abated as
such.
      (2)   Any person maintaining any such nuisance is guilty of an offense,
and each day upon which any such nuisance continues is a separate offense.
   (F)   (1)   No residence, business or commercial building, nor any other
premises in the city, if located within 300 feet of any public sewer lateral or
main, shall be connected to or in any manner served by a septic tank.
      (2)   No such person shall allow the installation, maintenance, operation
or use of any septic tank in violation of this section.
(Prior Code, § 8-116) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.08 LITTERING PROHIBITED GENERALLY.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition applies
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
       LITTER. Trash, refuse, rubbish and all like material.
   (B)   No person shall throw, place, leave, drop, put or otherwise abandon
litter upon any public property, private property or roadway, except as
otherwise specifically permitted in this code.
(Prior Code, § 8-118) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.09 UNAUTHORIZED DUMPING, DEPOSITING OR DISPOSAL OF TRASH ON PROPERTY OF
ANOTHER.
   (A)   It is unlawful to place, deposit or leave any trash, debris, refuse or
garbage on the property of another or on public property, including any public
street, easement, sidewalk or other public property, except where such disposal
is expressly allowed by law.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit, leave or dispose of
trash, garbage, refuse or debris in any dumpster or trash receptacle that is
located on the property of another without the express consent of the person on
whose property the dumpster or trash receptacle is located.
(Prior Code, § 8-112) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.10 ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS.
   It is unlawful for any person to leave in a place accessible to children any
abandoned or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other container which has an
airtight door with a lock or other fastening device which cannot be easily
released for opening from the inside of the icebox, refrigerator or container
without first removing the door, lock or fastener.
(Prior Code, § 8-119) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.11 JUNKYARDS PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to build or maintain a junkyard or to place on
city lots within the city a junkyard or material commonly found in junkyards,
such as old car bodies, old vehicles, wrecked vehicles or old secondhand
materials commonly found in junkyards or similar places of business. It is
unlawful to convert any lots which, as of September 1969, were not so used into
such junkyard or for the purpose of placing thereon materials as described
above.
(Prior Code, § 8-120) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.12 SALVAGE YARDS PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to build or maintain a salvage yard in the
city.
(Prior Code, § 8-121) Penalty, see §
92.99
ABATEMENT AND REMEDIES
§ 92.25 CITY HAS POWER TO DEFINE AND SUMMARILY ABATE NUISANCES.
   (A)   As provided in 50 O.S. § 16, the city is empowered to determine what
is and what shall constitute a nuisance within its corporate limits and, for
the protection of the public health, the public parks and the public water
supply outside of its corporate limits.
   (B)   Whenever it is practical to do so, the city has the power summarily to
abate any such nuisance after notice to the owner and an opportunity for him or
her to be heard, if this can be done.
(Prior Code, § 8-108)
§ 92.26 OBSTRUCTING HEALTH OR ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS.
   It is unlawful for any person to willfully obstruct or interfere with any
health officer or other code enforcement officer charged with the enforcement
of the health or nuisance laws of the city.
(Prior Code, § 8-117) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.27 SUMMARY ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES.
   (A)   (1)   Some nuisances are of such a nature so as to constitute a grave
and immediate danger to the peace, health, safety, morals or welfare of one or
more persons or of the public generally.
      (2)   It is recognized that circumstances may be such so as to justify,
and even to require, the city or other appropriate officer or agency of the
city government to take immediate and proper action summarily to abate such
nuisances or to reduce or suspend the danger until more deliberate action can
be taken toward such abatement.
   (B)   An officer of the city may submit a statement as to the existence of a
nuisance as defined by the ordinances of the city or law, and a request or
recommendation that it be abated.
   (C)   (1)   The city, or its designee, shall determine if a nuisance exists
as defined by the ordinances of the city or law. If a nuisance does in fact
exist, then city personnel shall direct the owner or other persons responsible
for or causing the nuisance to abate the nuisance within a specified time, if
the peace, health, safety, morals or welfare of the person or persons or the
public adversely affected would not be unduly jeopardized by the consequent
delay, by:
         (a)   Mailing of notice by the city, with a receipt of mailing being
obtained from the U.S. post office, said receipt showing the date of mailing
and the name and address of the mailee. Said receipt of mailing shall be
properly kept in the records of the city to prove that such mailing was
accomplished;
         (b)   Posting notice on the property in question in a prominent place
if the address of said property owner cannot be obtained, or again if the
address cannot be obtained; and
         (c)   Publication in a newspaper in general circulation within the
community for one time not less than ten days prior to any action or hearing by
the city.
      (2)   If such peace, health, safety, morals or welfare would be unduly
jeopardized by the consequent delay, or if the owner or other persons
responsible for or causing the nuisance do not abate it within the specified
time, or if the persons responsible authorize the city to abate the nuisance,
then the city shall direct the appropriate officer to abate the nuisance or
have it abated, if summary abatement is practical, as authorized by 50 O.S. §
16.
      (3)   The city shall send a statement of the cost of such summary
abatement to the owner or other persons responsible for or causing the
nuisance, as may be just under the circumstances, if their names and addresses
are known. Until paid, such cost shall constitute a debt to the city,
collectible as other debts may be collected.
   (D)   The determination of the existence of a nuisance and order to abate
it, as made by the city, may be appealed by the occupant or owner or person
causing the nuisance by filing a request for hearing in writing with the city
within the period of time specified in the notice for abatement of the
nuisance. The City Clerk shall cause the matter to be placed on the agenda of
the City Council for final determination, with appropriate notice of the
hearing provided to the person requesting the appeal.
(Prior Code, § 8-109) (Ord. 2008-04, passed 7-7-2008)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 50 O.S. § 16
§ 92.28 ABATEMENT BY SUIT IN DISTRICT COURT.
   In cases where it is deemed impractical to summarily abate a nuisance, the
city may bring suit in the District Court.
(Prior Code, § 8-114)
§ 92.29 HEALTH NUISANCES; ABATEMENT.
   (A)   (1)   Pursuant to authority granted by 63 O.S. § 1-1011, the city
shall have the authority to order the owner or occupant of any private premises
in the city to remove from such premises, at his or her own expense, any source
of filth, cause of sickness, condition conducive to the breeding of insects or
rodents that might contribute to the transmission of disease or any other
condition adversely affecting the public health within 24 hours, or within such
other time as may be reasonable.
      (2)   (a)   Such order shall be in writing and may be served personally
on the owner or occupant of the premises or the authorized agent thereof by the
city or a police officer, or a copy thereof may be left at the last usual place
of abode of the owner, occupant or agent if known and within the state.
         (b)   If the premises are unoccupied and the residence of the owner,
occupant or agent is unknown or is outside the state, then the order may be
served by posting a copy thereof on the premises or by publication in at least
one issue of a newspaper having a general circulation in the city.
   (B)   If the order is not complied with, then the city may cause the order
to be executed and complied with and the cost thereof shall be certified, and
the cost of removing or abating such nuisance shall be charged to the owner or
occupant, enforceable as a lien or any other method allowed by law or
ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 8-110)
§ 92.30 CITY ACTIONS NOT TO JEOPARDIZE PRIVATE ACTION.
   Nothing herein contained shall be construed to abridge the rights of
citizens of the city to bring and maintain actions in the proper courts for the
abatement of private nuisances or those specially injurious to them.
(Prior Code, § 8-111)
§ 92.31 REMEDIES AGAINST PUBLIC NUISANCES.
   The remedies against a public nuisance are:
   (A)   Prosecution on complaint before the Municipal Court;
   (B)   Prosecution on information or indictment before another appropriate
court;
   (C)   Civil action; or
   (D)   Abatement:
      (1)   By the person injured, as provided in 50 O.S. § 12; or
      (2)   By the city, in accordance with law or ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 8-106)
§ 92.32 REMEDIES AGAINST PRIVATE NUISANCES.
   The remedies against a private nuisance are:
   (A)   Civil action; or
   (B)   Abatement:
      (1)   By the person injured, as provided in 50 O.S. §§ 14 and 15; or
      (2)   By the city, in accordance with law or ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 8-107)
§ 92.33 PROCEDURES CUMULATIVE.
   (A)   The procedures for abating nuisances prescribed by this chapter and by
other provisions of law and ordinance shall be cumulative one to the other.
   (B)   The city may elect to follow any such procedure which is applicable in
abating any particular nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 8-115)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter,
except as set out in division (B) below, shall, upon conviction thereon, be
punished as provided in §
10.99(A) of this code.
(Prior Code, § 8-122)
   (B)   Any person who knowingly violates §
92.06 of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be punished by a fine of not less than $20 nor more than $100.
(Prior Code, § 8-123)
(Ord. 2007-05, passed 7-12-2007)
CHAPTER 93: WEEDS, GRASS AND TRASH
Section
   
93.01   Definitions
   
93.02   Accumulation of weeds or trash unlawful
   
93.03   Duty of owner or occupant to maintain private property
   
93.04   Reporting accumulations of weeds, grass or trash
   
93.05   Abatement; notice, consent, hearing, lien and payment
§ 93.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER. The person so designated by the City Council.
   CLEANING. The removal of trash from property.
   OWNER. The owner of record as shown by the most current tax rolls of the
County Treasurer.
   TRASH. Any refuse, litter, ashes, leaves, debris, paper, combustible
materials, rubbish, offal, waste or matter of any kind or form which is uncared
for, discarded or abandoned.
   WEED.
      (1)   Includes, but is not limited to, poison ivy, poison oak or poison
sumac and all vegetation at any stage of maturity which:
         (a)   Exceeds 12 inches in height, except healthy trees, shrubs or
produce for human consumption or grown in a tended and cultivated garden,
unless such trees and shrubbery, by their density or location, constitute a
detriment to the health, benefit and welfare of the public and the community or
a hazard to traffic, create a fire hazard to the property or otherwise
interfere with the mowing of the weeds;
         (b)   Regardless of height, harbors, conceals or invites deposits or
the accumulation of refuse or trash;
         (c)   Harbors rodents or vermin;
         (d)   Gives off unpleasant or noxious odors;
         (e)   Constitutes a fire or traffic hazard; or
         (f)   Is dead or diseased.
      (2)   The term WEED does not include tended crops on land zoned for
agricultural use which are planted more than 150 feet from a parcel zoned for
other than agricultural use.
(Prior Code, § 8-201)
§ 93.02 ACCUMULATION OF WEEDS OR TRASH UNLAWFUL.
   (A)   It is unlawful for the owner or occupant of any lot, parcel or tract
of land entirely or partially within city limits to allow trash to accumulate
or weeds or vegetation to grow, accumulate or stand in excess of the length of
12 inches within or upon said premises.
   (B)   No owner or occupant of said property shall:
      (1)   Knowingly permit the disposal of trash or refuse upon said
property; or
      (2)   Continue to allow such trash, refuse or excessive vegetation to
remain on said property after receiving notice to remove from the city, despite
whether or not the owner or occupant knowingly permitted the problem arising.
   (C)   The existence of such weeds, grass or excessive vegetation or the
allowance of the accumulation of trash is determined to constitute a public
nuisance.
   (D)   In order to abate such public nuisance, the city is authorized to
issue citations and to take any other action or actions to abate such nuisance
that may be authorized under this code, all such actions being cumulative.
(Ord. 2017-01, passed 9-11-2017) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.03 DUTY OF OWNER OR OCCUPANT TO MAINTAIN PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   No person owning, leasing, occupying or having dominion and control over any
privately-owned property or premises shall allow the accumulation of any weeds,
grass or vegetation of excessive length, nor allow the accumulation of any
refuse, rubbish, trash or other similar material other than the dirt thereon.
The excessive accumulation of any such matter is determined to cause a
diminution in value of surrounding properties, and therefore shall not be
permitted. Upon the ten-day notice provided for in this chapter, the city is
authorized to take the appropriate remediation actions as provided.
(Ord. 2017-01, passed 9-11-2017) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.04 REPORTING ACCUMULATIONS OF WEEDS, GRASS OR TRASH.
   (A)   Any officer or employee of the city or the PWA who discovers an
accumulation of trash or the existence of weeds, grass or vegetation of
excessive length upon any property or premises within said city shall report
the condition to the Mayor or designated Administrative Officer of the city if
the accumulation or overgrowth appears to be:
      (1)   Detrimental to the health, benefit or welfare of the public and the
community;
      (2)   A hazard to traffic; or
      (3)   A fire hazard to property.
   (B)   If any such condition is reported, then the Mayor or Administrative
Officer is authorized to order the remediation action provided for herein to
alleviate the problem.
(Ord. 2017-01, passed 9-11-2017)
§ 93.05 ABATEMENT; NOTICE, CONSENT, HEARING, LIEN AND PAYMENT.
   The city’s Administrative Officer is authorized to cause property within the
city to be cleaned of trash and weeds, or grass to be cut or mowed, and the
nuisance to be abated in accordance with the following procedure.
   (A)   The city’s Administrative Officer or his or her designee may determine
whether the accumulation of trash, growth of weeds or grass or other nuisance
has caused the property to become detrimental to the health, benefit or welfare
of the public and the community or a hazard to traffic, or creates a fire
hazard to the danger of the property.
   (B)   At least ten days’ notice shall be given to the property owner and/or
occupant of the property. Said notice may be given by posting the property by
use of a door hanger or other such notice, if occupied, and by mail at the
address shown by the current year’s tax rolls in the County Treasurer’s office
by both certified and first-class mail to the owner of the property. The notice
shall order the property owner and/or occupant to clean the property of trash
or to cut or mow the weeds or grass on the property, as appropriate. The notice
shall state that unless the work is performed within ten days of the date of
the notice, the work shall be done by the city and a notice of lien shall be
filed with the County Clerk against the property for the costs due and owing
the city.
   (C)   At the time of mailing of notice to the property owner, the city shall
obtain a receipt of mailing from the postal service, which receipt shall
indicate the date of mailing and the name and address of the addressee.
   (D)   (1)   If the city anticipates summary abatement of a nuisance in
accordance with the provisions as herein provided, then the notice shall state:
that any accumulations of trash or excessive weeds or grass growth on the
owner’s property occurring within six months after the removal of trash or the
cutting or mowing of weeds or grass on the property pursuant to the notice may
be summarily abated by the city, that the costs of such abatement shall be
assessed against the owner and that a lien shall be imposed on the property to
secure such payment, all without further notice to the property owner.
      (2)   At the time of each summary abatement, the City Clerk shall notify
the property owner of the abatement and costs thereof. That notice shall state
that the property owner may request a hearing within ten days after the date of
the notice to determine the cost of the cleanup. Unless otherwise determined at
the hearing, the cost of such abatement shall be determined and collected as
provided in this section.
   (E)   The owner of the property may give his or her written consent to the
city authorizing the removal of the trash or the mowing of the weeds or grass.
By giving his or her written consent, the owner waives his or her right to a
hearing by the city.
   (F)   A hearing may be held by the Administrative Officer to determine
whether the accumulation of trash or the growth of weeds or grass has caused
the property to become detrimental to the health, benefit or welfare of the
public and the community, or a hazard to traffic, or creates a fire hazard to
the danger of property. The property owner shall have a right of appeal to the
city’s Administrative Officer, except that if the city’s Administrative Officer
conducts the initial hearing, then the right of appeal is to the City Council.
The appeal shall be taken by filing a written notice of appeal with the city’s
Administrative Officer within ten days after the administrative order is
rendered.
   (G)   (1)   If the Administrative Officer finds that the condition of the
property constitutes a detriment or hazard and that the property would be
benefitted by the removal of such conditions, then the Administrative Officer
shall direct that the clearing or cleaning be done by one of the following
methods:
         (a)   By the city, provided the actual cost of the labor, maintenance
and equipment required does not exceed $500; or
         (b)   On a private contract basis, in which case it shall be awarded
to the lowest and best bidder.
      (2)   The agents of the city are granted the right of entry on the
property for the removal of trash, mowing of weeds or grass or cleaning and
performance of necessary duties as a governmental function of the city.
Immediately following the cleaning or mowing of the property, the City Clerk
shall file a notice of lien with the County Clerk describing the property and
the work performed by the city and stating that the city claims a lien on the
property for the cleaning and mowing costs, and that such costs are the
personal obligation of the property owner from and after the date of filing of
the notice.
   (H)   After the property has been cleaned, the Administrative Officer shall
determine the actual cost of such cleaning and of any other expenses as may be
necessary in connection therewith, including the cost of the notice and
mailing. The City Clerk shall forward by mail to the property owner specified
in this section a statement of the actual cost and demanding payment.
   (I)   If payment is not made within 30 days from the date of the mailing of
the statement, the City Clerk shall forward a certified statement of the amount
of the cost to the County Treasurer of the county in which the property is
located, and the same shall be levied on the property and collected by the
County Treasurer as other taxes authorized by law. The cost and the interest
thereon shall be a lien against the property from the date the cost is
certified to the County Treasurer and shall continue until the cost shall be
fully paid.
   (J)   At any time prior to the collection as provided herein, the city may
pursue any civil remedy for collection of the amount owing and the interest
thereon. Upon receiving payment, if any, the City Treasurer shall forward to
the County Treasurer a notice of such payment and directing discharge of the
lien or part thereof.
   (K)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any property used
for agricultural purposes unless said property is determined by the
Administrative Officer to pose a health or safety hazard to adjoining
landowners and property.
(Ord. 2018-02, passed 9-10-2018) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 94: WRECKED OR INOPERABLE VEHICLES OR TRAILERS
Section
   
94.01   Storing, parking or leaving on public property prohibited
   
94.02   Storing, parking or leaving on private property prohibited; exceptions
   
94.03   Notice to remove; methods of delivery
   
94.04   Contents of notice; procedures explained
   
94.05   Hearing procedures
   
94.06   Removal of vehicles or trailers
   
94.07   Removal notice to owner and other interested parties
   
94.08   Disposition of motor vehicles or trailers
   
94.09   Alternative sales procedures
   
94.10   Redemption of vehicle or trailer by owner
   
94.11   Liability for towing and storage expenses
 
   
94.99   Penalty
§ 94.01 STORING, PARKING OR LEAVING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall park, store, leave or permit the parking, storing or
leaving of any motor vehicle or trailer of any kind which is in a wrecked or
inoperable condition so as to constitute a WRECKED OR INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE
OR TRAILER as defined in state statute, whether attended or not, upon any
public property within the city for a period of time in excess of 72 hours.
   (B)   The presence of an abandoned, dismantled, junked or partially
dismantled, wrecked or inoperable motor vehicle or trailer, or parts thereof,
on public property is hereby declared a public nuisance which may be abated as
such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 15-516) (Ord. 2008-03, passed 7-7-2008) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.02 STORING, PARKING OR LEAVING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall park, store, leave or permit the parking, storing or
leaving of any wrecked or inoperable motor vehicle or trailer of any kind,
whether attended or not, upon any private property within the city, except
that, with respect to a wrecked or inoperable motor vehicle or trailer, such
vehicle or trailer may be parked, stored or left on said property for a period
of time not to exceed 72 hours.
   (B)   The presence of such wrecked or inoperable motor vehicle or trailer,
or parts thereof, on private property is hereby declared a public nuisance
which may be abated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   This section shall not apply to:
      (1)   Any motor vehicle or trailer parked or stored within a building or
private garage, behind a sight-proof fence, in the backyard or side yard where
it is out of sight of the public or behind the front line of the house under a
commercially-manufactured cover designed to conceal and totally cover the
vehicle or trailer and which does conceal and totally cover the vehicle or
trailer, and which is well maintained; or
      (2)   Any motor vehicle or trailer held in connection with a business or
enterprise lawfully licensed by the city for the servicing or repair of such
vehicles or trailers and which is located and operated in an area having the
proper commercial zoning for such operation, and where such vehicles and
trailers are only located for the limited time necessary to effect such
repairs.
(Prior Code, § 15-516) (Ord. 2008-03, passed 7-7-2008) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.03 NOTICE TO REMOVE; METHODS OF DELIVERY.
   (A)   Whenever it comes to the attention of the Mayor or the Police Chief,
or their designees, that any nuisance, as defined in this chapter, appears to
exist on public property, they may cause a written notice to be affixed to the
wrecked or inoperable motor vehicle or trailer declaring the existence of a
nuisance and ordering whomsoever has an interest in the wrecked or inoperable
motor vehicle or trailer to comply with this chapter by removing the vehicle or
trailer within 72 hours of the notice.
   (B)   If such nuisance is found to exist on private property, then the Mayor
or Police Chief, or their designee, may cause the notice to be affixed and, in
addition to the affixed notice, deliver a copy of such notice to the owner and/
or occupant of said private property. If a copy of this notice cannot be
delivered to the owner/occupant, then a copy of the notice shall be posted in a
conspicuous place on said private property, with a duplicate copy sent to the
owner and/or occupant of the private property by certified mail, return receipt
requested.
   (C)   The Mayor or Police Chief, or their designee, may also provide notice
of removal of a wrecked or inoperable motor vehicle or trailer by publication
in a newspaper in general circulation in the city.
(Prior Code, § 15-516) (Ord. 2008-03, passed 7-7-2008)
§ 94.04 CONTENTS OF NOTICE; PROCEDURES EXPLAINED.
   (A)   The notice so affixed or posted shall contain the request for removal
within the time specified in §
94.03 of this chapter. The notice shall advise that upon failure to comply with
the notice of removal, the designated official, either as to private or public
property, shall undertake such removal or cause it to be undertaken by private
wrecker or towing service. The cost of such removal shall be levied against the
owner and/or occupant of the property.
   (B)   The notice shall also advise the person to whom the notice is
applicable of his or her right to contest the determination of the official
designee that a violation of this chapter exists by requesting a hearing before
the Mayor or his or her designee. If such hearing is requested, then said
request shall be made by filing such request with the City Clerk. The request
for hearing must be made within the time for removal as set in §
94.03 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 15-516) (Ord. 2008-03, passed 7-7-2008)
§ 94.05 HEARING PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Upon receiving a request for a hearing pursuant to this chapter, the
hearing shall be set before the Mayor or a designated official who was not
involved in the determination to declare that a public nuisance existed. Notice
of the hearing shall be given to the person requesting the hearing and to the
Police Chief, or to the official who issued the notice, at least five days
prior to the hearing. No other notice shall be required. A request for hearing
under this chapter stays all enforcement proceedings until an order of the
Mayor, or other city official who was not involved in the declaration of
nuisance, is entered.
   (B)   (1)   At any hearing, the city and the person to whom the notice has
been directed may introduce such witnesses and evidence as either deems
necessary.
      (2)   The Mayor, or his or her designee who was not involved in the
determination to declare that a nuisance existed, shall determine either that
there exists such a nuisance as defined herein or that there does not exist a
nuisance as defined herein.
      (3)   The Mayor, or his or her designee who was not involved in the
determination to declare the nuisance, shall issue a written order either
finding the existence of a nuisance or finding that a nuisance does not exist.
The individual who conducts the hearing shall be authorized to allow the person
who requested the hearing additional time to come into compliance. The Mayor or
his or her designee shall state in his or her order the findings of fact on
which he or she based his or her decision and remit copies of those findings to
the property owner and to the Police Chief and the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 15-516) (Ord. 2008-03, passed 7-7-2008)
§ 94.06 REMOVAL OF VEHICLES OR TRAILERS.
   (A)   Within the time for removal set forth in the notice for removal, or in
the case of private property, within 48 hours of the date on which an order is
entered by the Mayor or his or her designee affirming the determination of the
declaration that such vehicle or trailer constituted a nuisance, the owner of
the wrecked vehicle or trailer and the owner or occupant of the private
property on which the same is located, either or all of them, shall cause the
removal of the vehicle or trailer.
   (B)   If the violation is not remedied within the time set forth herein,
then the city, through the Mayor or Police Chief or their designee, shall have
the right to take or cause to take possession of the vehicle or trailer and
remove it from the premises. If such action is necessary, the owner/occupant of
the private property shall be jointly and severally liable for the costs and
expenses incurred by the city for such removal through the use of any private
wrecker or towing service.
   (C)   Any interference by any individual with such lawful removal shall be
grounds for arrest or citation. It shall be lawful in all cases for any city
official designee or any private wrecker service to go onto private property to
effect such removal.
(Prior Code, § 15-516) (Ord. 2008-03, passed 7-7-2008) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.07 REMOVAL NOTICE TO OWNER AND OTHER INTERESTED PARTIES.
   (A)   The Mayor or Police Chief, or their designee, after possession has
been taken by the city of the herein-described property, shall furnish notice,
as notice has been defined in this chapter, by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the registered owner of the property in question at his or her
last known address within 15 days of the date the city has taken possession. In
the case of removal from private property, such notice shall also be given to
the owner/occupant of the private property from which said vehicle or trailer
was taken.
   (B)   The Mayor or Police Chief, or their designee, shall also contact the
Department of Public Safety of Oklahoma, or of whatever state is applicable,
and such other agencies within the state or of whatever state is applicable, as
may be reasonably necessary, to ascertain the names and addresses of any other
persons or companies that may have a lien interest or other interest of record
in the vehicle or trailer. If such interest holder is identified, then notice
shall be given to such party by certified mail, return receipt requested, in
the same manner as other notices are required under this chapter.
   (C)   (1)   Such notice shall be legally and factually sufficient so as to
properly identify the vehicle or trailer and shall include the make, model,
color, serial number, location and owner’s name. The notice shall also include
information concerning the location where the property was taken and its
condition and operability. Such information shall include where the property is
being stored and the contact information with the city in the event that said
party wishes to redeem the vehicle or trailer, including all information
concerning costs and charges incurred by the city for towing, removal,
transporting, notification, mailing and storage.
      (2)   The notice shall further inform all such notified parties that in
the event that redemption or reclamation by any party so notified is not made
within 30 days after the date of the notice, the right to reclaim such
property, as well as any and all right, title and interest to said property,
shall be legally deemed to have terminated, and said party shall be deemed to
have consented to the sale or disposition of such property and to the
termination of any and all of his or her rights, title and interest to said
property.
   (D)   If unable to identify the last registered owner of any wrecked or
inoperable vehicle or trailer, or if unable to obtain, with reasonable
certainty, the names and addresses of the owner or other interested parties, it
shall be sufficient notice to publish the notice as described herein in a
newspaper in general circulation within the city and county. Such notice by
publication may concern multiple listings at the discretion of the city. A copy
of any such published notice shall be forwarded to the Department of Public
Safety of the applicable state.
(Prior Code, § 15-516) (Ord. 2008-03, passed 7-7-2008)
§ 94.08 DISPOSITION OF MOTOR VEHICLES OR TRAILERS.
   (A)   Any such property herein described shall be sold at public sale in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, provided that no such vehicle
or trailer shall be so sold prior to the expiration of 30 days from the date of
the notice given pursuant to §
94.07 of this chapter. At least ten days prior to such public sale, the city,
through its designee, shall cause to be published a notice in a newspaper in
general circulation within the county and the city stating that such property
is being sold, the condition of such property, the location where it can be
viewed and any information available concerning the make, model number, year,
license number, serial number and any other necessary information to
sufficiently describe the property in question.
   (B)   Such notice shall additionally set forth the terms of the sale and the
location, date and time of said sale. A copy of this notice shall be mailed to
the last registered owner of the vehicle or trailer and to any identified
lienholder. On the date of the sale, such property shall be sold to the highest
bidder for cash or certified funds, provided that any property not so sold for
an amount sufficient to equal the city’s costs and other charges owed may be
summarily disposed of at such sale for the best bid price available.
   (C)   The city shall provide a certificate of sale to the winning bidder,
restricted to granting only that title held by the city, in duplicate, the
original of which shall be given to the purchaser with a copy retained and
deposited with the City Clerk. Any such certificate shall not guarantee title
greater than that which is possessed by the city. Should the sale be invalid
for any reason, the liability of the city shall be limited to a return of the
bid price upon the return of the property in question to the city.
   (D)   The proceeds of sale shall be applied in the following order:
      (1)   First, to the reasonable costs incurred in the sale itself;
      (2)   Second, to the satisfaction of the special lien held by the city
stemming from the costs and expenses so incurred by the city in its seizure;
      (3)   Third, to any indebtedness secured by a subordinate security
interest or lien in the vehicle or trailer; and
      (4)   Fourth, to the registered owner of said property, or if such owner
has not been identified, then any remaining monies shall be deposited to the
General Fund of the city.
(Prior Code, § 15-516) (Ord. 2008-03, passed 7-7-2008)
§ 94.09 ALTERNATIVE SALES PROCEDURES.
   Nothing contained in this chapter shall prohibit the city from following the
applicable sales procedures established by the state for disposing of abandoned
vehicles as provided for under 47 O.S. §§ 901 et seq. or under any other
statute allowing for the disposal of personal property, such as found in, but
not limited to, 11 O.S. §§ 34-104 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 15-516) (Ord. 2008-03, passed 7-7-2008)
§ 94.10 REDEMPTION OF VEHICLE OR TRAILER BY OWNER.
   The owner of any wrecked or inoperable vehicle or trailer which has come
into the possession of the city or a private wrecker service under the
provisions of this chapter may redeem such property prior to its sale or
disposal upon presentation of proof of ownership and payment in full to the
city and/or wrecker service of all charges lawfully incurred in its removal,
storage, notifications, mailings, advertising and any other expenses of the
city. This right of redemption shall terminate with the sale or disposition by
the city.
(Prior Code, § 15-516) (Ord. 2008-03, passed 7-7-2008)
§ 94.11 LIABILITY FOR TOWING AND STORAGE EXPENSES.
   Any person from whose private property such vehicle or trailer was removed
and stored under this chapter is liable to the city and/or any private wrecker
service for the expenses incurred by the removal, transportation, storage, sale
and disposition of such property. In the event that the sale of such property
fails to generate sufficient funds to cover all of the costs of such removal,
transportation, towing, storage, advertising, mailings, sale and disposition,
then the person or persons from whose private property such vehicle or trailer
was removed shall pay to the city any balance of the city’s costs remaining
unpaid within 60 days, or otherwise, such obligation may be collected by the
city as with any other indebtedness owed.
(Prior Code, § 15-516) (Ord. 2008-03, passed 7-7-2008) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty
of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be subject to punishment as provided
for under the general penalty clause in §
10.99(A) of this code.
(Prior Code, § 15-516) (Ord. 2008-03, passed 7-7-2008)
CHAPTER 95: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
   
95.01   City Council to make rules
   
95.02   Fees to be determined
   
95.03   Public park closing hours, posted
   
95.04   Public park rules and regulations, posted
 
   
95.99   Penalty
§ 95.01 CITY COUNCIL TO MAKE RULES.
   The Council shall promulgate, invoke, create, amend and enforce such rules,
regulations and other requirements as it deems necessary or expedient in
connection with the use of all recreational and park facilities owned or
operated by the city.
(Prior Code, § 11-101) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.02 FEES TO BE DETERMINED.
   The city shall provide by rules, from time to time, the fees charged for any
such park or recreational privileges on any property or facility for
recreational purposes owned or operated by the city.
(Prior Code, § 11-102)
§ 95.03 PUBLIC PARK CLOSING HOURS, POSTED.
   (A)   The city’s public park (Legacy Park) within the city limits shall be
closed to the public:
      (1)   From 10:00 p.m. until 7:00 a.m. each day (Summer Hours); or
      (2)   From 8:00 p.m. until 7:00 p.m. each day (Winter Hours).
   (B)   Provided, the city may post more restrictive rules and regulations.
(Ord. 2022-02, passed 5-9-2022) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.04 PUBLIC PARK RULES AND REGULATIONS, POSTED.
   (A)   No alcohol;
   (B)   No glass containers;
   (C)   No drugs;
   (D)   No smoking under the gazebo;
   (E)   Smoking only in designated area;
   (F)   No littering:
   (G)   No vandalism; and
   (H)   No defacing of permanent or temporary fixtures such as signs, plants
or grass.
(Ord. 2022-02, passed 5-9-2022) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.99 PENALTY.
   It is unlawful for any person to use any of the park or recreational
facilities without having complied with the rules and regulations promulgated
by the Council, as per §
95.01 of this chapter, in connection therewith. Anyone violating any of the
rules and regulations, or failing to comply with such, shall be guilty of an
offense and, on conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in §
10.99(A) of this code.
(Prior Code, § 11-103) (Ord. 2022-02, passed 5-9-2022)
CHAPTER 96: CEMETERIES
Section
   
96.01   Conduct in cemeteries
   
96.02   Lot care
   
96.03   Supervision of lot plantings and improvements
   
96.04   Conditions of lot purchases
   
96.05   Price of lots, charges
   
96.06   Purchase of lots
   
96.07   Transfer of lots
   
96.08   Conditions prior to interment
   
96.09   Preparation of graves
   
96.10   Disinterment and removal
 
   
96.99   Penalty
§ 96.01 CONDUCT IN CEMETERIES.
   (A)   No person shall:
      (1)   Enter a cemetery except through established gates;
      (2)   Litter or throw rubbish or debris on walks or drives or any part of
the cemetery grounds;
      (3)   Pick or mutilate any flowers, wild or domestic, or disturb any
trees, shrubs or other plants;
      (4)   Possess or consume liquor within the cemetery;
      (5)   Permit any dog to enter or remain in the cemetery;
      (6)   Discharge any firearms or air rifles in or adjacent to the
cemetery, except for authorized volleys at burials;
      (7)   Violate any of the city’s traffic regulations;
      (8)   Drive a vehicle in excess of 15 mph;
      (9)   Drive off the established roads, unless permission is given in
writing by the Superintendent of the cemetery;
      (10)   Make a U-turn on a cemetery road; or
      (11)   Use a cemetery road as a public thoroughfare.
   (B)   No children shall enter a cemetery unless accompanied by an adult
responsible for the children’s conduct. The city is not responsible for any
damage to lots, structures or objects thereon, or for flowers or articles
removed from any lot or grave. Persons driving in cemeteries are responsible
for any damage done by the vehicle or animal, or both, in the driver’s charge.
(Prior Code, § 11-205) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.02 LOT CARE.
   The following rules shall be observed in caring for cemetery lots.
   (A)   Copings, fences, structures of wood and hedges are prohibited.
   (B)   Those structures or enclosures established on any lot previous to the
adoption of these regulations which have, in the judgment of the cemetery
management, become unsightly by reason of neglect or age shall be removed.
   (C)   No elevated mounds shall be built over graves, and no lot shall be
filled above the grade established by the city.
   (D)   Receptacles for cut flowers shall be installed flush with the surface
of the lawn.
   (E)   Chairs, settees, benches and vases shall be permitted only if properly
installed and maintained. Failure to properly install and maintain shall be
cause for removal.
   (F)   Rubbish, refuse and unused containers shall not be left on the lots.
   (G)   No person may enclose any cemetery lot in the cemetery of the city by
curbs, fence posts, pipes or any other means.
(Prior Code, § 11-207) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.03 SUPERVISION OF LOT PLANTINGS AND IMPROVEMENTS.
   All plantings and other improvements to lots shall be done with the approval
of the superintendent of the cemetery or his or her assistant.
(Prior Code, § 11-206) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.04 CONDITIONS OF LOT PURCHASES.
   All lots shall be sold subject to city rules and regulations, and the deed
of title shall be stated. No lot shall be used for any purpose other than the
burial of human remains and the placing of appropriate monuments and memorials.
When an internment is to be made, a permit must be obtained from the City Clerk
and signed by one of the heirs. Burial lots are exempt from ordinary taxes and
cannot be seized on execution. The city may impose specific charges against the
lots. No mortgage or other encumbrance shall be given on any lot. An internment
properly made shall not be disturbed except on written consent of the original
owners or their heirs, and then only with the permission of the cemetery’s
superintendent or the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 11-201) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.05 PRICE OF LOTS, CHARGES.
   The City Council, by motion or resolution, shall determine the prices at
which the various lots in the cemeteries shall be sold and also the charges to
be made by the city for interment, disinterment and other services.
(Prior Code, § 11-204)
§ 96.06 PURCHASE OF LOTS.
   When a lot is paid for in full, a deed of title for cemetery purposes only
shall be issued to the purchaser by the City Clerk. This section does not apply
to indigent internment cases.
(Prior Code, § 11-202)
§ 96.07 TRANSFER OF LOTS.
   The transfer of lots or parts of lots to another person shall be reported to
the City Clerk for recording. No person shall be recognized as owner or part
owner unless recorded. All transfers of parts of lots less than that conveyed
from the city to the lot owners must be approved by the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 11-203) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.08 CONDITIONS PRIOR TO INTERMENT.
   (A)   No interment shall take place without a burial permit, nor until all
laws, ordinances, rules and regulations relative to burials have been complied
with. No grave shall be opened unless the grave space has been paid for, with
the exception of indigent cases or when the funeral director assumes the
responsibility of payment for such grave space. Funeral directors making
arrangements for burials shall be responsible for all interment charges if not
paid by the owner or agent.
   (B)   If the deceased to be interred is not a member of the immediate family
of the lot owner, then permission in writing from such owner must be filed with
the superintendent of the cemetery. This permission must be filed before the
interment is made.
(Prior Code, § 11-208) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.09 PREPARATION OF GRAVES.
   Only one internment in any one grave shall be permitted. The superintendent
of the cemetery shall not be held responsible for errors in the location of
graves on lots arising from improper instructions of lot owners. Orders from
funeral directors shall be construed as orders from owners. Under no
circumstances shall the city assume responsibility for errors in opening graves
when orders are given by telephone.
(Prior Code, § 11-209)
§ 96.10 DISINTERMENT AND REMOVAL.
   Disinterment and removal of a body shall not be made without the permission
of the cemetery’s superintendent, the lot owner or the next-of-kin of the
deceased. Graves shall not be opened for inspection, except for official
investigations.
(Prior Code, § 11-210) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished as
provided in §
10.99(A) of this code.
(Prior Code, § 11-211)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   OCCUPATIONAL LICENSES AND PERMITS
      
111.   FOOD AND BEVERAGES
      
112.   MERCHANTS AND ITINERANT VENDORS
      
113.   DANGEROUS OR RESTRICTED MATERIALS
CHAPTER 110: OCCUPATIONAL LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section
General Provisions
   
110.01   License required
   
110.02   License period, expiration
   
110.03   Fee payment; proration of fee
   
110.04   License issuance
   
110.05   License transfer
   
110.06   License display
   
110.07   License revocation or suspension; notice; appeal
   
110.08   Exemptions
Occupational Provisions
   
110.20   Plumber’s license; requirements to practice
   
110.21   Electrician’s license; requirements to practice
   
110.22   Gas piping/gas appliance installer’s license; requirements to practice
   
110.23   Mechanic’s license; requirements to practice
 
   
110.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 110.01 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, either as principal,
officer, agent, servant or employee, to engage in any of the callings, trades,
professions or occupations for which a license is required without first paying
to the city the fee or tax required and procuring from the city a license.
(Prior Code, § 9-101) Penalty, see §
110.99
Statutory reference:
   Municipal powers to levy occupational license taxes, see 11 O.S. §§ 22-106
and 22-107
§ 110.02 LICENSE PERIOD, EXPIRATION.
   All licenses shall expire annually unless a different date of expiration is
provided by the ordinance providing for the particular license.
(Prior Code, § 9-103)
§ 110.03 FEE PAYMENT; PRORATION OF FEE.
   All license fees shall be paid in advance for the license period for which
issued. The license fee may be prorated for a new business in proportion to the
amount of the year remaining during which time it will operate. However, at the
direction of the City Council, the City Clerk may issue licenses to licensees,
sending them statements for fees due, and if the same is not paid within 60
days from the due date, then the license shall thereupon become null and void.
(Prior Code, § 9-104)
§ 110.04 LICENSE ISSUANCE.
   All licenses shall be issued by the City Clerk. No license shall be issued
until all conditions prescribed by ordinance have been complied with and, in
those cases where examination or inspection is required by ordinance, a
certificate of examination or inspection filed with the City Clerk. Any
applicant for a license shall make application upon such forms as may be
prescribed by ordinance or may be prescribed by the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 9-102)
§ 110.05 LICENSE TRANSFER.
   No license shall be sold or otherwise transferred.
(Prior Code, § 9-105) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.06 LICENSE DISPLAY.
   (A)   It is the duty of any person, having obtained a license for any
authorized purpose, to have the same placed or posted in a secure manner in
some public place on the premises occupied and used for such business and where
the license may be readily seen at any time by any person entering the place of
business.
   (B)   Any licensee who does not occupy any certain premises for the conduct
of such licensed business shall carry his or her license on his or her person
and shall display the same whenever requested.
(Prior Code, § 9-106) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.07 LICENSE REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION; NOTICE; APPEAL.
   (A)   All licenses issued by the city shall be subject to revocation by the
duly-authorized officer of the City Council upon any breach of any condition
prescribed by ordinance for the regulation of such licensed occupation or in
the event that such licensee operates such licensed occupation or business in
violation of the laws of the city or the state, or in violation of any law or
regulation of the United States government. The DULY-AUTHORIZED OFFICER shall
mean the City Clerk in all instances, except when some other person or board is
given the authority by ordinance to revoke or suspend the particular license.
   (B)   The duly-authorized officer shall either give written notice by
personal service or by mail to the licensee of the revocation of his or her
license or the suspension of the same, which notice, if mailed, shall be mailed
to the address given on the application or license. The license shall stand
revoked or suspended from the time of the giving of such notice.
   (C)   Any licensee, however, may appeal to the City Council from such
decision within ten days after the aforesaid notice by filing a written request
with the City Clerk for a hearing. The hearing shall be held by the City
Council at the next regular meeting following the filing of the appeal but may
be continued from day to day. The appealing licensee may be represented by
counsel. The hearing shall be conducted in an informal manner, but no license
shall be revoked or suspended except upon a preponderance of the evidence. The
Council may affirm, modify or vacate the order of revocation or suspension, and
its decision shall be final.
(Prior Code, § 9-107)
§ 110.08 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following shall be exempt from the provisions of this subchapter:
   (A)   A farmer selling in the city produce actually produced by him or her
in the county;
   (B)   All scientific or literary entertainers or lecturers;
   (C)   All concerts, musicals or other entertainment given exclusively by the
citizens of the city; and
   (D)   All entertainments the proceeds from which are to be devoted to
charity or to public uses or improvements.
(Prior Code, § 9-108)
OCCUPATIONAL PROVISIONS
§ 110.20 PLUMBER’S LICENSE; REQUIREMENTS TO PRACTICE.
   (A)   No person shall practice or engage in the business, trade or
occupation of a plumbing contractor, a journeyperson plumber or a plumber’s
apprentice unless he or she possesses a current and valid license as such from
the state.
   (B)   Bond and insurance requirements of plumbing contractors shall meet the
requirements established by state law.
   (C)   No person shall practice or engage in the business, trade or
occupation of a plumbing contractor, a journeyperson plumber or a plumber’s
apprentice unless he or she has first registered as such with the city and paid
the annual fee set by the City Council by motion or resolution.
(Prior Code, § 5-203) Penalty, see §
110.99
Statutory reference:
   State plumbing licenses required, cities may require registration, see 59
O.S. §§ 1001 et seq.
§ 110.21 ELECTRICIAN’S LICENSE; REQUIREMENTS TO PRACTICE.
   (A)   No person shall practice or engage in the business, trade or
occupation of an electrical contractor, journeyperson electrician or
electrician’s apprentice unless he or she holds a current license obtained from
the state.
   (B)   Bond and insurance requirements of electrical contractors shall meet
the requirements established by state law.
   (C)   No person shall practice or engage in the business, trade or
occupation of an electrical contractor, a journeyperson electrician or an
electrician’s apprentice unless he or she has first registered as such with the
city and paid the annual fee set by the City Council by motion or resolution.
(Prior Code, § 5-302) Penalty, see §
110.99
Statutory reference:
   State electrical licenses required, 59 O.S. §§ 1680 through 1696
§ 110.22 GAS PIPING/GAS APPLIANCE INSTALLER’S LICENSE; REQUIREMENTS TO
PRACTICE.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of installing
gas piping or gas appliances without first obtaining a license from the city.
The license may be obtained by persons holding appropriate contractor’s and
other licenses issued by the state.
   (B)   Bond and insurance shall be provided by the licensee in such amounts
as required by the state.
(Prior Code, § 5-402) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.23 MECHANIC’S LICENSE; REQUIREMENTS TO PRACTICE.
   (A)   No person shall practice or engage in the business, trade or
occupation of a mechanical contractor, a mechanical journeyperson or a
mechanical apprentice unless he or she has a current and valid license issued
by the state.
   (B)   Bond and insurance requirements of mechanical contractors shall meet
the requirements established by state law.
   (C)   No person shall practice or engage in the business, trade or
occupation of a mechanical contractor, a mechanical journeyperson or a
mechanical apprentice unless he or she has first registered as such with the
city and paid the annual fee set by the City Council by motion or resolution.
(Prior Code, § 5-603) Penalty, see §
110.99
Statutory reference:
   State mechanical licenses required, cities may require registration, see 59
O.S. §§
1850.1 et seq.
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99(A) of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any person who engages in any business, trade or vocation for
which a license, permit, certificate or registration is required by §§
110.20 through
110.23 of this chapter without first having a valid license, permit,
certificate or registration as required, or who shall fail to do anything
required by §§
110.20 through
110.23 of this chapter or by any code adopted by §§
110.20 through
110.23 of this chapter, or who shall otherwise violate any provision of §§
110.20 through
110.23 of this chapter, or of any code adopted by §§
110.20 through
110.23 of this chapter, or who shall violate any lawful regulation or order
made by any of the officers provided in §§
110.20 through
110.23 of this chapter, shall be guilty of an offense punishable as provided in
§
10.99(A) of this code. Each day upon which a violation continues shall be
deemed a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 5-801)
      (2)   No penalty imposed by and pursuant to §§
110.20 through
110.23 of this chapter shall interfere with the right of the city also to apply
to the proper courts of the state for mandamus, an injunction or other
appropriate action against such person.
(Prior Code, § 5-802)
   (C)   A violation of §
110.20 of this chapter shall be deemed a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as
provided in §
10.99(A) of this code. Any person who violates or refuses to comply with any of
the provisions of §
110.20 of this chapter shall be punished as provided in §
10.99(A) of this code.
(Prior Code, § 5-204)
   (D)   A violation of §
110.21 of this chapter shall be deemed a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by
fine. Any person, firm or corporation who violates or refuses to comply with
any of the provisions of §
110.21 of this chapter shall be punished as provided in §
10.99(A) of this code.
(Prior Code, § 5-303)
   (E)   Any person who shall do any act prohibited by §
110.22 of this chapter or fail or refuse to comply therewith, or fail or refuse
to obey a lawful order of the inspector, shall be punished by a fine as
provided in §
10.99(A) of this code.
(Prior Code, § 5-403)
   (F)   A violation of §
110.23 of this chapter shall be deemed a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as
provided in §
10.99(A) of this code. Any person who violates or refuses to comply with any of
the provisions of §
110.23 of this chapter shall be punished as provided in §
10.99(A) of this code.
(Prior Code, § 5-604)
CHAPTER 111: FOOD AND BEVERAGES
Section
Food Service
   
111.01   State rules and regulations adopted
   
111.02   Permit required; fee
Alcoholic Beverages
   
111.15   Definitions
   
111.16   Application for license; conditions
   
111.17   Application for certificate of zoning and code compliance
   
111.18   Amount of tax
   
111.19   Compliance with state and city law
   
111.20   Location of retail package stores, mixed beverage establishments;
exceptions
   
111.21   Retail package store premises separated from other business premises
   
111.22   Employment of persons under 21 prohibited
   
111.23   Hours of operation
   
111.24   Transportation of intoxicating beverages and/or low-point beer
   
111.25   General alcohol prohibitions
   
111.26   Sales to minors prohibited; minors prohibited from premises
   
111.27   Consumption of intoxicating alcoholic beverages in public places
Low-Point Beer
   
111.40   Definitions
   
111.41   State licenses
   
111.42   Retail dealer’s license required; license fees
   
111.43   Application for license
   
111.44   Inspections by city officers
   
111.45   Location of retail dealers
   
111.46   Employment of persons under 18 years of age; exceptions
   
111.47   Sale of low-point beer prohibited during certain hours; exceptions
   
111.48   Transportation of low-point beer in moving vehicle
   
111.49   Minors on premises prohibited; exceptions
   
111.50   Sale of low-point beer to minors prohibited
Milk and Milk Products
   
111.65   National regulations adopted
   
111.66   Milk, milk product grading and sale
 
   
111.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Alcoholic beverage provisions, see 37A O.S. §§ 1-101 et seq.
FOOD SERVICE
§ 111.01 STATE RULES AND REGULATIONS ADOPTED.
   The latest edition of Oklahoma State Department of Health Rules and
Regulations pertaining to Food Establishments is hereby adopted and
incorporated by reference in this code. At least one copy of the rules and
regulations shall be on file in the office of the City Clerk. The rules and
regulations shall govern except for in cases of conflict with the provisions of
this chapter, in which case, the more restrictive terms shall prevail.
(Prior Code, § 8-401) Penalty, see §
111.99
Statutory reference:
   Requirements of food establishments, see 63 O.S. §§ 1-1101 et seq.
§ 111.02 PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE.
   Annual permits are required for the operation of food service
establishments. The fee for such permit shall be as set by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 8-402) Penalty, see §
111.99
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
§ 111.15 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   The definition of terms used in this subchapter shall be in conformity
with those provided in 37A O.S. § 1-103.
   (B)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
      ABLE COMMISSION. The Alcoholic Beverage Laws Enforcement Commission of
the state.
      ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Alcohol, spirits, beer and wine, as those terms are
defined herein, and also includes every liquid or solid, patented or not,
containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer and capable of being consumed as a
beverage by human beings, but does not include low-point beer as that term is
defined in §
111.40 of this chapter.
      LICENSEE. Any person holding a license under the State Alcoholic Beverage
Control Act, being 37A O.S. §§ 1-101 et seq., and any agent, servant or
employee of such licensee while in the performance of any act or duty in
connection with the licensed business or on the licensed premises.
      MIXED BEVERAGES. One or more servings of a beverage composed in whole or
in part of an alcoholic beverage that is in a sealed or unsealed container of
any legal size for consumption on the premises where served or sold by the
holder of a mixed beverage, caterer or special event license.
      SALE.
         (a)   Any transfer, exchange or barter in any manner or by any means
whatsoever, and includes all sales made by any person, whether as principal,
proprietor, agent, servant or employee.
         (b)   The term SALE shall also include the use or consumption of any
alcoholic beverage obtained within or imported from without the state upon
which the excise tax levied by the laws of the state has not been paid or
exempted.
(Prior Code, § 3-101)
§ 111.16 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Every person desiring to obtain a license as provided for herein shall
make application to the City Clerk on forms to be provided, setting forth the
location of the business and the names of all persons interested in the
business, together with their addresses. If a corporation, the application
shall include the names of the president and managing officer.
   (B)   No licensee shall be issued a license without a satisfactory showing
that the applicant has:
      (1)   Satisfied the conditions of this subchapter;
      (2)   Obtained all applicable state and county permits or licenses; and
      (3)   Paid the tax as required herein.
   (C)   No license shall be issued or valid unless the licensee meets the
requirements of the city’s zoning ordinances and regulations.
(Prior Code, § 3-103)
§ 111.17 APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE OF ZONING AND CODE COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   Every applicant for a certificate of compliance with the zoning, fire,
health and safety codes of the city required by 37A O.S. shall apply at the
office of the City Clerk by:
      (1)   Filing a written application on forms prescribed by that office;
and
      (2)   Paying a verification and certification fee in the amount as set by
the Council at the time of filing.
   (B)   Upon receipt of an application for a certificate of compliance, the
City Clerk shall cause an investigation to be made to determine whether the
premises proposed for licensed operations complies with the provisions of the
zoning ordinance and any health, fire, building or other safety codes
applicable to it.
   (C)   Upon finding that the premises of an applicant for a certificate is in
compliance with all applicable zoning ordinances, a certificate of zoning shall
be issued to the ABLE Commission.
   (D)   Upon finding that the premises of an applicant for a certificate is in
compliance with all applicable fire, safety and health codes, a certificate of
compliance shall be issued to the ABLE Commission.
   (E)   The above certificates of compliance shall be signed by the City
Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 3-104)
§ 111.18 AMOUNT OF TAX.
   (A)   There is hereby levied and assessed an annual occupation tax on every
business or occupation relating to alcoholic beverages as specifically
enumerated herein and pursuant to the provisions of 37A O.S. § 4-104 in the
amount as set by the City Council by motion or resolution.
   (B)   The occupation tax for a brewer and a Class B wholesaler shall be
reduced by 75% if the brewer or Class B wholesaler is also the holder of a
license from the state to manufacture or wholesale any low- point beer as
provided in 37A O.S. § 2-101.
   (C)   The occupation tax levied herein shall be paid in advance to the City
Clerk, who shall issue a receipt therefor. The license shall expire annually on
December 31.
   (D)   Upon payment of the occupation tax, the City Clerk shall issue a
receipt, signed by the City Clerk, to the state licensee paying such
occupational tax. The City Clerk shall also record the name of the licensee and
the address where the licensee engages in his or her occupation. Such record
shall be duly filed and kept in the permanent files of the city for at least
five years. Thereafter, upon resolution by the Council, it may be destroyed.
   (E)   Any state licensee shall post his or her tax receipt in a conspicuous
place on the premises wherein he or she carries on his or her occupation.
   (F)   The occupation tax shall cover only the person paying the tax and no
other of a successor thereof, and shall not be refundable.
   (G)   The City Clerk shall make and transmit to the ABLE Commission an
annual report showing the number and class of licenses subject to the tax and
the amount of money received therefrom.
   (H)   (1)   All sums due from any person by reason of occupation taxes
imposed by this chapter and all penalties accruing from such person by reason
of failure to pay such taxes shall be recoverable at the suit of the city,
brought against such person in any court of competent jurisdiction.
      (2)   In any suit, in addition to the tax and penalties, the plaintiff
shall recover interest at the rate of 10% per annum upon all sums due by way of
tax and penalty from the date of accrual thereof, and all costs of collection,
judicial or otherwise, including reasonable attorney’s fees, all to be
determined by the court.
      (3)   Prosecution for an offense against the city arising out of the
failure to pay a tax levied by this chapter, regardless of the outcome thereof
or its continued pendency, shall not constitute a defense or bar in any manner
the collection of the tax and penalties, if any are due, as herein provided.
(Prior Code, § 3-102) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.19 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE AND CITY LAW.
   No person shall own, operate or maintain a retail package store or mixed
beverage establishment, or produce, manufacture, distribute, rectify, bottle or
sell any beer, spirits, wine or other alcoholic beverage, without first
obtaining valid licenses issued by the state and the city.
(Prior Code, § 3-105) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.20 LOCATION OF RETAIL PACKAGE STORES, MIXED BEVERAGE ESTABLISHMENTS;
EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall own, operate, maintain or have any interest in any
retail package store which is located at a place in the city which is forbidden
as a location for such store by state law or city ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   The location of a retail package store or mixed beverage
establishment is specifically prohibited within 300 feet from any church
property primarily and regularly used for worship services and religious
activities or a public school. If any such church or school shall be
established within 300 feet of any licensed premises after such premises has
been licensed, then this shall not be a bar to the renewal of such license by
the Alcoholic Beverage Laws Enforcement Commission so long as it has been in
continuous force and effect.
      (2)   The distance shall be measured from the nearest property line of
such church or school to the nearest public entrance door of the premises of
such package store or mixed beverage establishment along the street right-of-
way line providing the nearest direct route usually traveled by pedestrians
between such points.
   (C)   A retail package store or mixed beverage establishment shall not be
located on any city block where a church or school is located.
(Prior Code, § 3-113) Penalty, see §
111.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 37A O.S.§ 4-103
§ 111.21 RETAIL PACKAGE STORE PREMISES SEPARATED FROM OTHER BUSINESS PREMISES.
   (A)   No person shall maintain, operate or assist in any manner in the
maintenance or operation of a package store upon premises which are not
separated by nontransparent walls from adjoining premises on which any other
goods, wares or merchandise are sold or services are rendered, the same broken
only, if at all, by a passage to which the public is not admitted.
   (B)   No person shall take any alcoholic beverage through such passageway
for the purpose of selling or reselling such beverage or for the purpose of the
delivery thereof in connection with a sale of such beverage.
(Prior Code, § 3-115) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.22 EMPLOYMENT OF PERSONS UNDER 21 PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No licensee shall employ, assist or aid in causing the employment of
any person under the age of 21 years in the selling, manufacture, distribution
or other handling of alcoholic beverages.
   (B)   However, a mixed beverage, caterer or special event licensee may
employ servers who are 18 years of age or older except for in designated bar or
lounge areas.
(Prior Code, § 3-111) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.23 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition applies
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
      OPEN CONTAINER. Any receptacle containing low-point beer or an
intoxicating alcoholic beverage, to include the original container of the
beverage where the original seal has been broken or opened.
   (B)   No package store licensee shall sell or keep a package store premises
open for the purpose of selling any alcoholic beverage at any hour than between
the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday.
   (C)   (1)   No alcoholic beverages may be sold, dispensed, served or
consumed on the premises of a mixed drink beverage licensee or bottle club
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m.
      (2)   No licensee shall permit any person who has in his or her
possession an open container having as its contents an intoxicating alcoholic
beverage to remain in a mixed beverage establishment between the hours of 2:15
a.m. and 10:00 a.m. No person having in his or her possession an open container
having as its contents an intoxicating alcoholic beverage shall remain in a
mixed beverage establishment between the hours of 2:15 a.m. and 10:00 a.m.
(Prior Code, § 3-114) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.24 TRANSPORTATION OF INTOXICATING BEVERAGES AND/OR LOW-POINT BEER.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly transport in any
moving vehicle on a public street, highway or alley any intoxicating beverage
or low-point beer, as defined by 37A O.S.§ 1-103, except in the original
container, which shall not have been opened and from which the original cap or
seal shall not have been removed, unless the opened container be in the rear
trunk or a compartment which is not accessible to the driver or to any other
person in the vehicle while it is in motion.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to the passenger area
of BUSES, as defined in the state statutes as being a vehicle for the transport
of people for hire, or to LIMOUSINES, as defined by the state statutes as a
chauffeur-driven vehicle other than a bus or taxicab. However, it shall be
unlawful for the driver of any such bus or limousine to consume or to have in
his or her immediate possession any such intoxicating beverage or low-point
beer.
(Prior Code, § 3-107) (Ord. 2005-7, passed 11-7-2005) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.25 GENERAL ALCOHOL PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No person shall:
      (1)   Purchase any alcoholic beverage at retail or wholesale from any
person other than a dealer licensed by the ABLE Commission;
      (2)   Except as otherwise permitted in this chapter, drink any alcoholic
beverage in public, except on the premises of a licensee who is authorized to
sell or serve alcoholic beverages by the individual drink, or be intoxicated in
a public place;
      (3)   Open a container of intoxicating beverage or consume alcoholic
beverages on the premises of a retail package store; or
      (4)   Possess more than one quart of any alcoholic beverage unless the
state tax has been paid thereon, except as may be otherwise provided by law.
   (B)   No licensee shall:
      (1)   Give any alcoholic beverage as a prize, premium or consideration
for any lottery, game of chance or skill or any type of competition; or
      (2)   Advertise or offer “happy hours” or any other means or inducements
to stimulate the consumption of alcoholic beverages, including:
         (a)   Deliver more than two drinks to one person at one time;
         (b)   Sell to or offer to sell to any person or group of persons any
drinks at a price less than the price regularly charged for such drinks during
the same calendar week, except at private functions not open to the public;
         (c)   Sell to or offer to sell to any person an unlimited number of
drinks during any set period of time for a fixed price, except at private
functions not open to the public;
         (d)   Sell to or offer to sell drinks to any person or group of
persons on any one day at prices less than those charged to the general public
on that day, except at private functions not open to the public;
         (e)   Increase the volume of alcoholic beverage contained in a drink
without increasing proportionately the price regularly charged for such drink
during the same calendar week; or
         (f)   Encourage or permit, on the licensed premises, any game or
contest which involves drinking or the awarding of drinks as prizes.
   (C)   No licensee shall:
      (1)   Allow any person on the premises where alcoholic beverages or low-
point beer are sold or dispensed for consumption on the premises of the
licensee when such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing
so as to expose to view any portion of the breast below the top of the areola
or any portion of the pubic area, buttocks or genitalia;
      (2)   Permit any person to perform sexual acts or acts which simulate
sexual acts;
      (3)   Permit any person to use artificial devices or inanimate objects to
depict any lewd activities; or
      (4)   Permit the showing of films, still pictures, electronic
reproductions or other visual reproductions depicting any of the prohibited
acts in this section.
   (D)   No licensee shall permit any drink solicitation, or request from a
patron to purchase any intoxicating alcoholic beverage or low-point beer for
consumption off the premises of the licensee, as that term is defined in this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 3-108) Penalty, see §
111.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 37A O.S.§§ 3-101 through 3-127
§ 111.26 SALES TO MINORS PROHIBITED; MINORS PROHIBITED FROM PREMISES.
   (A)   No person shall sell, deliver, furnish or give any alcoholic beverage
to any person under the age of 21 years, except that this division (A) shall
not apply to a parent or guardian as regards his or her child or children.
   (B)   No licensee shall permit any person under 21 years of age to enter,
remain within or be about the premises of a retail package store or mixed
beverage establishment.
   (C)   No person under 21 years of age shall enter, remain within or be about
the premises of a retail package store or mixed beverage establishment.
(Prior Code, § 3-106) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.27 CONSUMPTION OF INTOXICATING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   No person within the city shall drink intoxicating liquor in any public
place unless authorized by the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, nor shall any
person be intoxicated in a public place within the city.
(Prior Code, § 3-109) Penalty, see §
111.99
LOW-POINT BEER
§ 111.40 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly requires a different meaning.
   LOW-POINT BEER. All beverages containing more than 0.5% alcohol by volume
and not more than 3.2% alcohol by weight.
   MINOR. A person who, in accordance with state law, has not yet attained the
age at which the consumption of low-point beer is permitted.
   RETAIL DEALER. Includes any and all persons who sell, distribute or dispense
any low-point beer at retail to the public for consumption or use, whether
consumed on the premises or not.
(Prior Code, § 3-201)
§ 111.41 STATE LICENSES.
   No person shall engage in the business of selling, offering for sale or
distributing any low-point beer at retail for consumption or use without first
having obtained a state license to do so, and in cases where such beverages are
consumed on the premises, a license as provided by the statutes of the state.
(Prior Code, § 3-202) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.42 RETAIL DEALER’S LICENSE REQUIRED; LICENSE FEES.
   (A)   No person shall sell, distribute or dispense any low-point beer at
retail to the public without first having obtained a license to do so from the
city, making payment in advance to the City Clerk in the amount as provided
herein. The annual fee shall be $25 for a license under this subchapter for
retail dealers selling low-point beer for consumption on or off the premises,
and $25 for retail dealers selling low-point beer in original packages and not
for consumption on the premises. The license shall expire annually on December
31.
   (B)   No license issued hereunder is transferable. Licenses required by this
subchapter shall be issued by the City Clerk upon payment of the required fee
and compliance by the applicant with all applicable ordinances of the city, and
upon a satisfactory showing that the applicant has obtained such state and
county permits as are required by law.
(Prior Code, § 3-203) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.43 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   An applicant for a retail dealer’s license or a renewal of such license
shall deposit the required fee with the City Clerk and submit an application on
the form provided containing the information required by the city.
(Prior Code, § 3-204)
§ 111.44 INSPECTIONS BY CITY OFFICERS.
   City officers may make inspections of all places of business where low-point
beer is sold, distributed or dispensed at retail for the purpose of enforcing
the laws and for ascertaining whether the operators thereof are complying with
the requirements of the law relating to the handling of low-point beer.
(Prior Code, § 3-213)
§ 111.45 LOCATION OF RETAIL DEALERS.
   No person shall own, operate, maintain or have any interest in any retail
dealer which is located at a place in the city which is forbidden as a location
for such store by state law or city ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 3-214) Penalty, see §
111.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 37A O.S.§ 4-103
§ 111.46 EMPLOYMENT OF PERSONS UNDER 18 YEARS OF AGE; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person under 18 years of age to be employed or
permitted to work, in any capacity whatsoever, in a place where low-point beer
is sold or dispensed for consumption on the premises.
   (B)   (1)   It is unlawful for any minor to be employed or permitted to
work, in any capacity whatsoever, in the separate or enclosed bar area of a
place where the main purpose of the area is the sale or consumption of low-
point beer.
      (2)   The provisions of this division (B) shall not apply to any area
which has as its main purpose some objective other than the sale or serving of
low-point beer, in which the sale or serving of the beverage is incidental to
the main purpose. However, the incidental service of food in the bar area shall
not exempt a holder of a license to sell low-point beer for consumption on the
premises from the provisions of this division (B).
   (C)   A parent, as regards the employment of his or her own child or
children, is excepted from the provisions of this section, provided that such
employment shall in no capacity whatsoever be related to the selling or
dispensing of such beverages.
   (D)   The provisions of division (A) above shall not apply to any business
or establishment where sales of the beverage do not exceed 25% of the gross
sales of the business or establishment.
(Prior Code, § 3-207) Penalty, see §
111.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 37A O.S. §§ 6-101, 6-102 and 6-120
§ 111.47 SALE OF LOW-POINT BEER PROHIBITED DURING CERTAIN HOURS; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No retail dealer licensed to sell low-point beer shall sell such
beverages for consumption on the premises:
      (1)   On Sundays between the hours of 2:00 a.m. Sunday and 7:00 a.m. the
following Monday; or
      (2)   Between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on any other day.
   (B)   (1)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition
applies unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
         OPEN CONTAINER. Any receptacle containing low-point beer or
intoxicating alcoholic beverage, to include the original container of the
beverage where the original seal has been broken or opened.
      (2)   No retail dealer of any business selling low-point beer, as that
term is defined in this subchapter, for consumption on the premises, nor any
operator, agent or employee of the retail dealer, shall permit any person who
has in his or her possession an open container having as its contents a low-
point beer to remain in the premises after 2:15 a.m. on Sunday or between the
hours of 2:15 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday.
      (3)   No person having in his or her possession an open container having
as its contents a low- point beer shall remain in the premises between the
hours of 2:01 a.m. to 7:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday or after 2:01 a.m. on
Sunday.
   (C)   No retail dealer licensed to sell low-point beer shall sell such
beverages for consumption off the premises on any day between 2:00 a.m. and 6:
00 a.m.
(Prior Code, § 3-208) Penalty, see §
111.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 37A O.S. §§ 3-125 and 6-123
§ 111.48 TRANSPORTATION OF LOW-POINT BEER IN MOVING VEHICLE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly transport in any moving
vehicle on a public street, highway or alley any intoxicating beverage or low-
point beer, as defined by 37A O.S.§ 1-103, except in the original container,
which shall not have been opened and from which the original cap or seal shall
not have been removed, unless the opened container be in the rear trunk or a
compartment which is not accessible to the driver or to any other person in the
vehicle while it is in motion. The provisions of this section shall not apply
to the passenger area of BUSES, as defined in the state statutes as being a
vehicle for the transport of people for hire, or LIMOUSINES, as defined by the
state statutes as a chauffeur- driven vehicle other than a bus or taxicab.
However, it shall be unlawful for the driver of any such bus or limousine to
consume or to have in his or her immediate possession any such intoxicating
beverage or low-point beer.
(Prior Code, § 3-107) (Ord. 2005-7, passed 11-7-2005) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.49 MINORS ON PREMISES PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   It is unlawful for any person who holds a license to sell and
dispense low-point beer for consumption on the premises, or any agent, servant
or employee of the license holder, to permit any minor to be admitted to or
remain in a separate or enclosed bar area of the licensed premises which has as
its main purpose the selling or serving of low-point beer for consumption on
the premises unless the minor’s parent or legal guardian is present.
      (2)   The provisions of this division (A) shall not prohibit minors from
being admitted to an area which has as its main purpose some objective other
than the sale or serving of low-point beer, in which the sale or serving of the
beverage is incidental to the main purpose, as long as minors are not sold or
served the beverage. However, the incidental service of food in the bar area
shall not except a licensee, agent, servant or employee from the provisions of
this division (A).
   (B)   If the premises of a holder of a license to sell low-point beer
contains a separate or enclosed bar area which has as its main purpose the sale
or serving of low-point beer for consumption on the premises, then no minor
shall enter, attempt to enter or remain in the area. The provisions of this
division (B) shall not prohibit minors from entering or remaining in an area
which has as its main purpose some objective other than the sale or serving of
low-point beer, in which the sale or serving of the beverage is incidental to
the main purpose, if the minors are not sold or served or do not consume low-
point beer anywhere on the premises. However, the incidental service of food in
the bar area shall not exempt minors from the provisions of this division (B).
   (C)   A showing by competent testimony that a minor was found upon the
premises of a retail dealer shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of
division (B) above.
(Prior Code, § 3-205) Penalty, see §
111.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 37A O.S. §§ 6-101, 6-102 and 6-120
§ 111.50 SALE OF LOW-POINT BEER TO MINORS PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person who holds a license to sell and dispense low-
point beer, or any agent, servant or employee of the license holder, to sell,
barter or give to any minor any low-point beer. This section shall not apply to
a parent as regards his or her own child or children.
(Prior Code, § 3-206) Penalty, see §
111.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 37A O.S. § 6-101
MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS
§ 111.65 NATIONAL REGULATIONS ADOPTED.
   The latest edition of the United States Public Health Service recommendation
Grade “A” Pasteurized Milk Ordinance with Administrative Procedures and the
provisions of state law governing milk and milk products as set out in 63 O.S.
§§ 1-1301 through 1-1311, as amended from time to time, are hereby adopted and
incorporated by reference in this chapter and are enforceable by the city as
fully as if they were set out at length herein. At least one copy of the milk
ordinance and referenced state law shall be on file in the office of the City
Clerk. The milk ordinance and the referenced state law shall govern except for
in cases of conflict with the provisions of this chapter, in which case, the
more restrictive terms shall prevail.
(Prior Code, § 8-420) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.66 MILK, MILK PRODUCT GRADING AND SALE.
   (A)   Only certified pasteurized and grade “A” pasteurized, and certified
raw or grade “A” raw, milk and milk products shall be sold to the final
consumer or to restaurants, soda fountains, grocery stores or similar
establishments. In an emergency, however, the sale of pasteurized milk and milk
products which have not been graded, or the grade of which is unknown, may be
authorized by the health authority, in which case, such milk and milk products
shall be labeled “ungraded.”
   (B)   All sampling, examining, grading and regarding of milk and milk
products and all inspections and issuing and suspension or revocation of
permits shall be done by the Health Officer or his or her designee, who shall
be a registered professional sanitarian.
(Prior Code, § 8-420) Penalty, see §
111.99
Statutory reference:
   Milk regulations, see 63 O.S. §§ 1-1201 et seq.
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99(A) of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of §§
111.01,
111.02,
111.65 or
111.66 of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished as provided in §
10.99(A) of this code. Such person may also be enjoined from continuing such
violation. Each day upon which such a violation occurs shall constitute a
separate violation.
(Prior Code, § 8-421)
   (C)   (1)   Any person violating the provisions of §
111.24 of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a
fine not to exceed the sum of $50.
      (2)   Any person convicted of violating §
111.24 of this chapter shall pay, in addition to any fine as described above, a
special assessment trauma care fee of $100, to be deposited to the Trauma Care
Assistance Revolving Fund created by 63 O.S. § 1-2530.9.
(Prior Code, § 3-107)
   (D)   Any person violating the provisions of §
111.48 of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a
fine not to exceed the sum of $50. Any person convicted of violating §
111.48 of this chapter shall pay, in addition to any fine as described above, a
special assessment trauma care fee of $100, to be deposited to the Trauma Care
Assistance Revolving Fund created by 63 O.S. § 1-2530.9.
(Ord. 2005-7, passed 11-7-2005)
CHAPTER 112: MERCHANTS AND ITINERANT VENDORS
Section
General Provisions
   
112.01   Selling merchandise from parked vehicles prohibited
Itinerant Vendors
   
112.15   Definitions
   
112.16   License required; blanket licenses
   
112.17   Fee
   
112.18   Exemptions
   
112.19   Application for license
   
112.20   Application for blanket license
   
112.21   Investigation; approval or disapproval
   
112.22   Bond for licenses
   
112.23   Service of process
   
112.24   Hours of business
   
112.25   Identification tag or badge; display
   
112.26   Sale of foods
   
112.27   Provisions cumulative
 
   
112.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 112.01 SELLING MERCHANDISE FROM PARKED VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to park any vehicle upon a street in the city
and offer merchandise for sale therefrom. In addition to the penalty provided
in Title VII, the sale of merchandise from parked vehicles on streets in the
city is declared to be dangerous to traffic and to the persons congregating
around the vehicle and constitutes a public nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 15-238) Penalty, see §
112.99
ITINERANT VENDORS
§ 112.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly requires a different meaning.
   COMMERCIAL. Soliciting for a business purpose which is intended to be for
profit and is not intended to be charitable, religious, not-for-profit or
political.
   ITINERANT. Having no regular place of doing business or soliciting in the
city, and includes, but is not limited to, making regular delivery or providing
goods over an established route through the city.
   PEDDLER. A person soliciting commercial orders for goods or services which
are to be provided from stocks or goods carried with the peddler, or which are
services provided by the peddler at the time the order is made.
   SOLICITING. All activities of peddlers, solicitors and vendors attempting to
obtain business. Such activities may include, but are not limited to,
distributing handbills or leaflets to the public directly or by placing them in
a mailbox, on a doorknob or otherwise on any property; coming personally onto
any property for the purposes defined herein; calling the occupants of any
property by telephone for the purposes herein defined or calling or inviting
any prospective customers to purchase or obtain merchandise, products or
service.
   SOLICITOR. A person soliciting commercial orders for goods or services which
are to be provided or shipped to the consumer at a later date.
   VENDOR. Any person engaged in a business or occupation selling or offering
to sell any merchandise, product or service, and includes, but is not limited
to, peddlers and solicitors.
(Prior Code, § 9-201)
§ 112.16 LICENSE REQUIRED; BLANKET LICENSES.
   (A)   Any itinerant vendor, solicitor or peddler shall obtain a license from
the city prior to any soliciting in the city, unless exempted herein, to cover
each person who will be soliciting and each location or separate place of
business.
   (B)   (1)   Owners or lessees of buildings in which itinerant vendors
operate or locate must obtain a blanket license covering all itinerant vendors
who will be established in the building controlled by the owner or lessee.
      (2)   Governmental agencies owning public buildings may arrange a letter
of agreement with the city in lieu of a license if licensing is contrary to the
regulations governing the governmental agency. In such a case, the letter of
agreement will provide for the same requirements as are shown in this
subchapter and will provide that the city receive half the rental fee paid by
the itinerant vendor until the city’s receipts equal the amount required for a
blanket license fee.
(Prior Code, § 9-202) Penalty, see §
112.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 47 O.S. § 434
§ 112.17 FEE.
   (A)   The fee for the licenses herein required shall be as set by the City
Council by motion or resolution. The fees may be waived for educational,
charitable or religious groups qualifying as 501(c)(3) organizations that make
house-to-house solicitations.
   (B)   Vendors/suppliers catering to local merchants for the resale of
merchandise as-is or to be processed into consumer items shall be exempt from
the license fee when selling to a business with the same standard industry code
number or American industry code number.
   (C)   The license fee will not apply to vendors who have rented space for a
sponsoring organization who are working in their designated area on the day or
days of the event.
(Prior Code, § 9-203) (Res. 2007-08, passed 8-6-2007)
§ 112.18 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   The following are exempt from the license requirements of this
subchapter:
      (1)   Farmers and truck gardeners from lands owned, cultivated or
controlled by them who offer for sale or sell, or who solicit and sell from
house to house, vegetables, butter, eggs and farm products produced and raised
by the farmers and truck gardeners from such land or produced thereon; and
      (2)   Needy ex-service persons holding a certificate duly issued by a
district judge having jurisdiction as provided by law.
   (B)   (1)   Any person who desires to be exempt from the license fees levied
under this subchapter due to engaging in interstate commerce shall provide
sufficient data on transactions and proof to the city to establish the
interstate commerce nature of his or her business and transactions.
      (2)   If the city refuses to issue an interstate commerce exemption for
the license fees to a commercial business activity, then the applicant is
entitled to a hearing before the City Judge.
(Prior Code, § 9-210)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions regarding ex-service persons, see 72 O.S. § 1
§ 112.19 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Applicants for licenses shall file during regular business hours a written
application, signed by the applicant if an individual, by all partners if a
partnership and by a qualified corporate officer if a corporation, with the
licensing officer, showing:
   (A)   The name and address of the person or persons having management or
supervision of the applicant’s business during the time that it is proposed to
be carried on in the city; the location or address of such person or persons
when engaged in such business; the permanent address or addresses of such
person or persons; the capacity in which such person or persons will act; the
name and address of the person, firm or corporation for whose account the
business will be carried on, if any, and, if a corporation, under the laws of
what state the same is incorporated;
   (B)   The place or places in the city within the proper zoning
classification where it is proposed to carry on the applicant’s business and
the length of time during which it is proposed that the business be conducted;
   (C)   The place or places, other than the permanent place of business of the
applicant, within the six months next preceding the date of the application
where the applicant has conducted a transient business;
   (D)   The nature of the goods or products being sold, that is, whether they
are rejects, “seconds” or first-line quality, and whether any warranty applies
to the items being sold; if a warranty applies, the period of the warranty and
the name and address of the warrantor and the procedures for filing for the
adjustment of refund shall be specified;
   (E)   A statement that the applicant agrees to the requirement to pay all
state and city sales taxes due on all items which are subject to sales taxes
and recognizes that a copy of all applications will be provided to the local
office of the State Tax Commission;
   (F)   The current state sales tax permit number;
   (G)   The current license or permit, if any, which may be required by state
law or ordinances of the city for the particular activity or business;
   (H)   If a motor vehicle is to be used in the business, a description of the
vehicle together with the motor vehicle registration number and license number
for the vehicle, and:
      (1)   Proof of the liability insurance required by state law; and
      (2)   Proof or verification from the insurance carrier that the City
Clerk will be provided at least ten days’ notice of any cancellation.
   (I)   Proof of 501(c)(3) tax status if claiming exemption from the license
fees.
(Prior Code, § 9-204)
§ 112.20 APPLICATION FOR BLANKET LICENSE.
   Applicants for a blanket itinerant vendor license shall file during regular
business hours a written application, signed by the applicant if an individual,
by all partners if a partnership and by a corporation officer if a corporation,
with the Clerk showing:
   (A)   The name and address of the person or persons having management or
supervision of the building in which itinerant vendors shall conduct business;
   (B)   The name and address of the person or persons having management or
supervision of the applicant’s business during the time that it is proposed to
be carried on in the city; the location or address of such person or persons
when engaged in such business; the permanent address or addresses of such
person or persons; the capacity in which such person or persons will act; the
name and address of the person, firm or corporation for whose account the
business will be carried on, if any, and, if a corporation, under the laws of
what state the same is incorporated and licensed to operate in the state;
   (C)   A general description of the products or services that will be sold by
the itinerant vendors; and
   (D)   A statement that the applicant shall establish the following controls
over itinerant vendors and shall maintain records concerning each itinerant
vendor for one year after the engagement dates involving the itinerant vendors.
      (1)   The applicant shall determine the names and addresses of each
salesperson involved locally for an itinerant vendor and determine the names
and permanent addresses of the parent company, if any, controlling the
itinerant vendor.
      (2)   The applicant shall determine the nature of the merchandise or
product to be sold, determine whether it is a “reject” line or seconds and
determine whether there are warranties on the product, and how any complaint is
to be filed for warranty adjustment. The applicant shall require that the
vendor display a sign prominent enough to disclose to all potential customers
that the product consists of seconds, rejects or irregulars if such is the
case.
      (3)   The applicant shall inform each vendor of the requirement to pay
state and city sales taxes and shall forward the name, product involved and
dates of the vendor’s engagement to the local office of the State Tax
Commission. Further, the applicant will furnish the vendor with one copy of the
state sales tax report form and require him or her to certify that he or she
will submit a sales tax report at the conclusion of his or her engagement in
the city.
      (4)   The applicant shall post proof of a liability insurance policy in
effect in the amount of $25,000.
      (5)   The applicant shall provide copies of all ordinances, regulations,
tax forms and the like to the itinerant vendor and provide the city with a
statement signed by the vendor agreeing to comply with the same.
      (6)   The applicant shall post a notice with the city 30 days in advance
listing each itinerant vendor establishing a business.
(Prior Code, § 9-204)
§ 112.21 INVESTIGATION; APPROVAL OR DISAPPROVAL.
   (A)   All applications for licensing or registration shall be immediately
referred for investigation as to the truth thereof, which investigation shall
be conducted within ten business days after the application and fee are
deposited with the city.
   (B)   If the city finds no past history of the applicant indicating
violations of this code and that the application is properly made and truthful,
then a license shall be issued to the approved applicant upon payment of the
fee therefor and the filing of the required bond.
   (C)   In all matters of denial of the license or registration, the applicant
shall be forthwith advised thereof. The applicant shall be advised that an
appeal of a denied license may be submitted to the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 9-205) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.22 BOND FOR LICENSES.
   (A)   Before any license, as provided by this subchapter, shall be issued,
such applicant shall file a bond running to the city. A person engaging in
business as an itinerant vendor shall file a bond in the sum set forth in the
bond schedule secured by the applicant as principal and two sureties upon whom
service of process may be made in the state.
   (B)   All such bonds shall be approved by the City Attorney and conditioned
that the applicant:
      (1)   Shall comply with all of the provisions of the ordinances of the
city and the statutes of the state regulating and concerning the sale of goods
or wares and merchandise; and
      (2)   Will pay all judgments rendered against the applicant for any
violation of the ordinances or statutes, or any of them, together with all
judgments and costs that may be recovered against him or her by any person or
persons for damage growing out of any misrepresentation or deceptive practice
by any person transacting such business with such applicant, whether such
misrepresentation or deception was made or practiced by the owner or by his or
her service, agents or employees, either at the time of making the sale or
through any advertisement, of any character whatsoever, printed or circulated
with reference to the goods, wares and merchandise sold or any part thereof.
      (3)   Any action on the bond may be brought in the name of the city to
the use of the aggrieved person.
(Prior Code, § 9-206) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.23 SERVICE OF PROCESS.
   (A)   (1)   Before any license for an itinerant vendor, as herein provided,
shall be issued, such applicant shall file with the city an instrument
nominating and appointing the City Clerk his or her true and lawful agent, with
the full power and authority to acknowledge service of notice of process for
and on behalf of the applicant in respect to any matters connected with or
arising out of the business transaction under the license and the bond given as
required by this subchapter, or for the performance of the conditions of the
bond or for any breach thereof.
      (2)   The instrument shall also contain recitals to the effect that the
applicant for the license consents and agrees that service of any notices or
process may be made upon the agent and, when so made, shall be taken and held
to be as valid as if personally served on the person or persons applying for
the license under this subchapter according to the laws of the state, or of any
other state, and waiving all claims or right of error by reason of such
acknowledgment of service or manner of service.
   (B)   Immediately upon service of process upon the City Clerk, as herein
provided, the City Clerk shall send to the licensee at his or her last known
address, by certified mail, a copy of the notice.
(Prior Code, § 9-207)
§ 112.24 HOURS OF BUSINESS.
   A licensee under this subchapter may conduct business from 9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m., excluding bona fide appointments before 9:00 a.m. and after 9:00 p.m.
(Prior Code, § 9-213) (Res. 2007-08, passed 8-6-2007) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.25 IDENTIFICATION TAG OR BADGE; DISPLAY.
   (A)   At all times, there shall be posted in a conspicuous place a badge,
tag or card issued by the city as proof of issuance of a license upon each:
      (1)   Licensee, if an individual;
      (2)   Vehicle or booth used by a licensee; or
      (3)   Building or premises, as appropriate for blanket licenses.
   (B)   The card, tag or badge shall state the name of the licensee and the
date of expiration of the license. Blanket licenses shall be displayed and
readily available for inspection by the city.
(Prior Code, § 9-209) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.26 SALE OF FOODS.
   (A)   All applicants for a license to sell foods and merchandise for human
or animal consumption shall have their application for such license approved in
accordance with the applicable state food establishment requirements before the
licenses are issued.
   (B)   The sale of foods requires an individual license not covered by
blanket licenses.
(Prior Code, § 9-208) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.27 PROVISIONS CUMULATIVE.
   The requirements of this subchapter are cumulative to any provisions of
state law or city ordinances regulating or governing any of the activities
licensed herein. In the case of any conflict between the provisions of this
subchapter and those of any other city ordinance or state law, the more
restrictive requirements shall apply.
(Prior Code, § 9-211) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99(A) of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§
112.15 through
112.27 of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided
in §
10.99(A) of this code.
(Prior Code, § 9-212)
CHAPTER 113: DANGEROUS OR RESTRICTED MATERIALS
Section
Marijuana
   
113.01   Medical marijuana business activities restricted
   
113.02   Medical marijuana dispensary provisions
Fireworks
   
113.15   Permit required to sell
   
113.16   Time of permitted selling
   
113.17   Operation of fireworks stands
 
   
113.99   Penalty
MARIJUANA
§ 113.01 MEDICAL MARIJUANA BUSINESS ACTIVITIES RESTRICTED.
   (A)   The city has followed its standard planning and zoning procedures to
determine if certain zones or districts would be appropriate for locating
marijuana-licensed premises, medical marijuana businesses or any other premises
where marijuana or its byproducts are cultivated, grown, processed, stored or
manufactured. With the exception of retail medical marijuana establishments
(those licensed as a dispensary), the city has determined that there are no
zones or districts where other, nonretail medical marijuana business activities
would be appropriate.
   (B)   As such, it is hereby declared unlawful to engage in any nonretail,
commercial medical marijuana business activities, including, but not limited
to, the commercial growth and/or processing of medical marijuana.
(Ord. 2022-01, passed 2-17-2022) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.02 MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY PROVISIONS.
   The use of property for a retail medical marijuana establishment
(dispensary) shall only be allowed under the following conditions:
   (A)   The use is explicitly authorized in the zoning district ordinances;
   (B)   All city ordinances related to business licensing have been complied
with; and
   (C)   No medical marijuana business-related activities, except those
authorized by state law pursuant to the issuance of a dispensary license, are
allowed. Commercial growth and/or processing by a dispensary is prohibited.
(Ord. 2022-01, passed 2-17-2022) Penalty, see §
113.99
FIREWORKS
§ 113.15 PERMIT REQUIRED TO SELL.
   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition applies
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
      FIREWORKS. Shall have the same meaning as in state law, 68 O.S.§ 1622.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to manufacture, display, sell, possess
or expose for sale, possess, use or discharge fireworks within the city except
as provided in this subchapter and in §§
91.16 and
91.17 of this code.
   (C)   A city permit is required for any person operating a fireworks stand
or who sells or retails fireworks. The permit is subject to such regulations
and fee as may be required by the City Council by motion or resolution. The
permit shall be on display at any sale or retail of fireworks.
(Prior Code, § 10-329) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.16 TIME OF PERMITTED SELLING.
   The selling of fireworks and firecrackers shall be prohibited within the
city limits of the city, except from June 25 through July 4 between the hours
of 11:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m.
(Ord. 2016-01, passed 6-13-2016) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.17 OPERATION OF FIREWORKS STANDS.
   (A)   A city permit shall be on display at any fireworks stand.
   (B)   A city permit shall be obtained from the city for a fee as set by the
city before any fireworks stand may be operated within the city limits.
(Prior Code, § 10-331) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99(A) of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   A penalty not to exceed $70 and not less than $15 shall be imposed for
each citation issued by the City Police Department or the City Fire Department
for any violation of §§
113.15 through
113.17 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 10-332)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PEOPLE
      
132.   OFFENSES AGAINST THE PUBLIC
      
133.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
      
134.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
      
135.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC AUTHORITY
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
130.01   Offenses generally
   
130.02   Violations generally
   
130.03   Nuisances generally
   
130.04   Capacity to commit an offense
   
130.05   Attempting to commit an offense
   
130.06   Intoxication no defense
   
130.07   Penalty not to excuse offense
   
130.08   Aiding in an offense
   
130.09   Conspiracy
   
130.10   Witness, self incrimination
   
130.11   Limitations of actions
   
130.12   Lawful use of force
 
   
130.99   Penalty
§ 130.01 OFFENSES GENERALLY.
   The word OFFENSE, whenever used in this code or in any title, chapter,
section or ordinance of the city, means the unlawful act of doing, or failing
to do, some particular act or thing construed therein to be detrimental to the
general welfare, morals, peace, health or safety of the inhabitants of the
city.
(Prior Code, § 10-103) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.02 VIOLATIONS GENERALLY.
   The doing of any of the acts or things prohibited, or failing to do any of
the acts or things commanded to be done, as more fully specified and set forth
by any provision of this code or any title, chapter or section hereof, or
future ordinances of the city, is hereby declared to be an offense against the
good order, public peace, morals, health, proper government and welfare of the
city and unlawful.
(Prior Code, § 10-104) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.03 NUISANCES GENERALLY.
   It is unlawful and an offense for any person to permit, maintain, aid, abet
or sanction a nuisance on or about any premises owned by him or her or under
his or her control at any place within the corporate limits of the city.
(Prior Code, § 10-109) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.04 CAPACITY TO COMMIT AN OFFENSE.
   All persons are capable of committing an offense as herein provided, except
those belonging to the classes following:
   (A)   Children under the age of seven years;
   (B)   Children over the age of seven years but under the age of 14 years in
the absence of proof that at the time of committing the act or neglect charged
against them, they knew its wrongfulness;
   (C)   All persons of unsound mind, including persons temporarily or
partially deprived of reason, upon proof that at the time of committing the act
charged against them, they were involuntarily incapable of knowing its
wrongfulness;
   (D)   Persons who committed the act or made the omission charged under an
ignorance or mistake of fact which disproves any criminal intent, but ignorance
of the law does not excuse from punishment for its violation;
   (E)   Persons who committed the act charged without being conscious thereof,
involuntarily; and
   (F)   Persons who committed the act, or made the omission charged, while
under involuntary subjection to the power of superiors.
(Prior Code, § 10-106) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.05 ATTEMPTING TO COMMIT AN OFFENSE.
   Every person who attempts to commit an offense against the ordinances of the
city, and in such attempt, does any act toward the commission of such offense
but fails or is prevented or intercepted in the perpetration thereof, is guilty
of an offense and shall be punished in the manner prescribed for the attempted
offense itself.
(Prior Code, § 10-101) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.06 INTOXICATION NO DEFENSE.
   No act committed by any person while in a state of intoxication, whether
from liquor or drugs, shall be deemed less an offense by reason of his or her
being in such condition.
(Prior Code, § 10-107) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.07 PENALTY NOT TO EXCUSE OFFENSE.
   The imposition of one penalty for an offense shall not excuse it or permit
it to continue, nor prevent the imposition of further penalties should the
offenses be continued or permitted to continue.
(Prior Code, § 10-105) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.08 AIDING IN AN OFFENSE.
   When no punishment for counseling or aiding in the commission of a
particular offense is expressly prescribed by ordinance, every person who
counsels or aids another in the commission of such is guilty of an offense or a
misdemeanor and punishable in the same manner as the principal offender.
(Prior Code, § 10-102) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.09 CONSPIRACY.
   Any two or more persons assembled, or who shall assemble, with the intent to
mutually agree to do any unlawful act with force or violence, and shall make
any movement therefor against the property of the city or the person or
property of another person, shall be guilty of an offense.
(Prior Code, § 10-110) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.10 WITNESS, SELF INCRIMINATION.
   No person otherwise competent as a witness shall be incapacitated, excused
or disqualified from testifying concerning the offense mentioned in any
section, chapter or title of this code, or any ordinances hereafter enacted, on
the grounds that his or her testimony might incriminate him or her. The
testimony which may be given by such witness shall in no case be used against
him or her.
(Prior Code, § 10-108) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.11 LIMITATIONS OF ACTIONS.
   The time within which a charge may be filed under the provisions of this
chapter shall be one year from the date of the commission or omission, or in
cases involving fraud, deception or deceit, one year from the discovery of the
fraud, deception or deceit, unless otherwise provided by the state statutes.
(Prior Code, § 10-111) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.12 LAWFUL USE OF FORCE.
   (A)   To use or to attempt to offer to use force upon or toward the person
of another is not unlawful in the city in the following cases:
      (1)   When necessarily committed by a public officer in the performance
of any legal duty, or by any other person assisting him or her or acting by his
or her direction;
      (2)   When necessarily committed by any person in arresting one who has
committed any felony and delivering him or her to a public officer competent to
receive him or her in custody;
      (3)   When committed either by the party about to be injured or by any
other person in his or her aid or defense in preventing or attempting to
prevent an offense against his or her person, or any trespass or other unlawful
interference with real or personal property in his or her lawful possession,
provided that the force used is not more than sufficient to prevent such
offense, and that the same shall be necessary for the self-defense of his or
her person or property;
      (4)   When committed by a parent or the authorized agent of any parent,
or by any guardian, master or teacher, in the exercise of a lawful authority to
restrain or correct his or her child, ward, apprentice or scholar, provided
that restraint or correction has been rendered necessary by the misconduct of
such child, ward, apprentice or scholar, or by his or her refusal to obey the
lawful command of such parent or authorized agent or guardian, master or
teacher, and that the force used is reasonable in manner and moderate in
degree;
      (5)   When committed by a carrier of passengers or the authorized agents
or servants of such carrier, or by any person assisting them at their request,
in expelling from any carriage, interurban car, vessel or other vehicle any
passenger who refuses to obey a lawful and reasonable regulation prescribed for
the conduct of passengers, if such vehicle has first been stopped and the force
used is not more than is sufficient to expel the offending passenger with a
reasonable regard to his or her personal safety;
      (6)   When committed by any person in preventing an person of unsound
mind, including persons temporarily or partially deprived of reason, from
committing an act dangerous to himself or herself or to another, or enforcing
such restraint as is necessary for the protection of his or her person or for
his or her restoration to health, during such period only as shall be necessary
to obtain legal authority for the restraint or custody of such person;
      (7)   In preventing or interrupting an intrusion upon the lawful
possession of property; and
      (8)   To preserve the peace or prevent the commission of an offense.
   (B)   Where force is permitted to effect a lawful purpose, only that degree
of force necessary to effect such purpose shall be used.
(Prior Code, § 10-112) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any violation of any of the provisions of Title XIII not addressed
otherwise by any person, firm or corporation shall be deemed a misdemeanor and
shall be punishable by fine. Punishment shall be as provided in §
10.99(A) of this code unless otherwise specifically shown.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who is charged with the following
offenses shall be subject to a fine of $500, excluding costs, and shall be
subject to a sentence of incarceration of up to 60 days in jail for each
offense.
Offense Code Section
Offense                                              Code Section
Assault and battery                                  §
                                                     131.02
Assault and battery on a police officer              §
                                                     135.08
Bogus checks                                         §
                                                     134.08
Damage or destruction of private property            §
                                                     134.14
Damage to a vehicle                                  §
                                                     134.15
Damage to public works                               §
                                                     134.10
Defacing a public building or structure              §
                                                     134.12
Defrauding public accommodations                     §
                                                     134.06
                                                     §§
Injury to private or public property                 134.12 and
                                                     134.16
Obtaining merchandise or services by false pretenses §
                                                     134.02
Petit larceny                                        §
                                                     134.01
Possession of stolen property                        §
                                                     134.05
Tampering with public utilities                      §
                                                     134.16
 
(Prior Code, § 10-113)
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES AGAINST PEOPLE
Section
General Provisions
   
131.01   Definitions
   
131.02   Assault and battery
   
131.03   Reckless conduct
Minors
   
131.15   Curfew
   
131.16   Contributing to delinquency of a minor
   
131.17   Possession of alcoholic beverages by minors
   
131.18   Possession of low-point beer in public by minors
   
131.19   Consumption of low-point beer in public by minors
   
131.20   Misrepresenting age to induce sale of alcohol
   
131.21   Furnishing tobacco to or facilitating tobacco use by minors
 
   
131.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 131.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly requires a different meaning.
   ASSAULT. Any willful and unlawful attempt or offer with force or violence to
do corporal hurt to another.
(Prior Code, § 10-202)
   BATTERY. Any willful and unlawful use of force or violence upon the person
of another.
(Prior Code, § 10-203)
§ 131.02 ASSAULT AND BATTERY.
   No person shall commit an assault or battery, or both, upon the person of
another.
(Prior Code, § 10-201) Penalty, see §
131.99
Statutory reference:
   Assault and battery generally, see 21 O.S. §§ 641 et seq.
   City’s power to prevent, see 11 O.S. § 22-110
§ 131.03 RECKLESS CONDUCT.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition applies
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
      RECKLESS CONDUCT. An act which creates a situation of unreasonable risk
and probability of death or great bodily harm to another and which demonstrates
a conscious disregard for the safety of another.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to endanger another’s safety by reckless
conduct in the operation or handling of any weapon or instrument, including a
pistol, revolver or other firearm.
(Prior Code, § 10-204) Penalty, see §
131.99
MINORS
§ 131.15 CURFEW.
   (A)   This section shall be known and may be cited as the “Curfew Ordinance”
or “Regulation of the Presence and Conduct of Minors on Streets and Public
Places.”
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
      MINOR. Any person under the age of 18.
      PARENT. Any person having legal custody of a minor as:
         (a)   A natural or adoptive parent;
         (b)   A legal guardian;
         (c)   A person who stands in loco parentis; or
         (d)   A person to whom legal custody has been given by order of the
Court.
      PUBLIC PLACE. Any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, park, playground or
place to which the general public has access and a right to resort for
business, entertainment or other lawful purposes. A PUBLIC PLACE shall include,
but not be limited to, any store, shop, restaurant, tavern, bowling alley,
café, theater, drug store, pool room or shopping center and any other place
devoted to the amusement or entertainment of the general public. It shall also
include the front or immediate area of the above.
      REMAIN. To stand behind, to tarry and to stay unnecessarily upon the
streets, including the congregating of groups (or of interacting minors)
totaling four or more persons in which any minor involved would not be using
the streets for ordinary or serious purposes, such as mere passage or going
home.
      STREET. A way or place, of whatsoever nature, open to the use of the
public as a matter of right for the purpose of vehicular travel or, in the case
of a sidewalk thereof, for pedestrian travel. The term STREET includes the
legal right-of-way, including, but not limited to, the cartway or traffic
lanes, the curb, the sidewalks, whether paved or unpaved, and any grass plots
or other grounds found within the legal right-of-way of a street.
      TIME OF NIGHT. Is based upon the prevailing standard of time, whether
central standard time or central daylight saving time, generally observed at
that hour by the public.
      YEAR OF AGE. Continues from one birthday, such as the seventeenth, to,
but not including the day of, the next, such as the eighteenth birthday, making
it clear that 17 or less years of age is herein treated as equivalent to the
phrase “under 18 years of age.”
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person 17 or less years of age (under 18) to be
or to remain in or upon the streets within the city at night during the period
ending at 6:00 a.m. and beginning:
      (1)   At 10:00 p.m., for minors 15 years of age or younger;
      (2)   At 12:00 a.m., midnight, for minors more than 15 years of age on
Sunday through Thursday; and
      (3)   At 1:00 a.m. on Saturday morning and Sunday morning, for minors
more than 15 years of age.
   (D)   In the following exceptional cases, a minor on a city street during
the nocturnal hours for which division (C) above is intended to provide the
maximum limits of regulation shall not, however, be considered in violation of
this section:
      (1)   When accompanied by a parent of such minor;
      (2)   When accompanied by an adult authorized by a parent of such minor
to take the parent’s place in accompanying the minor for a designated period of
time and purpose within a specified area;
      (3)   When exercising First Amendment rights protected by the U.S.
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the
right of assembly. Such minor shall evidence the bona fides of such exercise by
possessing a written communication, signed by such minor and countersigned by a
parent of such minor, with his or her home address and a telephone number,
specifying when, where and in what manner the minor will be on the streets at
night (during hours when division (C) above is otherwise applicable to the
minor) in the exercise of a First Amendment right specified in such
communication;
      (4)   In cases of reasonable necessity, but only if the minor has in the
minor’s possession a written communication, signed by the minor and
countersigned by a parent of such minor, evidencing his or her home address and
a telephone number and establishing such reasonable necessity relating to
specified streets at a designated time for a described purpose, including
points of origin and destination;
      (5)   When the minor is on the sidewalk of the place where such minor
resides, or is on the sidewalk of either next-door neighbor not communicating
an objection to the police officer;
      (6)   When returning home by a direct route from (and within 30 minutes
of the termination of) a school activity, or an activity of a religious or
voluntary association, provided that the minor has a written communication in
the minor’s possession, countersigned by a parent, indicting the home address
and a telephone number, the purpose for the event and when, where and in what
manner the minor will be on the streets at night;
      (7)   When authorized, by regulation issued by the City Council, in other
similar cases of reasonable necessity, similarly handled but adopted to
necessary nighttime activities of more minors than can readily be dealt with on
an individual special permit basis. Normally, such regulation by the City
Council permitting use of the streets should be issued sufficiently in advance
to permit appropriate publicity through news media and through other agencies
such as the schools, and shall define the activity, the scope of the use of the
streets permitted, the period of time involved (not to extend more than 30
minutes beyond the time for termination of such activity) and the reason for
finding that such regulation is reasonably necessary and is consistent with the
public interest and the purposes of this section;
      (8)   When the minor carries a certified card of employment, briefly
identifying the minor, the addresses of his or her home, his or her place of
employment and his or her hours of employment, or caries a valid proof of
employment, which may include the latest payroll receipt (not over 30 days
old); or
      (9)   When the minor is, with parental consent, in a motor vehicle. This
contemplates normal travel. This clearly exempts bona fide interstate movement
through the city, particularly on normal routes.
   (E)   (1)   It is unlawful for a parent having legal custody of a minor
knowingly to permit, or by inefficient control to allow, such minor to be or to
remain upon any city street under circumstances not constituting an exception
to, or otherwise beyond the scope of, this section. The term KNOWINGLY includes
knowledge which a parent should reasonably be expected to have concerning the
whereabouts of a minor in that parent’s legal custody.
      (2)   It is intended to continue to keep neglectful or careless parents
up to a reasonable community standard of parental responsibility through an
objective test. It shall, a fortiori, be no defense that a parent was
completely indifferent to the activities, conduct or whereabouts of such minor.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any person operating or having charge of any
public place to knowingly allow, permit or suffer the presence of minors in
violation of the curfew established by this section.
   (G)   (1)   Upon finding or having attention called to any minor on the
streets in prima facie violation of this section, a police officer of the city
shall normally take the minor to the city’s police station, or other place
designated by the Police Chief, where a parent shall immediately be notified to
come for such minor, whereupon, they shall be interviewed. This is intended to
permit ascertainment, under constitutional safeguards, of relevant facts and to
centralize responsibility in the personnel then on duty for accurate,
effective, fair, impartial and uniform enforcement and recording, thus making
available experienced supervisory personnel, the best facilities and access to
information and records.
      (2)   In the absence of convincing evidence, such as a birth certificate,
a police officer on the street shall in the first instance use his or her best
judgment in determining age.
      (3)   Police procedures shall constantly be refined in light of
experience and may provide, inter alia, that the police officer may deliver to
a parent thereof a minor under appropriate circumstances, for example, a minor
of tender age near home whose identity may readily be ascertained or is known.
      (4)   In any event, such police officer shall, within 24 hours, file a
written report with the Police Chief. The report shall be treated for purposes
of juvenile records, in accordance with state statutes.
      (5)   When a parent, immediately called, has come to take charge of the
minor and the appropriate information has been recorded, the minor shall be
released to the custody of such parent. If the parent cannot be located or
fails to take charge of the minor, then the minor shall be released to the
juvenile authorities, except to the extent that, in accordance with police
regulations approved in advance by juvenile authorities, the minor may
temporarily be entrusted to a relative, neighbor or other person who will, on
behalf of a parent, assume the responsibility of caring for the minor pending
the availability or arrival of a parent.
      (6)   In the case of a first violation by a minor, the Police Chief shall
cause to be personally delivered to, or by certified mail send to, a parent a
written notice of violation with a warning that any subsequent violation shall
result in the full enforcement of this section, including the enforcement of
parental responsibility and of applicable penalties.
(Prior Code, § 10-505) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.16 CONTRIBUTING TO DELINQUENCY OF A MINOR.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
      ANY PERSON. Any human being without regard to the legal or natural
relationship to a minor, as well as legal or corporate entities.
      MINOR. Any person under the age of 18 years.
   (B)   Any person who shall knowingly or willfully cause, aid, abet or
encourage a minor to be, to remain or to become a delinquent child, as defined
by state law, shall be guilty of an offense.
(Prior Code, § 10-516) Penalty, see §
131.99
Statutory reference:
   Contributing to delinquency of minors, see 21 O.S. §§ 856 et seq.
§ 131.17 POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES BY MINORS.
   (A)   Possession in public prohibited. No person under 21 years of age shall
be in possession of any alcoholic beverage while such person is upon any public
street, road or highway or in any public place.
   (B)   Permitting or allowing gatherings where minors are consuming alcoholic
beverages.
      (1)   Definitions. For the purpose of this division (B), the following
definitions apply unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
         ALCOHOL. Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl or spirits of wine
from whatever source or by whatever process produced.
         ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine or beer
and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and which
contains 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage
purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed or combined with other substances.
This term includes intoxicating beverages and low-point beer, as defined
herein.
         GATHERING. A party, gathering or event where a group of three or more
persons have assembled or are assembling for a social occasion or social
activity.
         INTOXICATING BEVERAGE. Includes beverages containing more than 3.2%
alcohol by weight.
         LEGAL GUARDIAN.
            1.   A person who, by court order, is the guardian of the person of
a minor; or
            2.   A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed
by the Court.
         LOW-POINT BEER. Includes beverages containing more than 0.5% alcohol
by volume and not more than 3.2% alcohol by weight, including, but not limited
to, beer or cereal malt beverages obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an
infusion of barley or other grain, malt or similar products.
      (2)   Hosting, permitting or allowing a party, gathering or event where
minors consume alcoholic beverages prohibited.
         (a)   It is the duty of any person having control of any premises who
knowingly hosts, permits or allows a gathering at said premises to take all
reasonable steps to prevent the consumption of alcoholic beverages by any minor
at the gathering. REASONABLE STEPS are:
            1.   Controlling access to alcoholic beverages at the gathering;
            2.   Controlling the quantity of alcoholic beverages present at the
gathering;
            3.   Verifying the age of persons attending the gathering by
inspecting driver’s licenses or other government-issued identification cards to
ensure that minors do not consume alcoholic beverages while at the gathering;
and
            4.   Supervising the activities of minors at the gathering.
         (b)   It is unlawful for any person having control of any premises to
knowingly host, permit or allow a gathering to take place at said premises
where at least one minor consumes an alcoholic beverage whenever the person
having control of the premises either knows a minor has consumed an alcoholic
beverage or reasonably should have known that a minor consumed an alcoholic
beverage had the person taken all reasonable steps to prevent the consumption
of an alcoholic beverage by a minor as set forth in division (B)(2)(a) above.
         (c)   This division (B) shall not apply to conduct involving the use
of alcoholic beverages that occurs exclusively between a minor and his or her
parent or legal guardian.
         (d)   Nothing in this division (B) shall be interpreted to prohibit
any family activity held in the confines of the family home from providing the
use of alcohol to immediate family members within the supervision of parents
and guardians. However, if a minor leaves such a family gathering intoxicated
and is found in public, then said providers of alcohol will be held responsible
in the same manner as a nonfamily gathering.
      (3)   Reservation of legal options.
         (a)   Violations of this division (B) may be prosecuted by the city
criminally, civilly or through both processes. The city may seek administrative
fees and response costs associated with the enforcement of this division (B)
through all remedies or procedures provided by statute, ordinance or law.
         (b)   This division (B) shall not limit the authority of peace
officers or private citizens to make arrests for any criminal offense arising
out of conduct regulated by this division (B), nor shall it limit the city’s
ability to initiate and prosecute any criminal offense arising out of the same
circumstances necessitating the application of this division (B).
(Prior Code, § 3-112) (Ord. 2009-03, passed 12-10-2009) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.18 POSSESSION OF LOW-POINT BEER IN PUBLIC BY MINORS.
   No minor shall be in possession of any low-point beer or beer while such
person is upon any public street, building or place.
(Prior Code, § 3-210) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.19 CONSUMPTION OF LOW-POINT BEER IN PUBLIC BY MINORS.
   (A)   No minor shall consume, or possess with intent to consume, low-point
beer in any public place.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply when such persons are
under the direct supervision of their parent or guardian, but in no instance
shall this exception be interpreted to allow such persons to consume such
beverages in any place licensed to dispense beer as provided for in 37 O.S. §
163.11.
(Prior Code, § 3-211) Penalty, see §
131.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 37A O.S. § 6-114
§ 131.20 MISREPRESENTING AGE TO INDUCE SALE OF ALCOHOL.
   (A)   No person shall misrepresent his or her age, either orally or in
writing or by presenting false or altered documentation of age, for the purpose
of inducing any person to sell him or her alcoholic beverages.
(Prior Code, § 3-110)
   (B)   No person shall misrepresent his or her age, either orally or in
writing or by presenting false or altered documentation of age, for the purpose
of inducing any person to sell him or her low-point beer.
(Prior Code, § 3-212)
Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.21 FURNISHING TOBACCO TO OR FACILITATING TOBACCO USE BY MINORS.
   It is unlawful and an offense for any person to sell, barter, give or
otherwise furnish cigarettes, cigars or tobacco in any form to a minor, or to
permit such minor to frequent any premises owned, held or managed by him or her
for the purpose of using or procuring cigarettes, cigars or tobacco in any
form.
(Prior Code, § 10-517) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
130.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   If, after the warning notice pursuant to §
131.15(G)(6) of this chapter of a first violation by a minor, a parent violates
§
131.15(E) of this chapter in connection with a second violation by the minor,
then this shall be treated as an offense by the parent. The penalty, upon a
plea of guilty or nolo contendere or a finding of guilt, shall be as provided
in §
130.99 of this code.
(Prior Code, § 10-505)
   (C)   Any person who shall violate the provisions of §
131.17(B) of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an offense against the city
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished with a fine of not more than
$500, plus all court costs and statutory penalties.
(Prior Code, § 3-112)
   (D)   Any person violating the provisions of §
131.19 of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be punished as provided in §
130.99 of this code, or by appropriate community service not to exceed 20
hours.
(Prior Code, § 3-211)
(Ord. 2009-03, passed 12-10-2009)
CHAPTER 132: OFFENSES AGAINST THE PUBLIC
Section
   
132.01   Public intoxication
   
132.02   Sniffing glue, paint or other substances
   
132.03   Drug paraphernalia
   
132.04   Marijuana
   
132.05   Misrepresenting age
   
132.06   False representation as disabled to obtain money or aid
   
132.07   Sleeping on public or private property unauthorized
   
132.08   Offenses near schools
   
132.09   Prowling on premises
   
132.10   Obscene, threatening or harassing telephone calls
   
132.11   Nudity, improper dress or indecent exposure
   
132.12   Prostitution
   
132.13   Gambling and gambling devices
   
132.14   Disorderly houses
§ 132.01 PUBLIC INTOXICATION.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition applies
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
      STATE OF INTOXICATION. The condition in which a person is under the
influence of drugs, intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating beverages to such an
extent so as to deprive the person of his or her full mental or physical power
or be unable to exercise care for his or her own safety or the safety of
others.
   (B)   No person shall be in any public place in a state of intoxication.
(Prior Code, § 10-501) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Alcohol and drug abuse services generally, see 43A O.S. §§ 3-401 et seq.
   Intoxication in a public place or at a public gathering, see 37A O.S. § 6-
101
§ 132.02 SNIFFING GLUE, PAINT OR OTHER SUBSTANCES.
   No person shall sniff or inhale paint, glue, gasoline or other volatile
substances for the purpose of intoxication.
(Prior Code, § 10-504) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 132.03 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
   (A)   (1)   For the purpose of this section, DRUG PARAPHERNALIA means all
equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use
or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting,
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing,
testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing,
injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body a
controlled substance in violation of the State Uniform Controlled Dangerous
Substances Act, 63 O.S. §§ 2-101 et seq., hereinafter referred to as “the Act”
and adopted by reference herein.
      (2)   It includes, but is not limited to:
         (a)   Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in the planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which
is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived;
         (b)   Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing
controlled substances;
         (c)   Isomerization devices used, intended for use or designed for use
in identifying, or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of,
controlled substances;
         (d)   Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use in
identifying, or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of,
controlled substances;
         (e)   Scales and balances used, intended for use or designed for use
in weighing or measuring controlled substances;
         (f)   Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride,
mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, which are used, intended for use or
designed for use in cutting controlled substances;
         (g)   Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or designed
for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining,
marijuana;
         (h)   Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used,
intended for use or designed for use in compounding controlled substances;
         (i)   Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used,
intended for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of
controlled substances;
         (j)   Containers and other objects used, intended for use or designed
for use in storing or concealing controlled substances;
         (k)   Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended
for use or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances
into the human body; and
         (l)   Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in ingesting,
inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil
into the human body, such as:
            1.   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes
with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured metal
bowls;
            2.   Water pipes;
            3.   Carburetion tubes and devices;
            4.   Smoking and carburetion masks;
            5.   ROACH CLIPS, meaning objects used to hold burning material,
such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be
held in the hand;
            6.   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
            7.   Chamber pipes;
            8.   Carburetor pipes;
            9.   Electric pipes;
            10.   Air-driven pipes;
            11.   Chillums;
            12.   Bongs; or
            13.   Ice pipes or chillers.
   (B)   In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or
other authority should consider, in addition to all other logically relevant
factors, the following:
      (1)   Statements by an owner, or by anyone in control of the object,
concerning its use;
      (2)   Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in control of
the object, under any state or federal law relating to any controlled
substance;
      (3)   The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct
violation of the Act;
      (4)   The proximity of the object to controlled substances;
      (5)   The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the
object;
      (6)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of
anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he or she knows,
or should reasonably know, intended to use the object to facilitate a violation
of the Act; the innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object,
as to a direct violation of the Act shall not prevent a finding that the object
is intended for use or designed for use as drug paraphernalia;
      (7)   Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning
its use;
      (8)   Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or
depict its use;
      (9)   National and local advertising concerning its use;
      (10)   The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;
      (11)   Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a
legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a
licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products;
      (12)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the
object to the total sales of the business enterprise;
      (13)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community; and
      (14)   Expert testimony concerning its use.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to
use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest,
manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack,
repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce
into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the Act.
   (D)   It is unlawful for any person to deliver, possess with intent to
deliver or manufacture with intent to deliver drug paraphernalia knowing, or
under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that it will be used to
plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert,
produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain,
conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a
controlled substance in violation of the Act.
   (E)   It is unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper, magazine,
handbill or other publication any advertisement knowing, or under circumstances
where one reasonably should know, that the purpose of the advertisement, in
whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects designed or intended for
use as drug paraphernalia.
(Prior Code, § 10-503) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 63 O.S. § 2-101.1
§ 132.04 MARIJUANA.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition applies
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
      MARIJUANA. All parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L., whether growing or
not, the seeds thereof, the rosin extracted from any part of such plant and
every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of such
plant, its seeds or rosin, but shall not include the mature stalks of such
plant, fiber produced from such stalks, oil or cakes made from the derivative,
mixture or preparation of such mature stalks (except rosin extracted
therefrom), fiber, oil or cakes or the sterilized seed of such plant which is
incapable of germination.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person:
      (1)   To appear or be upon or in any street, alley, place of business or
other public place while under the influence of marijuana;
      (2)   To use, have or possess marijuana upon or in any street, alley,
place of business or other public place within the city;
      (3)   To use marijuana in any place within the city, except as legally
prescribed by a physician licensed to practice in the state; or
      (4)   To be about a place where marijuana is sold or furnished illegally.
(Prior Code, § 10-502) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances Act, see 63 O.S. §§ 2-101 et seq.
§ 132.05 MISREPRESENTING AGE.
   No person shall, for the purpose of violating any statutes of the state or
any ordinances of the city, willfully and knowingly misrepresent his or her age
by presenting a false document purporting to state his or her true age or by
presenting a document not his or her own.
(Prior Code, § 10-508) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
    Misrepresentation of age by false documents, see 21 O.S. §§ 1518 through
1520
§ 132.06 FALSE REPRESENTATION AS DISABLED TO OBTAIN MONEY OR AID.
   No person shall falsely represent himself or herself as blind, deaf,
mentally disabled, crippled or physically disabled for the purpose of obtaining
money or other things of value, nor to secure aid or assistance on account of
such false representation.
(Prior Code, § 10-506) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Offense against public morals being a misdemeanor, see 21 O.S. § 22
§ 132.07 SLEEPING ON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY UNAUTHORIZED.
   It is unlawful for any person without lawful reason, between the hours of
12:00 a.m., midnight, and sunrise, to sleep on any street, in any other public
place or on any property of another without the express or tacit consent of the
owner or person in charge of such place.
(Prior Code, § 10-515) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 132.08 OFFENSES NEAR SCHOOLS.
   No person shall engage in any of the conduct or acts hereinafter set forth
around, in or near any school or school grounds or the streets and alleys
adjacent to any school:
   (A)   Any conduct that would disturb the orderly conduct of the school;
   (B)   Annoying or molesting any student or employee of the school;
   (C)   Lewd or wanton conduct in, near or around any school or school grounds
or the streets and alleys adjacent to the school;
   (D)   Moving or parking any vehicle in the vicinity of any school for the
purpose of annoying or molesting any student or employee of the school; or
   (E)   Any other act or conduct calculated to or likely to annoy or molest
any student or employee of such school.
(Prior Code, § 10-514) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 132.09 PROWLING ON PREMISES.
   No person shall be upon the property or premises of another with the intent
to peer or peep into the windows or doors of the dwelling.
(Prior Code, § 10-507) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Peeping Tom generally, see 21 O.S. § 1171
§ 132.10 OBSCENE, THREATENING OR HARASSING TELEPHONE CALLS.
   (A)   No person shall by means of a telephone willfully:
      (1)   Make any comment, request, suggestion or proposal which is obscene,
lewd, lascivious, filthy or indecent;
      (2)   Make a telephone call, whether or not conversation ensues, without
disclosing his or her identity and with intent to annoy, abuse, threaten or
harass any person at the called number;
      (3)   Permit any telephone under his or her control to be used for any
purpose prohibited by this section; or
      (4)   In conspiracy or concerted action with other persons, make repeated
calls or simultaneous calls solely to harass any person at the called number.
   (B)   Use of a telephone facility under this section shall include all uses
made of such a facility between the points of origin and reception. Any offense
under this section is a continuing offense and shall be deemed to have been
committed at either the place of origin or the place of reception.
(Prior Code, § 10-509) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Telephone calls, see 21 O.S. § 1172
§ 132.11 NUDITY, IMPROPER DRESS OR INDECENT EXPOSURE.
   It is unlawful for any person to:
   (A)   Appear in any public place in the city in a state of nudity;
   (B)   Appear in any public place in the city in any offensive, indecent or
lewd dress; or
   (C)   Make an indecent public exposure of his or her person.
(Prior Code, § 10-511) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 21 O.S. § 1021
§ 132.12 PROSTITUTION.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
      KNOWN PROSTITUTE OR PROCURER. A person who, within one year prior to the
date of the suspected violation of this section, has, within the knowledge of
the arresting officer, been convicted of a violation of this section or has
been convicted of violating any statute or ordinance of any jurisdiction which
makes prostitution or soliciting for the purpose of prostitution unlawful.
      PROSTITUTION. Includes the getting or receiving of the body for sexual
intercourse for hire, and includes the giving or receiving of the body for
indiscriminate sexual intercourse without hire.
   (B)   It is unlawful:
      (1)   To engage in prostitution, lewdness or assignation;
      (2)   To solicit, induce, entice or procure another to commit an act of
lewdness, assignation or prostitution; or
      (3)   To aid, abet or participate in the doing of any of the acts herein
prohibited.
   (C)   No person shall, in any way or manner whatever, keep, harbor or house
any prostitute.
   (D)   No person shall entice or attempt to entice any person into a house of
prostitution or have illicit sexual intercourse with any person under eighteen
18 years of age.
   (E)   No person shall keep or maintain a house of prostitution or house of
assignation.
   (F)   No person shall lease, let or furnish any building, room, tent or
structure of any kind, or any conveyance used or to be used as a place of
prostitution or assignation within the city, or knowingly permit the same to be
so used.
   (G)   No person shall knowingly accept, receive, levy or appropriate any
money or other thing of value without consideration from a prostitute or from
the proceeds of any person engaged in prostitution.
   (H)   No person shall offer, or offer to secure, another for the purpose of
prostitution or for any other lewd or indecent act.
   (I)   No person shall direct, take or transport, or offer or agree to take
or transport, or aid or assist in transporting, any person to any house, place,
building or other structure, vehicle, trailer or other conveyance, or to any
other person, with knowledge or having reasonable cause to believe that the
purpose of such directing, taking or transporting is prostitution, lewdness or
assignation.
   (J)   (1)   It is unlawful for a person to be present in a public place in a
manner and under circumstances manifesting the purpose of inducing, enticing,
soliciting or procuring another to commit an act of prostitution. Among the
circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such a purpose is
manifested are:
         (a)   That such person is a known prostitute or procurer; or
         (b)   That such person repeatedly beckons to, stops or attempts to
stop or engage passersby in conversation, or repeatedly stops or attempts to
stop motor vehicle operators by hailing, waving of arms or any other bodily
gesture.
      (2)   No arrest shall be made for a violation of this division (J) unless
the arresting officer first affords such person an opportunity to explain such
conduct, and no one shall be convicted of violating this division (J) if it
appears at trial that the explanation given was true and disclosed a lawful
purpose.
(Prior Code, § 10-513) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Definition of prostitution, see 21 O.S. § 1030
   Pimping, see 21 O.S. § 1081
   Soliciting, see 21 O.S. § 1029
§ 132.13 GAMBLING AND GAMBLING DEVICES.
   (A)   Any person who plays or carries on, or who opens or causes to be
opened, or who conducts, either as owner or employee, roulette, craps or any
banking or percentage game played with dice, cards or any other device for
money, checks, credit or any representative of value, or any other gambling
game, is guilty of an offense.
   (B)   Any person who bets on or plays at any of the prohibited games
mentioned in division (A) above, or who otherwise gambles, is guilty of an
offense.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to exhibit or expose to view in any
building, or in any part of or room in any building, any table, cards, dice,
roulette wheel or other article or apparatus designed for or used for gambling
purposes.
   (D)   It is unlawful for any person to keep, own, operate, use, conduct or
cause to be kept, operated, used or conducted, either as owner, manager,
dealer, clerk or employee, and whether for hire or not, any punchboard,
machine, cards, game, parlay card or any other device or paraphernalia wherein
or whereby any money or property, or any representative of either or other
valuable thing, may be played, bet, staked, wagered or hazarded, won, lost or
obtained upon any change, combination of numbers or emblems, any uncertain or
contingent event or condition or a football or baseball contest.
   (E)   It is unlawful for any person to play any prohibited game described in
this section.
   (F)   It is unlawful for any person to bar or barricade any building, or any
part of or room in any building, in order to render the same difficult of
access or ingress to the police officers of the city, in which building, or any
part of or room in any such building, any table, cards, dice, roulette wheel or
other article or apparatus designed for or being used for gambling purposes are
exhibited or exposed to view.
   (G)   The apparatus and paraphernalia used in the conduct of any of the
gambling games prohibited by this section are hereby declared to be a public
nuisance and subject to seizure and suppression by any officer, and shall be
abated, forfeited and destroyed upon the order and decree of any court of
competent jurisdiction.
   (H)   It is unlawful for any person to be about in the immediate vicinity
where a person or persons are gambling, whether by playing games, operating a
slot machine or other device or otherwise.
   (I)   Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent the sponsoring
and operation of bingo games by nonprofit religious, fraternal, charitable or
educational organizations, provided that the organizations are properly
licensed and operated in accordance with law.
(Prior Code, § 10-512) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Bingo generally, see 3A O.S. §§ 401 et seq.
   Disposition of equipment used for gambling, see 21 O.S. § 943
   Gambling generally, see 21 O.S. §§ 941 et seq.
   Oklahoma Horse Racing Act, see 3A O.S. §§ 200 et seq.
   Punishment for betting, playing prohibited games, see 21 O.S. § 942
   Search, seizure of equipment used for gambling, see 21 O.S. § 960 and 22
O.S. §§ 1261 et seq.
§ 132.14 DISORDERLY HOUSES.
   (A)   A DISORDERLY HOUSE means any structure or vehicle by which the peace,
comfort, health, welfare or decency of the public is disturbed by reason of the
people therein committing or resorting to any of the following acts:
      (1)   The sale, distribution, possession or use of any controlled
dangerous substance the sale, distribution, possession or use of which is
declared unlawful by state statute;
      (2)   The violation of any of the ordinances of the city or statutes of
the state regulating the sale, distribution, possession or use of alcoholic
beverages and low-point beer, as defined by law;
      (3)   The performance of any sexual act declared unlawful by state
statute or city ordinance, including, but not limited to, soliciting for
purposes of prostitution; or
      (4)   The violation of any state statute or city ordinance prohibiting
gambling.
   (B)   No person shall keep or maintain, or aid, abet or assist in keeping
and maintaining, a disorderly house.
   (C)   No owner, lessee, lessor or other person, partnership or corporation
having control over any house, building, structure, tent, vehicle, mobile home
or recreational vehicle shall knowingly use, lease, sublease or otherwise
permit the use of the same for the purpose of keeping therein any disorderly
house, and knowing or ascertaining that such house, building, structure, tent,
vehicle, mobile home or recreational vehicle is so occupied as a disorderly
house, no person, partnership or corporation shall continue to grant permission
to so use such premises as a disorderly house.
   (D)   No person shall knowingly reside in, enter into or remain in a
disorderly house. In any prosecution for a violation of this section, the city
shall have the burden to prove such knowledge by direct evidence only and not
by circumstantial evidence. This division (D) shall not apply to physicians or
officers in the discharge of their professional or official duties.
(Prior Code, § 10-510) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Municipal power to regulate disorderly houses and indecencies, see 11 O.S. §
22-109
CHAPTER 133: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
Section
   
133.01   Disorderly conduct
   
133.02   Disturbing the peace
   
133.03   Disturbing funerals
   
133.04   Unnecessary noise
   
133.05   Motor vehicle sound amplifiers
   
133.06   Parades and public assemblies
   133.07   Discharge of firearms
 
   
133.99   Penalty
§ 133.01 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   A person shall be guilty of disorderly conduct if, with the intent to cause
public inconvenience, annoyance or alarm or recklessly creating the risk
thereof, he or she:
   (A)   Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby any
person is placed in fear of the safety of his or her life, limb or health;
   (B)   Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby the
property of any person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged;
   (C)   Endangers the lawful pursuits of another by acts of violence, angry
threats and abusive conduct;
   (D)   Jostles or crowds or pushes any person in any public place;
   (E)   Uses “fighting words” directed toward any person, and thus creates
turmoil;
   (F)   Causes, provokes or engages in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so
as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another; or
   (G)   By acts of violence, interferes with another’s pursuit of a lawful
occupation.
(Prior Code, § 10-403) Penalty, see §
133.99
Statutory reference:
   Power of city relating to disorderly conduct, see 11 O.S. § 22-110
§ 133.02 DISTURBING THE PEACE.
   (A)   It is unlawful to disturb or alarm the peace of another or others by
doing any of the acts set out in division (B) below.
   (B)   DISTURBING THE PEACE is the doing of any of the following in such a
manner as would foreseeably alarm or disturb the peace of another or others:
      (1)   Using obscene, offensive, abusive, profane, vulgar, threatening,
violent or insulting language or conduct;
      (2)   Appearing in an intoxicated condition;
      (3)   Engaging in a fistic encounter;
      (4)   Lewdly exposing one’s person, or private parts thereof, in any
public place or in any place where there are present other persons to be
offended or annoyed thereby;
      (5)   Pointing any pistol or any other deadly weapon, whether loaded or
not, at any other person or persons, either in anger or otherwise;
      (6)   Holding an unlawful assembly of two or more persons, including
being assembled together and acting in concert, to do any unlawful act against
the peace or to the terror of others or preparing for or moving toward such
acts, or otherwise assembling unlawfully or riotously;
      (7)   Interrupting any lawful assembly of people by making noise, by
rude, indecent or improper behavior, by profane, improper or loud language or
in any other manner, either within the place of assembly or within hearing
distance thereof;
      (8)   Obstructing the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles on a
street, right-of-way, sidewalk or other public place;
      (9)   Obstructing, molesting or interfering with any person lawfully in a
public place;
      (10)   Making unnecessarily loud, offensive noises;
      (11)   Disturbing any congregation or assembly of persons meeting for
religious worship by making noise, by rude, indecent or improper behavior, by
profane, improper or loud language or in any other manner, either within the
place of worship or within hearing distance thereof; or
      (12)   Committing any other act in such a manner calculated so as to
unreasonably disturb, interfere with or alarm the public or the comfort and
repose of any person.
   (C)   Whenever any police officer shall, in the exercise of reasonable
judgment, decide that the presence of any person in any public place is causing
any of the conditions enumerated in division (B) above, he or she may, if he or
she deems it necessary for the preservation of the public peace and safety,
order that person to leave that place, and any who shall refuse to leave after
being ordered to do so by a police officer shall be guilty of a violation of
this section.
   (D)   This section shall not apply to peaceful picketing, public speaking or
other lawful expressions of opinion not in contravention of other laws.
(Prior Code, § 10-401) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.03 DISTURBING FUNERALS.
   No person shall willfully disturb, interrupt or disquiet any assemblage of
people who have met for the purpose of any funeral, nor obstruct or detain any
person engaged in accompanying any funeral to a place of burial.
(Prior Code, § 10-402) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.04 UNNECESSARY NOISE.
   (A)   No person shall make, continue or cause to be made or continued any
excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud noise, or any noise which either
annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or
safety of others, within the limits of the city.
   (B)   Permits may be granted by the city for certain activities and events
which are exempt from the provisions of this section.
(Prior Code, § 10-404) Penalty, see §
133.99
Statutory reference:
   City’s power to restrain and prohibit unnecessary noise, see 11 O.S. § 22-
110
§ 133.05 MOTOR VEHICLE SOUND AMPLIFIERS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition applies
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
      PLAINLY AUDIBLE. Any sound produced by a sound amplifier device from
within the vehicle which can clearly be heard at a distance of 50 or more feet.
Measurement standards shall be by the audible senses, based upon direct line of
sight. Words or phrases need not be discernible and bass reverberations are
included. The motor vehicle in question may be stopped, standing, parked or
moving on a street, highway, alley, parking lot, driveway or right-of-way.
   (B)   No person operating or occupying a motor vehicle on a street, highway,
alley, parking lot, driveway or right-of-way in the city shall operate or
permit the operation of any radio, tape player, compact disc, loud speaker or
other electronic “sound amplifier” device used for the amplification of music
or the human voice from within the vehicle so that the sound is plainly audible
at a distance of 50 or more feet from the vehicle.
   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to the violation of this section that the
operator of the vehicle was not otherwise prohibited by law from operating the
sound amplifier device and that any of the following may apply.
      (1)   The system was being used to request medical assistance or
vehicular assistance or to warn of a hazardous road condition.
      (2)   The vehicle was an emergency vehicle.
      (3)   The vehicle was owned by the city or a private or public utility
company.
      (4)   The vehicle was used in an authorized public activity, including,
but not limited to, a parade, fireworks or sports event or an activity which
has been approved by the appropriate city official or governing body.
(Prior Code, § 10-405) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.06 PARADES AND PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition applies
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
      PARADE. Any parade, march, ceremony, show, demonstration, exhibition,
pageant or procession of any kind, or any similar display, in or upon any
street, park or other public place in the city.
   (B)   No person shall use any street, alley, public way, park or other
property owned or controlled by the city, except those places specifically
designed and intended for such use, for the purpose of holding, conducting,
causing or participating in any parade, street fair, street dance, carnival,
assemblage or activity of any nature which may cause the disturbance or
interference of the normal and ordinary use of the property by other persons
without first having obtained a permit for such purpose. The permits may be
granted by the City Clerk under such conditions as are deemed appropriate.
   (C)   Permits shall not be required under this section in the case of
construction or repairs to or within any such street or property, provided that
all other requirements of this code are complied with.
   (D)   (1)   Not less than two weeks prior to the closing or use of a street
or property for a parade, an application shall be submitted by the party to the
city.
      (2)   The time requirement may be waived by the City Clerk at his or her
discretion if sufficient time exists for proper review of the application as
herein provided. The application shall be submitted upon a form prescribed by
the city. The application shall provide such other information as requested.
   (E)   The City Clerk shall issue a permit as provided for hereunder when,
from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may
otherwise be obtained, he or she finds that:
      (1)   The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe
and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route;
      (2)   The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so
great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of
movement and the areas contiguous thereto so as to prevent normal police
protection to the city;
      (3)   The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so
great a number of ambulances so as to prevent normal ambulance service to
portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of
march and areas contiguous thereto;
      (4)   The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly
points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police
protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly
areas;
      (5)   The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of
firefighting equipment en route to a fire;
      (6)   The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury
to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or to create a
disturbance; and
      (7)   The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its
point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route.
   (F)   The City Clerk, in such cases as shall be determined in his or her
discretion, may require as a condition to the issuance of a permit herein such
insurance or bond holding the city harmless from any and all liability for
injury or damage of any kind whatsoever occurring during such activity covered
by the permit.
   (G)   Without regard to the above provisions of this section, the City
Clerk, from his or her consideration of available, appropriate and necessary
information, shall deny the application for a permit provided for by this
section when, from this information, he or she has reason to believe that any
contemplated advocacy at the proposed event will be directed to inciting or
producing imminent lawless action and will likely incite or produce such
action.
   (H)   (1)   The City Clerk, in denying an application for a parade permit,
may authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time or over a route
different from that named by the applicant.
      (2)   An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall so
indicate within five days after notice of the action of the City Clerk.
      (3)   An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of,
and shall have the effect of, a parade permit under this section.
(Prior Code, § 10-406) Penalty, see §
133.99
Statutory reference:
   Power of local authorities to regulate assemblies, see 47 O.S. § 15-102
§ 133.06 DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS.
   It is unlawful for any person to discharge a firearm in the city except when
doing so in the line of duty, when lawfully doing so in defense of one’s self,
of another person or of property, or when authorized by law or ordinance. It is
unlawful to discharge an air rifle or BB gun within the City.
(Ord. 2024-04, passed 11-12-2024)
§ 133.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
130.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   In addition to a fine as provided in §
130.99 of this code, for a third offense per §
133.05 of this chapter in any one 12-month period, the vehicle may be impounded
at the officer’s discretion. The Police Chief shall review all third-offense
impoundments to review discretion and the nature of the violation.
(Prior Code, § 10-405)
CHAPTER 134: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Section
   
134.01   Petit larceny; embezzlement
   
134.02   Larceny by false pretense
   
134.03   Altering keys
   
134.04   Concealing unpurchased merchandise; merchant’s authority to detain
   
134.05   Possession of stolen property
   
134.06   Defrauding public accommodations/conveyance; proof; exception
   
134.07   Failure to pay fare for public conveyance
   
134.08   False or bogus checks
   
134.09   Harmful deception
   
134.10   Public works under construction
   
134.11   Destroying trees and shrubbery
   
134.12   Defacing buildings, damaging property
   
134.13   Removing or breaking private property
   
134.14   Damaging private property
   
134.15   Damaging or tampering with motor vehicles
   
134.16   Damaging or tampering with utilities
   
134.17   Trespassing; notice requirements
   
134.18   Congregating or parking on premises after hours
   
134.19   Unlawful intrusion on land
   
134.20   Throwing or shooting at persons or property
   
134.21   Throwing out lighted substances or debris
   
134.22   Littering, depositing or discharging
   
134.23   Unlawful use of garbage or refuse container of another
   
134.24   Posting advertising matter on building of another
   
134.25   Sign or advertising prohibitions, exceptions
   
134.26   Interfering with radio, television or telephone reception of others
   
134.27   False weights
   
134.28   Electric fences
 
   
134.99   Penalty
§ 134.01 PETIT LARCENY; EMBEZZLEMENT.
   No person shall steal, take and carry away by fraud or stealth, with intent
to deprive another thereof, any personal property under the value of $50 or
embezzle any money, personal property or effects of another under the value of
$50. This section does not apply to taking property from the “person” of
another.
(Prior Code, § 10-301) Penalty, see §
134.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 21 O.S. §§ 1451 et seq. and 1701 et seq.
§ 134.02 LARCENY BY FALSE PRETENSE.
   No person shall induce, or attempt to induce, any person to give up or pay
over any money or other thing of value, which money or value does not exceed
$50, by any false representation or pretense, or in exchange for any false or
bogus coin or check, draft or other false evidence of value, or in
consideration of refraining from a lawful or unlawful arrest, or in
consideration of refraining from reporting any unlawful act to any public
official.
(Prior Code, § 10-302) Penalty, see §
134.99
§ 134.03 ALTERING KEYS.
   No person shall make or alter or attempt to make or alter any key or other
instrument that will open the lock of a building unless requested to do so by
some person having the right and authority to make such request.
(Prior Code, § 10-303) Penalty, see §
134.99
§ 134.04 CONCEALING UNPURCHASED MERCHANDISE; MERCHANT’S AUTHORITY TO DETAIN.
   (A)   Any person concealing unpurchased merchandise of any establishment,
either on the premises or outside the premises of the establishment, shall be
presumed to have so concealed the merchandise with the intention of committing
a wrongful taking of such merchandise.
   (B)   Such concealment or the finding of such unpurchased merchandise
concealed upon the person or among the belongings of such person shall be
conclusive evidence of reasonable grounds and probable cause for the detention,
in a reasonable manner and for a reasonable length of time, of such person by a
merchant or his or her agent or an employee. Any such reasonable detention
shall not be deemed to be unlawful nor render any such merchant or his or her
agent or employee criminally or civilly liable.
(Prior Code, § 10-306) Penalty, see §
134.99
§ 134.05 POSSESSION OF STOLEN PROPERTY.
   No person shall keep in his or her possession, dispose of or conceal any
stolen property, nor fail promptly to inform some proper official of the
possession thereof under circumstances indicating that such property had been
stolen or the possession thereof obtained unlawfully.
(Prior Code, § 10-304) Penalty, see §
134.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 21 O.S. § 1713
§ 134.06 DEFRAUDING PUBLIC ACCOMMODATIONS/CONVEYANCE; PROOF; EXCEPTION.
   (A)   No person shall obtain food, lodging or other accommodation in any
hotel, motel or inn, or boarding, eating or rooming house or place, or any
other lodging place, with the intent to defraud the owner or keeper.
   (B)   Proof that lodging, food and other accommodations were obtained by
false pretense or the fictitious show of any package or other property, or that
the person gave a check or negotiable paper on which payment was refused, or
that the person left the hotel, motel or inn, or boarding, eating or rooming
house or place, or other lodging place, without paying or offering to pay for
the food, lodging or other accommodation, or that the person surreptitiously
removed or attempted to remove the package or property, or that the person
registered under a fictitious name, shall be prima facie proof of attempt to
defraud.
   (C)   No person shall refuse to pay the legal fare of any of the vehicles
mentioned in this chapter after having hired the same, and no person shall hire
any vehicle with intent to defraud the person from whom it is hired of the
value of such service.
   (D)   This section shall not apply where there has been an agreement in
writing for a delay in payment.
(Prior Code, § 10-305) Penalty, see §
134.99
§ 134.07 FAILURE TO PAY FARE FOR PUBLIC CONVEYANCE.
   No person shall use or accept the use and services of any street car, taxi
cab, omnibus, automobile or any other means of public conveyance or passengers
operating under the code, ordinance, franchise, permit or license of the city
or state and refuse or fail to pay to the operator of the conveyance the usual,
customary, regulation or legal charge or price as fare immediately upon the
performance of the service.
(Prior Code, § 10-307) Penalty, see §
134.99
§ 134.08 FALSE OR BOGUS CHECKS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, with intent to cheat and defraud, to
obtain or attempt to obtain from any person any money, property or valuable
thing by means of any false or bogus check or by any other written, printed or
engraved instrument or spurious coin. The term FALSE OR BOGUS CHECK shall
include checks or orders given for money or property which are not honored on
account of insufficient funds of the maker to pay the same, as against the
maker or drawer thereof. The making, drawing, issuing or delivering of a check,
draft or order the payment of which is refused by the drawee shall be prima
facie evidence of intent to defraud and the knowledge of insufficient funds in
or credit with such bank or other depository.
   (B)   Such maker or drawer shall not have paid the drawee the amount due
thereon, together with the protest fees, and the check or order shall be
presented for payment within 30 days after the same is delivered and accepted.
(Prior Code, § 10-308) Penalty, see §
134.99
§ 134.09 HARMFUL DECEPTION.
   It is unlawful for any person knowingly to deceive another, whether by
impersonation, misrepresentation or otherwise, when such deception results in
or contributes to the loss, damage, harm or injury of the person deceived or of
a third party, or results in or contributes to the benefit of the deceiver.
(Prior Code, § 10-309) Penalty, see §
134.99
§ 134.10 PUBLIC WORKS UNDER CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Any person who removes, destroys, disturbs or in any manner injures
any grade stake, stone or other mark or monument set by or under authority of
the city to designate or mark grades, lines, corners or benchmarks on any
public work in the city prior to the completion and acceptance of the contract
for which such stakes or monuments are set, without lawful authority, is guilty
of an offense.
   (B)   Any contractor or other person constructing any public work in the
city shall protect such work by barriers or obstructions. It is unlawful for
any person to cross the barriers or to remove them until the work has been
completed and opened by authority of the city.
(Prior Code, § 10-313) Penalty, see §
134.99
§ 134.11 DESTROYING TREES AND SHRUBBERY.
   (A)   No person shall willfully, maliciously and without lawful authority
cut down, root up, sever, injure or destroy any fruit tree, shade or ornamental
tree, cultivated root or plant, grape or strawberry vine, shrub or plant
whatsoever standing on or attached to the land of another, or pick, destroy,
carry away therefrom or in any way interfere therewith any of the fruit
thereof.
   (B)   No person shall willfully or without lawful authority cut down,
destroy, root up or in any manner injure any fruit, shade or ornamental tree,
shrub or vine planted or growing on any street, land, avenue, alley or other
public ground of the city.
(Prior Code, § 10-316) Penalty, see §
134.99
§ 134.12 DEFACING BUILDINGS, DAMAGING PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall purposely deface or damage any public or private
building or appurtenance thereof or any fence, street, bridge, sidewalk,
driveway, street or public work.
   (B)   No person shall:
      (1)   Destroy, injure, deface, damage or molest any structure, building,
work or other property, real or personal, belonging to another;
      (2)   Use such property wrongfully to the detriment of the owner or other
person entitled to its use; or
      (3)   Interfere wrongfully with the use of any such property by its owner
or any other person entitled to its use.
(Prior Code, § 10-310) Penalty, see §
134.99
Statutory reference:
   Destroying property generally, see 21 O.S. § 1760
§ 134.13 REMOVING OR BREAKING PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   No person shall willfully, unlawfully or maliciously take and carry or cause
to be taken and carried away any part of a house, barn, fence, gate or other
structure, or maliciously break, tear down or destroy any part of a house, barn
or other structure not his or her own.
(Prior Code, § 10-311) Penalty, see §
134.99
§ 134.14 DAMAGING PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   No person shall willfully and wantonly damage or destroy the personal
property of another.
(Prior Code, § 10-312) Penalty, see §
134.99
§ 134.15 DAMAGING OR TAMPERING WITH MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person, other than a peace officer in the performance of his or her
official duties, shall, with intent and without right to do so, injure or
tamper with any vehicle or in any other manner damage any part or portion of
the vehicle, or any accessories, appurtenances or attachments thereto.
   (B)   No person, other than a peace officer in the performance of his or her
official duties, shall, without right to do so and with intent to commit a
crime, climb into or upon a vehicle, whether it is in motion or at rest,
attempt to manipulate any of the levers, starting mechanisms, brakes or other
mechanisms or devices of the vehicle while the vehicle is at rest and
unattended or set in motion any vehicle while the vehicle is at rest and
unattended.
(Prior Code, § 10-314) Penalty, see §
134.99
Statutory reference:
   Damaging motor vehicles, see 21 O.S. §§ 1787 and 1788
§ 134.16 DAMAGING OR TAMPERING WITH UTILITIES.
   (A)   No person shall alter, remove, tamper with, molest, damage or injure
any wires, cables, appurtenances, structures, pipes or equipment of any utility
of the city or any public utility, or connect or tamper with the wires, cables
or pipes of any electric, water, sewer, cable television or gas utility of the
city without the consent of the utility or city having been first obtained.
   (B)   It is unlawful to open up any manhole or opening to a sewer unless
authorized by the city, or to leave a manhole or other opening so opened
without replacing the fixture or appliances thereto in their proper place and
position.
   (C)   (1)   No person, except a member of the Fire Department or a person
acting on lawful order or permit issued by the city, shall open or use water
from any fire hydrant or take off the caps or damage the same.
      (2)   No person may block the approach or access to a fire hydrant or
attach, fasten, stand or brace anything against or on the hydrant.
   (D)   No person shall in any manner whatsoever:
      (1)   Cut into, attach to or intercept the wires, cables or pipes of any
electric, water, cable television or gas utility or of the city for the purpose
of fraudulently taking therefrom electric current, water, transmissions or gas;
      (2)   Cut into, attach to or intercept the wires, cables or pipes for the
purpose of conducting around any meter electric current, water or gas in order
to prevent the current, water or gas from being measured by the meter, or in
such other manner so as to consume or use the utility or cable service so as to
evade payment therefor with the unlawful intent to defraud the company or city
out of the value of the service; or
      (3)   By any device or manipulation whatsoever, to cause current,
transmissions, water or gas used upon any premises to be fraudulently conveyed
upon any premises for the purposes of use thereof and with the intent to
defraud and cheat the utility or city from payment thereof.
   (E)   Each day that any person maintains any such fraudulent connection with
any wires, cables or pipes, or fraudulently takes from any such wires, cables
or pipes either electric current, transmissions, water or gas, shall constitute
a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 10-315) Penalty, see §
134.99
§ 134.17 TRESPASSING; NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition applies
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
      TRESPASS.
         (a)   Includes each and every actual entry upon the premises of an
owner or other person in lawful possession of the premises without the express
consent of the owner or other person in lawful possession.
         (b)   TRESPASS shall also mean remaining upon the premises of an owner
or other person in lawful possession after having been told to leave the
premises by the owner or the agent or employee of the owner or other person in
lawful possession of the premises.
         (c)   TRESPASS shall also mean the act of entering upon or remaining
on private property when such is plainly forbidden by signs, markings or
otherwise, by verbal command of the owner or his or her agent or employee or
after having been directed to do so by a police officer, although this sentence
shall not apply to persons, including employees, whose presence upon the
premises is authorized by the owner or by a person in lawful possession of such
premises.
         (d)   TRESPASS shall also include the act of returning to private
property after having been directed to vacate the premises by the owner, his or
her agent or employee or a police officer under the terms of this section.
   (B)   It is unlawful and an offense for any person to commit a trespass
within the city upon either public or private property.
   (C)   Any of the following acts by any person shall be deemed a violation of
this section:
      (1)   The doing of an injury or misfeasance to the person of another;
      (2)   The doing of any injury or misfeasance to the property of another
when done with force and violence, either actual or implied;
      (3)   Each and every actual entry upon the premises of another owner or
person in possession of real property, whether the property is public or
private, without the owner’s or occupant’s consent, express or implied;
      (4)   An entry upon the premises, or any part thereof, of another in
violation of a notice exhibited thereon prohibiting entry at specified times;
      (5)   An entry upon the premises, or any part thereof, of another in
violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally or in writing by any
owner or other lawful occupant thereof;
      (6)   An entry upon any public property, including parks or parking
areas, in violation of a notice exhibited there prohibiting entry at specified
times;
      (7)   An entry upon any public property in violation of any notice,
warning or protest given orally or in writing by a city official;
      (8)   If on the property of another or upon public property lawfully, a
failure or refusal to depart in cases of being requested to so depart, orally
or written, by any owner or lawful occupant or by a city official;
      (9)   An entry upon any portion of a public park where such entry
involves the use of any vehicle, equipment or device where such use is
specifically prohibited;
      (10)   An entry of any public building, except for the purpose of
dispatching business with the public corporation or where consent is obtained
from the City Council or other public official who is lawfully authorized to
give consent; or
      (11)   Remaining on public or private property at any time other than
during the posted hours of business operation after having been directed to
vacate such premises by a police officer. The provisions of this division (C)
(11) shall not apply to persons, including employees, whose presence upon such
premises is authorized by the owner or by a person in lawful possession of such
premises, nor shall the provisions of this division (C)(11) apply unless the
hours of business operation are posted upon such premises. TRESPASS also
includes the act of returning to private property before the posted time of
opening for business operations on the next business day after having been
directed to vacate such premises under the terms of this division (C)(11).
   (D)   For purposes of constituting a violation of this section, the
exhibited notice required under divisions (C)(4), (C)(5), (C)(6), (C)(7) and
(C)(9) above shall meet the following criteria:
      (1)   The notice shall be plainly posted in a place or places conspicuous
to those who would enter the property;
      (2)   The notice shall be legible so as to afford reasonable warning
prior to the commission of a trespass; and
      (3)   If upon property to which the public is invited at least some part
of the day, the notice shall clearly specify the days and times of day that
entry is prohibited, and further, specify that entry at such times constitutes
a punishable offense under this code.
(Prior Code, § 10-317) Penalty, see §
134.99
§ 134.18 CONGREGATING OR PARKING ON PREMISES AFTER HOURS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
      AFTER BUSINESS HOURS. The doors of the business which are open to the
public during business hours are closed and locked and the business is no
longer admitting customers. The term applies to places of business which are
vacant or permanently or temporarily closed or otherwise unoccupied.
      PLACE OF BUSINESS. Any private property upon which a building, house or
other structure is used for commercial or public purposes, such as, without
limitation, restaurants, gas stations, shopping malls or centers, theaters,
convenience stores, grocery stores, drug stores or pharmacies, recreational
facilities, wholesale or retail sales activities, offices, banks or other
financial institutions, manufacturing and professional services (medical,
legal, accounting, insurance, consulting).
   (B)   No person shall stand, walk, sit, lie, congregate or otherwise occupy
or remain upon the premises of any place or business within the city after
business hours without the consent of the lawful owner, occupant, lessee or
employee thereof.
   (C)   (1)   No person shall stop, stand, park, leave or place any motor
vehicle, whether occupied or not, upon any public or private property without
the consent of the owner, occupant, lessee or employee thereof, except where
such property is provided for public parking and the use for such parking is
not restricted by proper notice.
      (2)   In addition to a fine or other punishment for a violation of this
division (C), the vehicle so parked, left or placed shall be subject to
impoundment upon complaint of the property owner or lawful occupant. The person
violating this division (C) shall be wholly responsible for payment of towage
and storage charges.
   (D)   No person may be charged under this section unless the premises in
question is posted with a conspicuous sign which states, substantially, that
the premises is posted and that any person congregating, occupying or remaining
upon the premises, or parking or leaving a motor vehicle thereon, is subject to
prosecution pursuant to this code.
   (E)   (1)   There is a rebuttable presumption that any person or motor
vehicle upon the premises of a place of business that is properly posted
pursuant to this section, after such time as the front door or other such door
that admits members of the public is closed and locked, is on the premises of
such business unlawfully under this section.
      (2)   However, this presumption shall not be applied within 30 minutes of
any opening or closing times posted by such place of business. This presumption
may only be rebutted by proof beyond a reasonable doubt that any person held by
the Municipal Judge to be subject to this rebuttable presumption was on the
premises in question with the permission of the lawful owner, occupant, lessee
or employee thereof.
   (F)   If a motor vehicle is alleged to be unlawfully parked or left under
this section, it shall be rebuttably presumed that the person in whose name the
motor vehicle was last registered was the person who parked or left the motor
vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 10-318) Penalty, see §
134.99
§ 134.19 UNLAWFUL INTRUSION ON LAND.
   (A)   No person shall intrude or remain upon any lot or piece of land, or in
any building within the city, without license or authority from the owner
thereof, nor erect or occupy thereon any structure whatsoever without such
license or authority.
   (B)   No person shall place, erect or occupy within the bounds of any
street, alley or avenue of the city any structure whatsoever unless such person
is granted a license by the city to do so.
(Prior Code, § 10-319) Penalty, see §
134.99
§ 134.20 THROWING OR SHOOTING AT PERSONS OR PROPERTY.
   No person shall throw or shoot any object into or across any street or alley
or in any place where he or she is likely to hit another person wrongfully or
injure property, nor throw any object at any person, vehicle, structure or
property of another, whether public or private, except where such is done in
defense of oneself or of another person or property.
(Prior Code, § 10-320) Penalty, see §
134.99
§ 134.21 THROWING OUT LIGHTED SUBSTANCES OR DEBRIS.
   No person shall throw, drop, deposit or otherwise place in, upon or within
the limits of any street, avenue, public ground, public waterway or city-owned
property or waterway any lighted cigarette, cigar or other flaming or glowing
substances, or any substance or thing which may cause a fire.
(Prior Code, § 10-321) Penalty, see §
134.99
§ 134.22 LITTERING, DEPOSITING OR DISCHARGING.
   It is unlawful to throw, deposit or discharge any item or waste material,
liquid or solid, on any street or public place in the city or upon the property
of another without express authority to do so.
(Prior Code, § 10-322) Penalty, see §
134.99
§ 134.23 UNLAWFUL USE OF GARBAGE OR REFUSE CONTAINER OF ANOTHER.
   (A)   It is unlawful and an offense for any person to dispose of garbage,
refuse, rubbish or waste into any refuse container, dumpster or other
receptacle for the deposit of the same belonging to or leased by another,
whether by rental agreement, lease or agreement with the city or a public or
private trash, garbage or refuse hauling service, without the permission of the
owner, lessee or other person entitled to the possession or use thereof.
   (B)   It is unlawful and an offense to use the city’s dumpsters for dumping
without an issued permit therefor.
(Prior Code, § 10-328) Penalty, see §
134.99
§ 134.24 POSTING ADVERTISING MATTER ON BUILDING OF ANOTHER.
   (A)   No person shall place upon any building any advertising matter of any
kind, nor print or exhibit printing on a building or any part thereof in words,
signs or characters, except with the express consent of the owner, lessee or
authorized agent of the owner of the building.
   (B)   No person shall place, post, paint, mark, write, print or put any
sign, poster, picture, announcement, writing, device, advertisement or other
marking upon any public or private building, fence, sidewalk, bridge, post,
automobile or vehicle or property of another without the consent of the owner
or person in charge thereof.
(Prior Code, § 10-323) Penalty, see §
134.99
§ 134.25 SIGN OR ADVERTISING PROHIBITIONS, EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   It is unlawful for any person or the officer or employee of any
person to erect on or over, or in any manner to display signs or advertisements
on, over or within, any street, right-of-way, road easement, utility easement,
sidewalk or alley or upon any utility pole or governmental sign or pole, no
matter if owned in fee or by easement, or whether owned by the municipality or
by franchisee within the city. This prohibition shall specifically include, but
not be limited to, any and all advertising signs or banners of any type.
      (2)   This section shall not prevent the placement and maintenance of
privately-owned canopies or marquees over sidewalks so long as such are at a
height which does not interfere with pedestrian traffic and do not extend so as
to obstruct the vision or traffic at or upon any street or intersection.
   (B)   (1)   Nothing herein shall prevent any business concern from erecting
or maintaining business or commercial signage when lawfully erected on any
private location in conformity with the ordinances and statutes of the city and
the state. Further, the Mayor and City Council reserve the right to allow the
advertisement of religious, charitable, patriotic and civic activities and
events upon and within municipal property upon proper application to the City
Clerk and proper approval of the City Council.
      (2)   Said exceptions shall only be allowed for such limited purposes as
advertising the observance of holidays and charitable events, and for the
commemoration and celebration of such public and civic events. Such approved
advertisements shall be allowed only for specifically-limited periods of time
as the City Council may approve.
   (C)   Nothing shall prevent the city, its employees or its lawful
franchisees from placing and erecting any signs, notices, warnings or
identifying information necessary to their lawful needs and responsibilities.
(Prior Code, § 10-324) (Ord. 2008-1, passed 5-5-2008) Penalty, see §
134.99
§ 134.26 INTERFERING WITH RADIO, TELEVISION OR TELEPHONE RECEPTION OF OTHERS.
   It is unlawful for any person or any officer or employee of any person to
operate or use any citizens band radio, ham radio or other electrical apparatus
or machine which materially and unduly interferes with the radio, television or
telephone reception of others.
(Prior Code, § 10-325) Penalty, see §
134.99
§ 134.27 FALSE WEIGHTS.
   It is unlawful for any person to sell any commodity or article of
merchandise and, in the sale thereof, knowingly make or give a false or short
weight therefor, or for any person owning or keeping or having in charge any
scale used in weighing any animal, commodity or article to knowingly and
willfully report any false or untrue weight whereby another person shall be
defrauded or damaged.
(Prior Code, § 10-326) Penalty, see §
134.99
§ 134.28 ELECTRIC FENCES.
   It is unlawful for any person to erect, install or maintain any
electrically-charged fence within the city, except that the Building Official
may issue a permit for an electrically-charged fence to retain animals upon
proof that the fence will not be hazardous to life and upon proof that the
electric charge is regulated by a controlling device.
(Prior Code, § 10-327) Penalty, see §
134.99
§ 134.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
130.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   The parking or leaving of a motor vehicle as set forth per §
134.18 of this chapter shall constitute the offense of unlawful parking or
leaving a motor vehicle after business hours, punishable as provided in §
130.99 of this code. If a person violates §
134.18(B) of this chapter, then it shall constitute the offense of unlawful
presence on property after business hours or congregating after business hours
and is punishable as provided in §
130.99 of this code.
      (3)   The provisions of §
134.18 of this chapter are cumulative of other applicable offenses enacted in
this code or state law.
(Prior Code, § 10-318)
CHAPTER 135: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC AUTHORITY
Section
   
135.01   Resisting police officers
   
135.02   Resisting public officials
   
135.03   Eluding police officers by motor vehicle
   
135.04   Escaping custody
   
135.05   Assisting a prisoner to escape
   
135.06   Conveying instruments to assist escape
   
135.07   Delivering articles to a person in confinement
   
135.08   Assaulting city officers or officials
   
135.09   Impersonating a police officer or any city officer
   
135.10   Using a siren or whistle
   
135.11   False statements, reports or complaints
   
135.12   False alarms
   
135.13   Removing barricades
   
135.14   Tampering with signs or equipment
   
135.15   Duties of the public at fires, emergencies
§ 135.01 RESISTING POLICE OFFICERS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
      OBSTRUCTION OF. In addition to the words’ common meaning, includes:
         (a)   Flight by one sought to be arrested before the arresting officer
can restrain him or her and after notice is given that he or she is under
arrest;
         (b)   Any violence toward or any resistance or opposition to the
arresting officer after the arrested party is actually placed under arrest and
before he or she is under arrest; or
         (c)   Refusal by the arrested party to give his or her name and make
his or her identity known to the arresting officer.
      RESISTING AN OFFICER. The intentional opposition or resistance to, or
obstruction of, an individual acting in his or her official capacity and
authorized by law to make a lawful arrest or seizure of property, or to serve
any lawful process or court order, when the offender knows or has reason to
know that the person arresting, seizing property or serving process is acting
in his or her official capacity.
   (B)   It is unlawful to resist, oppose or assault, prevent, fail to
cooperate with or in any way interfere with a police officer or any person duly
authorized to act as such while the officer or person is discharging or
attempting to discharge his or her official duties within the limits of the
city.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to warn or signal another so as to
assist such other person to flee, escape or evade an officer seeking to make an
arrest or for any person to bar or lock any door or barrier in the face of or
in front of an approaching officer.
(Prior Code, § 10-606) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 135.02 RESISTING PUBLIC OFFICIALS.
   It is unlawful for any person knowingly or willfully to:
   (A)   Resist, oppose or obstruct the Police Chief, any other police officer,
the Municipal Judge or any other officer or employee of the city in the
discharge of his or her official duties;
   (B)   Obstruct, threaten or otherwise intimidate or attempt to intimidate
any officer or employee from the discharge of his or her official duties; or
   (C)   Assault or beat, or revile, abuse, be disrespectful to or use abusive
or indecent language toward or about any such officer or employee while such
officer or employee is in the discharge of his or her official duties.
(Prior Code, § 10-613) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 135.03 ELUDING POLICE OFFICERS BY MOTOR VEHICLE.
   No operator of a motor vehicle who has received a visual or audible signal,
a red light or a siren from a police officer driving a motor vehicle showing
the same to be an official police, sheriff or highway patrol car directing the
operator to bring his or her vehicle to a stop shall willfully increase his or
her speed or extinguish his or her lights to elude or attempt to elude such
police officer, nor attempt in any other manner to elude the police officer.
(Prior Code, § 10-607) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 135.04 ESCAPING CUSTODY.
   No person lawfully in custody or confined in the city’s jail, before or
after conviction for any violation of the ordinances of the city, or held in
custody going to the city’s jail, or working upon the streets or other public
grounds of the city or in custody of any officer of the city, shall break or
attempt to break from such jail or custody and escape or attempt to escape
therefrom.
(Prior Code, § 10-601) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 135.05 ASSISTING A PRISONER TO ESCAPE.
   No person shall in any way aid, remove or assist any person to resist or
escape from the custody of any police officer or from any lawful confinement in
the city.
(Prior Code, § 10-603) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Assisting prisoner to escape, see 21 O.S. §§ 437 and 441
§ 135.06 CONVEYING INSTRUMENTS TO ASSIST ESCAPE.
   No person shall convey into the city’s jail any disguised instrument or
anything proper or useful to facilitate the escape of any prisoner lawfully
committed to or detained in the city’s jail for any violation of the city’s
ordinances or for any criminal offense, or lawfully detained or imprisoned
therein, whether such escape is effected or attempted or not.
(Prior Code, § 10-602) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 135.07 DELIVERING ARTICLES TO A PERSON IN CONFINEMENT.
   No person shall deliver any article or thing to any person under arrest
without the consent of the officer having charge and custody of the prisoner.
(Prior Code, § 10-604) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 135.08 ASSAULTING CITY OFFICERS OR OFFICIALS.
   No person shall knowingly commit any assault or battery, nor assault and
batter, any city official or police officer or firefighter while in the
performance of his or her duties.
(Prior Code, § 10-605) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Assaulting a law officer, see 21 O.S. §§ 649 and 650
§ 135.09 IMPERSONATING A POLICE OFFICER OR ANY CITY OFFICER.
   (A)   No person, other than police officers of the city, shall wear or carry
the uniform, apparel, badge, identification card or any other insignia of
office like or similar to, or a colorable imitation of, that adopted and worn
or carried by the police officers of the city.
   (B)   No person shall do or attempt any act to impersonate a police officer.
   (C)   It is unlawful to falsely impersonate any officer or employee of the
city, or falsely to represent himself or herself to be an officer or employee
of the city, by any kind of representation, pretense, insignia, sound, clothing
or conduct, or to exercise or attempt to exercise any of the duties, functions
or powers of an officer or employee of the city without being authorized to do
so.
(Prior Code, § 10-609) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Impersonating public officers, see 21 O.S. §§ 263, 264 and 1533
§ 135.10 USING A SIREN OR WHISTLE.
   (A)   No person shall use any police whistle or any other instrument used by
police officers to give signals to each other, nor imitate any signal given by
one police officer to another or any special signal used by police officers,
for the purpose of improperly or causelessly attracting the attention of the
police.
   (B)   No person, except members of the Police Department, Fire Department or
ambulance services, shall ring, use or otherwise sound any gong, siren, whistle
or any other device for making similar noise.
(Prior Code, § 10-608) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 135.11 FALSE STATEMENTS, REPORTS OR COMPLAINTS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly make or file, or cause to be made or filed,
a false or misleading report or misrepresentation, allegation or complaint with
the Police Department or any officer or employee of the city, or on any
official application, or commit perjury before any tribunal of the city.
   (B)   No person shall willfully and without probable cause make a false
report to any person of any crime, violation of the city’s ordinances or
circumstances indicating the possibility of a crime or violation having been
committed, including, but not limited to, the unlawful taking of personal
property, which report causes or encourages the exercise of police or other
official action or investigation.
(Prior Code, § 10-610) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 135.12 FALSE ALARMS.
   It is unlawful for any person to turn in a false alarm of any nature or in
any manner to deceive or attempt to deceive the Fire Department, Police
Department or any other emergency personnel, or to summon any officer or
employee thereof with reference to any fire alarm or reported fire, accident or
other emergency, or knowingly to cause the Fire Department or Police Department
or their officers or employees to make a useless or unnecessary run to any part
of the city or outside the city.
(Prior Code, § 10-611) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 135.13 REMOVING BARRICADES.
   It is unlawful for any person, except by proper authority, to remove any
barricade or obstruction placed by authority of the city to keep traffic off
any pavement, street, curb, sidewalk or other area.
(Prior Code, § 10-612) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 135.14 TAMPERING WITH SIGNS OR EQUIPMENT.
   It is unlawful for any person to tamper with any signs, signal equipment or
other devices placed, operated and maintained by the city in connection with
the administration of its code provisions, ordinances, regulations, services,
functions or performance of duties thereto.
(Prior Code, § 10-615) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 135.15 DUTIES OF THE PUBLIC AT FIRES, EMERGENCIES.
   (A)   All persons at fires or other emergencies or accidents shall conduct
themselves in an orderly and lawful manner and assist in maintaining law and
order.
   (B)   No person at or near any fire or emergency shall conduct himself or
herself in a disorderly manner or neglect or refuse to promptly obey any order
of the Fire Chief or his or her assistants relative to such fire, and no person
shall resist, obstruct, hinder or abuse any officer of the Fire Department or
any firefighter in the proper discharge of his or her duty.
   (C)   Every police officer present at a fire shall keep back all persons who
are in the way or impeding the work of the Fire Department, and so far as
possible, protect all property from loss or injury, and shall cooperate with
and assist the Fire Department in every way possible while at the fire. The
Fire Chief, an Assistant Fire Chief or any police officer shall have the power
to designate persons to guard any goods.
   (D)   No person shall follow or block the way of any emergency vehicle
engaged in an emergency run or knowingly interfere with officers at the
location of any fire or emergency.
(Prior Code, § 10-614) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Interfering with firefighters, see 21 O.S. § 1217
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
      
151.   TECHNICAL CODES AND REGULATIONS
      
152.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
153.   TREES AND SHRUBS
      
154.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
      
155.   OIL AND GAS DRILLING
      
156.   ZONING
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
Section
General Provisions
   
150.01   Fire limits defined
   
150.02   Address numbering
   
150.03   Mobile home restrictions
Dilapidated Buildings
   
150.15   Definitions
   
150.16   Reporting dilapidated buildings
   
150.17   Condemnation; boarding and securing; notice; removal; payment and lien
   
150.18   Clearing up premises from which building was removed
 
   
150.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.01 FIRE LIMITS DEFINED.
   The boundaries of the fire limits of the city are as may be established by
the Council.
(Prior Code, § 5-104)
§ 150.02 ADDRESS NUMBERING.
   (A)   The purpose of this section is to require that all homes, houses and
businesses within the corporate city limits properly and visibly display
accurate street numbers showing their addresses for the purpose of emergency
response.
   (B)   (1)   The size and location required for the display of street and
address numbers shall be as herein established and as may be modified as needed
from time to time by resolution of the City Council, with a record of the same
as kept by the City Clerk.
      (2)   The address display requirements are initially established as
follows.
         (a)   The numeral portion of said address shall be displayed in
reflective letters of a minimum height of three inches and reading left to
right.
         (b)   Said numeral address shall be displayed to the immediate left or
right of the main entry on the street address side of the residence or
business.
         (c)   In the event of any residence or business which is located 100
feet or more from the roadside, there shall be an additional posting of the
address within ten feet of the right-of-way on a post or sign at a height of
three to four feet from the ground and as shown in divisions (B)(2)(a) and (B)
(2)(b) above.
(Prior Code, § 12-203) (Ord. 2001-2, passed 4-2-2001) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.03 MOBILE HOME RESTRICTIONS.
   Mobile homes or prefabricated buildings within the city shall meet the
following restrictions.
   (A)   Parking of a mobile home or construction of a modular home in any
district for residential purposes shall be prohibited.
      (1)   Any replacement of a mobile/modular home on a site where one
previously or currently exists is prohibited.
   (B)   Mobile homes shall not be older than ten years of age.
   (C)   Mobile homes shall be skirted within 60 days and, if removable, axles
and tongues shall be removed also within 60 days.
   (D)   Standard mobile home tie-downs placed a minimum of 15 feet apart shall
be installed on each section of a manufactured mobile home.
   (E)   Two or more mobile homes shall not be joined unless the mobile home
consists of two or more sections, such as double- and triple-wide manufactured
homes.
   (F)   An exception to these requirements may be granted upon recommendation
of the Planning and Zoning Commission and approval by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 12-202) (Ord. 99-10, passed 8-2-1999; Ord. 2015-04, passed 6-8-
2015; Ord. 2023-01, passed 3-13-2023) Penalty, see §
150.99
DILAPIDATED BUILDINGS
§ 150.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly requires a different meaning.
   BOARDING AND SECURING or BOARDED AND SECURED. The closing, boarding or
locking of any or all exterior openings so as to prevent entry into the
structure.
   CLEANING or CLEANED. The removal of trash or weeds from the premises.
   DILAPIDATED BUILDING. The neglect of necessary repairs to a building, or
allowing it to fall into a state of decay, or allowing it to fall into partial
ruin to such an extent that the building is a hazard to the health, safety or
welfare of the general public.
   UNSECURED BUILDING. A structure which, through neglect or injury, lacks
necessary repairs or otherwise is in a state of decay or partial ruin to such
an extent that the structure is a hazard to the health, safety or welfare of
the general public.
(Prior Code, § 8-301)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 11 O.S. §§ 22-112 and 22-112.1
§ 150.16 REPORTING DILAPIDATED BUILDINGS.
   Any officer or employee of the city who discovers or receives a report of a
dilapidated building which has become detrimental to the health, benefit and
welfare of the public and the community or which creates a fire hazard to the
danger of property shall report such conditions to the administrative officer.
(Prior Code, § 8-302)
§ 150.17 CONDEMNATION; BOARDING AND SECURING; NOTICE; REMOVAL; PAYMENT AND
LIEN.
   The administrative officer may cause dilapidated buildings within the city
limits to be torn down and removed, or boarded or secured, in accordance with
the following procedure.
   (A)   (1)   At least 15 days’ notice shall be given to the owner of the
property before the city takes action or holds a hearing as provided herein. A
copy of the notice shall be posted on the property to be affected.
      (2)   In addition, a copy of the notice shall be sent by mail to the
property owner at the address shown by the current year’s tax rolls in the
office of the County Treasurer. Written notice shall also be mailed to any
mortgage holder, as shown by the records in the office of the County Clerk, to
the last known address of the mortgagee.
      (3)   At the time of mailing of notice to any property owner or mortgage
holder, the city shall obtain a receipt of mailing from the postal service,
which receipt shall indicate the date of mailing and the name and address of
the mailee. However, if neither the property owner nor mortgage holder can be
located, notice may be given by posting a copy of the notice on the property or
by publication, as defined by 11 O.S. § 1-102. Such notice may be published
once not less than 15 days prior to any hearing or action to be taken pursuant
to this section.
   (B)   A hearing shall be held by the administrative officer to determine
whether the property is dilapidated and has thereby become detrimental to the
health, benefit and welfare of the public and the community, or creates a fire
hazard to the danger of property, or needs to be boarded and secured.
   (C)   (1)   If the administrative officer finds that the condition of the
property constitutes a detriment or a hazard, and that the property would be
benefitted by the removal of such conditions or by its boarding and securing,
then the administrative officer may cause the dilapidated building to be torn
down and removed, or boarded and secured, and shall fix reasonable dates for
the commencement and completion of the work.
      (2)   The City Clerk shall immediately file a notice of lien with the
County Clerk describing the property and the findings of the administrative
officer at the hearing, and stating that the city claims a lien on the property
for the destruction and removal or boarding and securing costs, and that such
costs are the personal obligation of the property owner from and after the date
of filing of the notice.
   (D)   The property owner shall have a right of appeal to the city’s
administrative officer, or, if the order is rendered by the city’s
administrative officer, then the right to appeal is to the City Council. The
appeal shall be filed in writing with the City Clerk within ten days after the
administrative order is rendered.
   (E)   If the work is not performed by the property owner within the dates
fixed by the administrative officer, then the administrative officer shall
direct that the tearing down and removal, or the boarding and securing, be done
by one of the following methods:
      (1)   By the city, provided that the actual cost of the labor,
maintenance and equipment does not exceed $500; or
      (2)   On a private contract basis, in which case, it shall be awarded to
the lowest and best bidder.
   (F)   (1)   After the building has been torn down and removed, or boarded
and secured, the administrative officer shall determine the actual cost of the
dismantling and removal of the dilapidated building, or the boarding and
securing, and any other expenses as may be necessary in conjunction therewith,
including the cost of notice and mailing.
      (2)   The City Clerk shall forward a statement of such actual cost
attributable to the dismantling and removal or boarding and securing and a
demand for payment by mail to the property owner at the address specified in
this section.
      (3)   In addition, a copy of the statement shall be mailed to any
mortgage holder at the address specified in this section. At the time of
mailing of the statement of cost to any property owner or mortgage holder, the
city shall obtain a receipt of mailing from the Postal Service, which receipt
shall indicate the date of mailing and the name and address of the mailee.
   (G)   If payment is not made within six months from the date of the mailing
of the statement, the City Clerk shall forward a certified statement of the
amount of the cost to the county treasurer of the county in which the property
is located. The city shall have a lien on the property for such cost, together
with interest thereon, and the lien shall continue until the cost shall be
fully paid.
   (H)   When payment is made to the city for costs incurred, the city shall
file a release of lien or part thereof.
   (I)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any property zoned
and used for agricultural purposes.
   (J)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the city from otherwise abating
a dilapidated building as a nuisance or otherwise exercising its police power
to protect the public health, safety or welfare.
(Prior Code, § 8-303) Penalty, see §
150.99
Statutory reference:
   Removal of dilapidated buildings, see 11 O.S. § 22-112
§ 150.18 CLEARING UP PREMISES FROM WHICH BUILDING WAS REMOVED.
   (A)   In all cases in which a house or building has been removed before the
taking effect of this chapter or a house or building is torn down or demolished
pursuant to an order of the State Fire Marshal or one of his or her assistants,
the County Sheriff or the Fire Chief, as provided by state law or as provided
in this chapter, and in which any of the conditions in division (B) below
exist, then the owner or owners of the lot or lots and the person, firm or
corporation who tore down the house or building shall immediately comply with
the provisions of this chapter by having all of the things done.
   (B)   Conditions:
      (1)   The premises has not been cleaned up;
      (2)   The premises is cleaned up, and all lumber, brick, concrete,
cement, plaster, nails, wire and other materials have not been removed;
      (3)   The materials were removed, but the cellar space and excavations
have not been filled;
      (4)   A cistern or well has not been filled or safely and securely closed
and all openings to sanitary sewer have not been plugged to meet the
requirements of the City Plumbing Inspector and securely closed; or
      (5)   The lot or lots have not been leveled and left entirely free from
trash, or the same be not immediately done.
(Prior Code, § 8-304) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99(A) of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of §
150.02 of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished as provided for in §
10.99(A) of this code.
(Prior Code, § 12-203)
   (C)   Per §§
150.15 through
150.18 of this chapter, any person who shall tear down or begin the tearing
down of any house or building within the city limits of the city without having
first procured a permit therefor as herein provided shall be guilty of an
offense against the city and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as
provided in §
10.99(A) of this code.
(Prior Code, § 8-305)
(Ord. 2001-2, passed 4-2-2001)
CHAPTER 151: TECHNICAL CODES AND REGULATIONS
Section
   
151.01   International Building Code adopted; additions, insertions and changes
   
151.02   International Plumbing Code adopted; additions, insertions and changes
   
151.03   International Electrical Code adopted
   
151.04   International Fuel Gas Code adopted
   
151.05   International Residential Code adopted
   
151.06   International Mechanical Code adopted; additions, insertions and
changes
 
   
151.99   Penalty
§ 151.01 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE ADOPTED; ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS AND
CHANGES.
   (A)   The International Building Code, 2022 edition, as published by the
International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the Building Code of the city
for the control of buildings and structures as therein provided. Each and all
of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the
International Building Code are hereby referred to, adopted, incorporated and
made a part hereof as if fully set out in this code, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes prescribed in this section.
(Prior Code, § 5-101)
   (B)   The following sections of the city’s Building Code are hereby revised:
      (1)   Insert City of Beggs;
      (2)   Insert that applicable fees are set by the city by motion or
resolution; and
      (3)   Insert that offenses are punishable by fine and imprisonment as
provided in §
10.99(A) of the city’s code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 5-102)
(Ord. 2012-04, passed 11-8-2012; Ord. 2016-03, passed 7-11-2016) Penalty, see §
151.99
Statutory reference:
   Adoption of building codes, authorized codes, see 11 O.S. § 14-107 and 74
O.S. § 324.8
§ 151.02 INTERNATIONAL PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED; ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS AND
CHANGES.
   (A)   A certain document, at least one copy of which is on file in the
office of the City Clerk, being marked and designated as the International
Plumbing Code, 2009 version, and any revisions or amendments thereto, as
published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the Plumbing
Code of the city for the control of buildings and structures as therein
provided. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions
and terms of the Plumbing Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part
hereof as if fully set out in this code, with the additions, insertions and
changes, if any, prescribed in this section.
(Prior Code, § 5-201)
   (B)   The following sections are hereby revised as follows:
      (1)   Insert the City of Beggs;
      (2)   Insert that applicable fees are as set by the city by motion or
resolution; and
      (3)   Insert that offenses are punishable as provided in §
10.99(A) of the city’s code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 5-202)
(Ord. 2012-04, passed 11-8-2012; Ord. 2016-03, passed 7-11-2016) Penalty, see §
151.99
Statutory reference:
   Plumbing regulations and licensing, see 59 O.S. §§ 1001 et seq.
§ 151.03 INTERNATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED.
   The International Electrical Code, 2023 edition, as approved for the
installation of electrical wiring, devices and equipment is hereby adopted as
the minimum standard for the installation of all electrical wiring, devices and
equipment in the city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this
section. The International Electrical Code is hereby made a part of this code
as fully and to the same extent as if copied here in full, provided that the
present or current issue of the International Electrical Code and any
subsequent amendments thereto shall be considered as the International
Electrical Code as that term is used herein.
(Prior Code, § 5-301)
(Ord. 2012-04, passed 11-8-2012; Ord. 2016-03, passed 7-11-2016) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.04 INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE ADOPTED.
   The International Fuel Gas Code, 2022 edition, adopted by the International
Code Council, is adopted and incorporated herein by reference and shall have
full force and effect within the city. Any violation of these rules and
regulations shall be deemed a violation of the ordinances of the city and shall
be punished accordingly.
(Prior Code, § 5-501) (Ord. 2012-04, passed 11-8-2012; Ord. 2016-03, passed 7-
11-2016) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.05 INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE ADOPTED.
   The International Residential Code, 2022 edition, adopted by the
International Code Council, is adopted and incorporated herein by reference and
made a part of this code as if copied here in full as the designated and
legally adopted Residential Code of the city.
(Ord. 2012-04, passed 11-8-2012; Ord. 2016-03, passed 7-11-2016) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.06 INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE ADOPTED; ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS AND
CHANGES.
   (A)   The International Mechanical Code, 2022 version, as published by the
International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the Mechanical Code of the
city for the control of buildings and structures as therein provided. Each and
all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the
Mechanical Code are hereby referred to, adopted, incorporated and made a part
hereof as if fully set out in this code, with the additions, insertions,
deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in this section. At least one copy of
the Code is kept on file in the City Clerk’s office.
(Prior Code, § 5-601)
   (B)   The following sections are hereby revised as follows:
      (1)   Insert City of Beggs;
      (2)   Insert that applicable fees shall be set by the city by motion or
resolution; and
      (3)   Insert that offenses are punishable as provided in §
10.99(A) of the city’s code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 5-602)
(Ord. 2012-04, passed 11-8-2012; Ord. 2016-03, passed 7-11-2016) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99(A) of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any person who engages in any business, trade or vocation for
which a license, permit, certificate or registration is required by this
chapter without first having a valid license, permit, certificate or
registration as required, or who shall fail to do anything required by this
chapter or by any code adopted by this chapter, or who shall otherwise violate
any provision of this chapter or of any code adopted by this chapter, or who
shall violate any lawful regulation or order made by any of the officers
provided in this chapter, shall be guilty of an offense punishable as provided
in §
10.99(A) of this code. Each day upon which a violation continues shall be
deemed a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 5-801)
      (2)   No penalty imposed by and pursuant to this chapter shall interfere
with the right of the city also to apply to the proper courts of the state for
mandamus, an injunction or other appropriate action against such person.
(Prior Code, § 5-802)
   (C)   A person who violates a provision of §
151.01 of this chapter or fails to comply therewith or with any of the
requirements thereof, or who erects, constructs, alters, repairs or removes, or
has erected, constructed, altered, repaired or removed, a building or structure
in violation of a detailed statement or plan submitted and approved thereunder
or of a permit or certificate issued thereunder shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined any sum as provided in §
10.99(A) of this code, plus costs. Each day upon which a violation continues
shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 5-103)
   (D)   A violation of §
151.02 of this chapter shall be deemed a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as
provided in §
10.99(A) of this code. Any person who violates or refuses to comply with any of
the provisions of §
151.02 of this chapter shall be punished as provided in §
10.99(A) of this code.
(Prior Code, § 5-204)
   (E)   A violation of §
151.03 of this chapter shall be deemed a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by
fine. Any person, firm or corporation who violates or refuses to comply with
any of the provisions of §
151.03 of this chapter shall be punished as provided in §
10.99(A) of this code.
(Prior Code, § 5-303)
   (F)   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate §
151.04 of this chapter or any part thereof is guilty of an offense and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine as provided in §
10.99(A) of this code.
(Prior Code, § 5-502)
   (G)   A violation of §
151.06 of this chapter shall be deemed a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as
provided in §
10.99(A) of this code. Any person who violates or refuses to comply with any of
the provisions of §
151.06 of this chapter shall be punished as provided in §
10.99(A) of this code.
(Prior Code, § 5-604)
CHAPTER 152: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
   
152.01   Obstructions generally
   
152.02   Signs obstructing view or in sight triangle unlawful
   
152.03   Interfering with street or free flow of traffic unlawful
   
152.04   Structures on or over streets and sidewalks restricted
   
152.05   Displaying goods, wares and merchandise for sale prohibited
   
152.06   Playing prohibited
   
152.07   Duty of owner/occupant of property adjacent to sidewalks
   
152.08   Street cuts
   
152.09   Curb cuts
 
   
152.99   Penalty
§ 152.01 OBSTRUCTIONS GENERALLY.
   It is unlawful for any person to obstruct in any manner any street, alley,
sidewalk or other public way by leaving or permitting to remain thereon or
therein any vehicle, object, material, structure, fence or other obstruction of
any kind.
(Prior Code, § 14-101) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.02 SIGNS OBSTRUCTING VIEW OR IN SIGHT TRIANGLE UNLAWFUL.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to otherwise place any object, vehicle
or structure on or so near to any street right-of-way such that the same
constitutes a traffic or safety hazard for either pedestrians or vehicular
traffic traveling on or onto the street.
   (B)   It is unlawful and an offense for any person to erect, construct,
locate, maintain or allow to remain on his or her property any sign, fence or
structure within an area known as the SIGHT TRIANGLE, which is defined as the
area formed by measuring from the point of intersection of two lot lines a
distance of 25 feet along each lot line and connecting the points so
established to create a triangle with sides abutting street rights-of-way. Any
sign, fence or structure placed or located in the area is hereby determined to
be a public nuisance, and the city is authorized to cause the structure, fence
or sign to be removed.
(Prior Code, § 14-108) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.03 INTERFERING WITH STREET OR FREE FLOW OF TRAFFIC UNLAWFUL.
   (A)   It is unlawful to:
      (1)   Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any
other public place or building by hindering or impeding, or by tending to
hinder or impede, the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic or
pedestrians; or
      (2)   Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public
sidewalk or any other public place or building any act or thing which is an
obstruction or interference to the free and uninterrupted use of property, or
with any business lawfully conducted by anyone in or upon or facing or fronting
on any such public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public
place or building, all of which prevents the free and uninterrupted ingress,
egress and regress therein, thereon and thereto.
   (B)   When any person causes or commits any of the conditions enumerated in
division (A) above, a police officer or any law enforcement officer shall order
that person to stop causing or committing such conditions and to move on or
disburse, or to remove any obstructions. Any person who fails or refuses to
obey such orders shall be guilty of a violation of this section.
(Prior Code, § 14-102) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.04 STRUCTURES ON OR OVER STREETS AND SIDEWALKS RESTRICTED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to erect or construct, or to cause to be
erected or constructed, any cellar or basement way, stairway, door, awning
post, canopy or any other kind of structure projecting into, upon or over and
adjoining any street or sidewalk within the city, except that the Building
Official may, in his or her discretion, authorize the same to be done where the
public health, safety and necessity demand by granting a permit therefor.
   (B)   Upon the granting of a permit under this section, conditions as to the
erection of the structure through, upon or over any street or sidewalk may be
fixed by the city, and a contract shall be entered into as to the maintenance
of the structure and as indemnifying agreement secured, indemnifying and saving
the city harmless from any loss, cost or damage by reason of the structure
projecting into, upon or over and adjoining any street or sidewalk within the
fire limits of the city.
(Prior Code, § 14-105) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.05 DISPLAYING GOODS, WARES AND MERCHANDISE FOR SALE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this code, it is unlawful for any
person to display any goods, wares or merchandise for sale, or to sell the
same, on any street, alley or sidewalk or from any vehicle parked thereon in
the corporate limits of the city. Each separate sale or offer to sell in
violation hereof shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   Any vehicle parked on the streets, alleys or sidewalks for the purpose
of making merchandise available for sale by the methods prohibited by this
section shall be promptly moved by the driver upon order of the police of the
city, and, if not promptly moved, the same shall be towed from such location
upon order of the Police Department and the driver or custodian of the vehicle
shall also be deemed guilty of an offense.
   (C)   In each instance where an individual is guilty of an offense under the
provisions of this section, the person for whom such individual is acting in
the capacity of an agent or employee shall be guilty of a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 14-104) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.06 PLAYING PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to engage in any sport, game or amusement or
to play in, on or across the main-traveled portion of any sidewalk, street,
avenue or alley of the city, except as may be authorized by ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 14-106) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.07 DUTY OF OWNER/OCCUPANT OF PROPERTY ADJACENT TO SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to allow any obstruction of any kind to
accumulate in the sidewalk in front of his or her premises. All owners and
occupants of property are required to keep their premises and the sidewalks,
gutters, streets and alleys adjacent thereto free from weeds, trash and all
obstructions and to remove such weeds, trash and obstructions from such places.
   (B)   It is unlawful to deposit, throw or sweep into or upon a street,
alley, parking or sidewalk of the city any trash, weeds, tree trimmings, dirt
or any other refuse of any kind.
   (C)   It is unlawful for the owner or occupant of property abutting upon a
sidewalk or sidewalk area to permit the sidewalk or sidewalk area adjacent to
the property to become a hazard to persons using the sidewalk or sidewalk area.
(Prior Code, § 14-109) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.08 STREET CUTS.
   (A)   Permit required.
      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to cut the pavement or curb in or on
any of the streets, sidewalks, avenues or alleys in the city for the purpose of
laying pipe or other connections for utilities, or to cut or otherwise injure
the pavement or curb on any of the streets, sidewalks, avenues or alleys for
any purpose whatsoever, without a permit therefor as provided by this section.
(Prior Code, § 14-201)
      (2)   Every person who desires to lay pipes or lines for the purpose of
making and preparing any connections to utilities which will require the
cutting of the pavement to make such connections shall make application for and
procure from the city a written permit to cut such pavement or curb and to make
such installations for the proposed purpose or otherwise. No person shall have
any right or authority to construct or install any pipes or lines, or to
otherwise cut the pavement or curbs, without first having secured such permit.
(Prior Code, § 14-202)
   (B)   Permit fee. Any person desiring to cut the pavement or other hard
surface on any street or sidewalk in the city shall pay a fee for the permit.
The fee shall be in such amount as set by the City Council by motion or
resolution.
(Prior Code, § 14-203)
   (C)   Notification of completion; inspection. All permittees, when they have
completed the work for which such cut has been made, shall notify the city of
the completion of such work in order that the same may be inspected and
approved.
(Prior Code, § 14-204)
   (D)   No delays in performance. Any permittee cutting pavement by virtue of
a permit as authorized herein shall perform the excavation or other work
without delay or interruption.
(Prior Code, § 14-205)
Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.09 CURB CUTS.
   (A)   Permit required. It is unlawful for any person to cut, break, tear out
or remove the curbing or any part thereof along the street in the city for any
purpose, except for in accordance with this section. Any person desiring to cut
any curbing in the city shall first obtain a permit from the city before so
doing. Application for such permit shall be in writing to the city and shall
state the time and place that the applicant desires to break the curbing. The
application shall contain such other information as is required by the city.
      (1)   The city may, in its discretion, refuse to approve any permit to
cut any curbing along the streets of the city when the cutting of the curbing
shall constitute a traffic hazard or interfere in any way with the safety of
the public in the use of the street or adjacent sidewalk, or in any way
deteriorate or damage the street or interfere with the use thereof by the
public.
      (2)   Only such portions of any curbing may be cut or removed as in the
opinion of the Building Officer may be consistent with and not detrimental to
the general public welfare.
(Prior Code, § 14-211)
   (B)   Permit fee. A fee as set by the City Council by motion or resolution
shall be paid to the city prior to obtaining the permit required in this
section.
(Prior Code, § 14-212)
   (C)   Inspection. The removing of such curbing, the construction of the
driveway and all other parts of the work in connection therewith shall be
subject to the inspection and approval of the city.
(Prior Code, § 14-213)
Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99(A) of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of §§
152.01 through
152.07 of this chapter is guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be punished as provided in §
10.99(A) of this code. Each day upon which a violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 14-110)
   (C)   Any person who violates any provision of §§
152.08 and
152.09 of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction,
shall be punished as provided in §
10.99(A) of this code.
(Prior Code, § 14-214)
CHAPTER 153: TREES AND SHRUBS
Section
   
153.01   Removal of trees and shrubs obstructing view of traffic
   
153.02   Unlawful to injure trees, shrubbery
 
   
153.99   Penalty
§ 153.01 REMOVAL OF TREES AND SHRUBS OBSTRUCTING VIEW OF TRAFFIC.
   (A)   The owner of every lot or parcel of land in the city upon which any
trees, shrubs or plants are growing, or upon which any obstruction has been
placed, shall remove such trees, shrubs, plants or obstruction, or parts
thereof, if they are situated so as to constitute a traffic hazard by
obstructing the view of any driver of any vehicle on the streets of the city to
the extent that the driver is unable to observe the approach of other vehicles
on streets and alleys and at intersections.
   (B)   (1)   The owner of any premises abutting on any street shall trim all
trees and shrubbery growing in the parking, between the sidewalk and the
roadway of any such street and all trees and shrubbery growing on any part of
the premises adjacent to the sidewalk or any street or alley in such a manner
that the boughs or limbs thereof shall not obstruct free and convenient
passage, sight and travel along the street, sidewalk or alley.
      (2)   If the premises are occupied by some person other than the owner,
then such occupant shall trim the trees and shrubbery in the same manner as
hereinbefore required of the owner.
      (3)   Such trees and shrubbery shall be trimmed so that the lowest
branches or foliage shall not be lower than ten feet above the roadway of a
street or alley, nor lower than eight feet above the sidewalk.
   (C)   Any owner or occupant who fails, refuses or neglects to trim trees and
shrubbery as provided in this section, after receiving five days’ notice from
the City Clerk or his or her designee to do so, is guilty of an offense against
the city. In addition to any fine or punishment as an offense, the city may act
to abate the nuisance. Every day that the owner or occupant fails, refuses or
neglects to trim such trees or shrubbery after the expiration of the five days’
notice shall be a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 14-103) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.02 UNLAWFUL TO INJURE TREES, SHRUBBERY.
   It is unlawful for any person to injure any tree or shrubbery on a street or
alley in the city. This section shall not prohibit the lawful and proper care
and removal of such trees and shrubbery.
(Prior Code, § 14-107) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of an
offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in §
10.99(A) of this code. Each day upon which a violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 14-110)
CHAPTER 154: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
   
154.01   Statutory authority
   
154.02   Findings of fact
   
154.03   Statement of purpose
   
154.04   Methods of reducing flood losses
   
154.05   Definitions
   
154.06   Scope of applicability
   
154.07   Basis of special flood hazard area establishment
   
154.08   Development permit establishment
   
154.09   Compliance
   
154.10   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
154.11   Interpretation
   
154.12   Warning and disclaimer of liability
   
154.13   Floodplain management fee schedule
Administration and Enforcement
   
154.25   Floodplain Administrator designation
   
154.26   Floodplain Administrator duties and responsibilities
   
154.27   Permit procedures
   
154.28   Variances
Flood Damage Reduction
   
154.40   Provisions for flood hazard reduction; general standards
   
154.41   Provisions for flood hazard reduction; specific standards
   
154.42   Subdivision standards
   
154.43   Floodway standards
 
   
154.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.01 STATUTORY AUTHORITY.
   The legislature of the state has in 82 O.S. §§ 1601 through 1608, as
amended, delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
ordinances designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the city ordains the
following, to become effective immediately.
(Prior Code, § 12-400) (Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-3-2011)
§ 154.02 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation,
which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services and extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affects
the public health, safety and general welfare.
   (B)   These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and
velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazards areas by uses vulnerable to
floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated,
flood-proofed or otherwise protected from flood damage.
(Prior Code, § 12-401) (Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-3-2011)
§ 154.03 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
   (A)   Protect human life and health;
   (B)   Minimize the expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (D)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges, located in
floodplains;
   (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood-prone areas in such a manner so as to minimize future
flood-blight areas; and
   (G)   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood
area.
(Prior Code, § 12-402) (Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-3-2011)
§ 154.04 METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES.
   In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following
methods:
   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or
property in times of flood, or which cause excessive increases in flood heights
or velocities;
   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage; and
   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands.
(Prior Code, § 12-403) (Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-3-2011)
§ 154.05 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure which is on the same parcel of property as
the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the
principal structure. Examples of ACCESSORY STRUCTURES include, but are not
limited to, garages and storage sheds.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. The land in the floodplain within the city
subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION or BFE. The elevation in feet above mean sea level of
the base flood or 1% chance flood.
   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   C.F.R. The Code of Federal Regulations.
   CRITICAL FEATURE. An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood
protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire
system would be compromised.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change in improved and unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or the storage of
equipment or materials.
   DEVELOPMENT PERMIT. A permit issued by the City Floodplain Administrator
which authorizes development in a special flood hazard area in accordance with
this chapter.
   ELEVATED BUILDING. A nonbasement building built, in the case of a building
in Zones AE, A and X, to have the top of the elevated floor adequately anchored
so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood up
to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of Zones AE, A and X, ELEVATED
BUILDING also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation
perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement
of floodwaters.
   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION. For the purposes of determining rates, structures for
which the start of construction commenced before the effective date of the
FIRM, or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. EXISTING
CONSTRUCTION may also be referred to as EXISTING STRUCTURES.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) was completed before August 4, 1972.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FEMA. The Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP or FIRM. An official map of the city on which FEMA
has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium
zones applicable to the city.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report provided by FEMA for the city
which contains flood profiles and water surface elevation of the base flood, as
well as the floodway width, section area and mean velocity.
   FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM. Those physical structural works for which funds
have been authorized, appropriated and expended and which have been constructed
specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas
within the city subject to a special flood hazard and the extent of the depths
of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal
barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood-modifying
works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
   FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being inundated
by water from any source. See FLOOD or FLOODING.
   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. A person accredited by the OWRB and designated by
the City Council to administer and implement laws, ordinances and regulations
relating to the management of floodplains.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to,
emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management
regulations.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. Zoning codes and ordinances, subdivision
regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose regulations
and ordinances (such as floodplain, grading and erosion-control regulations and
ordinances) and other applications of police power. The term describes such
state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards
for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated
height. A FLOODWAY is located within areas of special flood hazard established
in §
154.07 of this chapter. A FLOODWAY is an extremely hazardous area due to the
velocity of floodwaters that carry debris and potential projectiles.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE. A use that cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term
includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers and shipbuilding and ship repair
facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the national register of historic places (a
listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the national register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
         (a)   By an approved state program, as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
         (b)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
   LEVEE. A human-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
   LEVEE SYSTEM. A flood protection system which consists of a levee or levees
and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are
constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including a
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for the
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building’s lowest floor, provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirement of 44 C.F.R. § 60.3.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure transportable in one or more sections which
is built on a permanent chassis and which is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a recreational vehicle.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL. For the purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program,
the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum to which base
flood elevations shown on the city’s flood insurance rate map are referenced.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures
for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of
an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes
any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management
purposes, NEW CONSTRUCTION means structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation
adopted by the City Council and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of floodplain management regulations adopted by the City Council.
   OWRB. The Oklahoma Water Resources Board.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. For other than new construction or substantial
improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act, being 16 U.S.C. §§ 3501
et seq., includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building
permit was issued, provided that the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement was
within 180 days of the permit date.
      (1)   The ACTUAL START means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work
beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation such as
clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers
or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
      (2)   For a substantial improvement, the actual START OF CONSTRUCTION
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part
of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the building.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank that is principally aboveground, as well as a manufactured home.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.
      (1)   Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other improvement
of a structure the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of
the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This
includes structures that have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the
actual repair work performed.
      (2)   The term does not, however, include either:
         (a)   Any project for the improvement of a structure to correct
existing violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary conditions; or
         (b)   Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the
alteration would not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure.
   VARIANCE.
      (1)   A grant of relief by the City Council to a person from the terms of
this chapter when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.
      (2)   A VARIANCE, therefore, permits construction or development in a
manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. For full requirements, see 44
C.F.R. § 60.6.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter.
   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION. The height, in relation to the North American
Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of
various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine
areas.
(Prior Code, § 12-404) (Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-3-2011)
§ 154.06 SCOPE OF APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the city.
(Prior Code, § 12-405) (Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-3-2011)
§ 154.07 BASIS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   The areas of special flood hazard identified by FEMA in a scientific
and engineering report entitled “The Flood Insurance Study for Okmulgee County,
Oklahoma and Incorporated Areas,” dated January 6, 2011, with the accompanying
flood insurance rate map (FIRM) were adopted on January 6, 2011, by reference
and declared to be a part of this chapter.
   (B)   However, until that date, the current effective flood maps for the
city, dated December 29, 1981, were used for this purpose until January 6,
2011.
(Prior Code, § 12-406) (Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-3-2011)
§ 154.08 DEVELOPMENT PERMIT ESTABLISHMENT.
   A development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the
provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 12-407) (Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-3-2011)
§ 154.09 COMPLIANCE.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered or have its use
changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other
applicable regulations.
(Prior Code, § 12-408) (Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-3-2011) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.10 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions.
   (B)   However, where this chapter and any other ordinance, easement,
covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more
stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Prior Code, § 12-409) (Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-3-2011)
§ 154.11 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(Prior Code, § 12-410) (Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-3-2011)
§ 154.12 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   (A)   (1)   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is
considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations.
      (2)   On rare occasions, greater floods can and will occur, and flood
heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes.
      (3)   This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special
flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages.
   (B)   This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city or any
official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on
this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
(Prior Code, § 12-411) (Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-3-2011)
§ 154.13 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT FEE SCHEDULE.
   The City Council establishes the floodplain management fee schedule.
(Prior Code, § 12-420) (Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-3-2011)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 154.25 FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR DESIGNATION.
   The City Council designates the Emergency Manager as Floodplain
Administrator, to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and
other appropriate sections of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations
in 44 C.F.R. pertaining to floodplain management, and being 42 U.S.C. §§ 4001
through 4138.
(Prior Code, § 12-412) (Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-3-2011)
§ 154.26 FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include,
but not be limited to, the following:
   (A)   Become accredited by the OWRB in accordance with 82 O.S. §§ 1601
through 1618, as amended;
   (B)   Review permit applications to determine whether the proposed building
sites, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe
from flooding;
   (C)   Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits
required by this chapter;
   (D)   Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have
been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from
which prior approval is required;
   (E)   Make the necessary interpretation where interpretation is needed as to
the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for
example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions);
   (F)   Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the OWRB
prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of
such notification to FEMA;
   (G)   Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained;
   (H)   Require the developer/applicant to determine and provide the base
flood elevation on two FEMA elevation certificates, one pre and one post, as
well as other data as required in order to administer the provisions of §§
154.40 through
154.43 of this chapter;
   (I)   When a floodway has not been designated, the Floodplain Administrator
must require that no new construction, substantial improvements or other
development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zone AE, as delineated
on the county’s FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of
the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one foot at any point within the city;
   (J)   After a disaster or other type of damage occurrence to structures in
the city, determine if the residential and nonresidential structures and
manufactured homes have been substantially damaged, and enforce the substantial
improvement requirement;
   (K)   Maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal from a decision
of the City Council; and
   (L)   Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to
the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 12-413) (Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-3-2011)
§ 154.27 PERMIT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   (1)   An application for a development permit shall be presented to
the Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him or her and may include,
but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the locations,
dimensions and elevations of proposed landscape alterations and existing and
proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the
location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard.
      (2)   Additionally, the following information is required:
         (a)   The elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor
(including a basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; and
         (b)   A description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural
drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.
   (B)   Approval or denial of a development permit by the Floodplain
Administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the
following relevant factors:
      (1)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (2)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      (3)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      (4)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (5)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      (6)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including the maintenance and repair of streets and bridges and of
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems;
      (7)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site;
      (8)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
      (9)   The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding
or erosion damage for the proposed use; and
      (10)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for
that area.
   (C)   The Floodplain Administrator or City Council, as applicable, may
approve certain development in Zones A or AE, delineated on the county’s FIRM,
which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one
foot, provided that the applicant for the development permit, in that case,
first complies with 44 C.F.R. § 65.12.
(Prior Code, § 12-414) (Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-3-2011)
§ 154.28 VARIANCES.
   (A)   General provisions.
      (1)   (a)   The City Council may grant variances for uses which do not
satisfy the requirements of the Oklahoma Floodplain Management Act, being 82
O.S. §§ 1601 et seq., or this chapter if the applicant for the variance
presents adequate proof that:
            1.   Compliance with this chapter will result in an arbitrary and
unreasonable taking of property without sufficient benefit or advantage to the
people; and
            2.   Satisfies the pertinent provisions of this section.
         (b)   However, no variance shall be granted where the effect of the
variance will be to permit the continuance of a condition which unreasonably
creates flooding hazards.
      (2)   Any variance so granted shall not be construed so as to relieve any
person who receives it from any liability imposed by the State Floodplain
Management Act or by other laws of the state.
      (3)   In no case shall variances be effective for a period longer than 20
years.
      (4)   Any person seeking a variance shall file a petition with the City
Council, accompanied by a filing fee as set by the city.
      (5)   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous
to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level, provided that the relevant factors in §
154.27(B) of this chapter and provisions of this section have been fully
considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.
      (6)   Any person seeking a variance to build a structure below the base
flood elevation will be issued a notice signed by the Chairperson of the City
Council which states that:
         (a)   The cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the
increased risk resulting from permitting the structure to be built lower than
the base flood elevation; and
         (b)   Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to
life and property.
      (7)   At such time as the City Council deems the petition ready for
notification to the public, the City Council shall schedule a hearing and
direct the applicant to publish notice thereof in a newspaper of general
circulation in the county at least 30 days prior to the hearing.
      (8)   The City Council shall conduct the hearing and make determinations
in accordance with the applicable provisions of this section. This appeals
group shall exercise wide discretion in weighing the equities involved and the
advantages and disadvantages to the applicant and to the public at large when
determining whether the variance shall be granted.
      (9)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant;
         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety or
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public or conflict with existing local laws, regulations or ordinances;
and
         (d)   A determination that the variance is the minimum necessary,
considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
      (10)   Upon consideration of the factors stated in this section and the
intent of this chapter, the City Council may attach such conditions to the
granting of a variance as it deems necessary to further the purposes and
objectives stated in §
154.03 of this chapter.
      (11)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all
variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and a copy of any
variance issued by the City Council shall be sent by the Floodplain
Administrator to the OWRB and FEMA within 15 days after issuance of the
variance.
   (B)   Special provisions.
      (1)   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed on the national register of historic places or
the state inventory of historic places without regard to the procedures set
forth in the remainder of this chapter.
      (2)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
      (3)   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of
historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the
historic character and design of the structure.
      (4)   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a
functionally dependent use, provided that:
         (a)   The criteria of divisions (A)(5), (A)(9), (B)(2) and (B)(3)
above are met; and
         (b)   The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats
to public safety.
(Prior Code, § 12-415) (Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-3-2011)
FLOOD DAMAGE REDUCTION
§ 154.40 PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION; GENERAL STANDARDS.
   In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required
for all new construction and substantial improvements.
   (A)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or
modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy.
   (B)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
   (C)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials resistant to flood damage.
   (D)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment
and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding.
   (E)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate the infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
   (F)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate the infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharge from the systems into floodwaters.
   (G)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located so as to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
(Prior Code, § 12-416) (Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-3-2011) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.41 PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION; SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
   In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required.
   (A)   Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement
of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including a basement)
elevated at a minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation. A registered
professional engineer, architect or land surveyor shall submit a certification
to the Floodplain Administrator that the standard of this division (A) is
satisfied.
   (B)   Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
shall have the lowest floor (including a basement) elevated at a minimum of one
foot above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer,
architect or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the Floodplain
Administrator that the standard of this division (B) is satisfied.
   (C)   Enclosures.
      (1)   New construction and substantial improvements with fully enclosed
areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for the parking of
vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement, and
which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of floodwaters.
      (2)   Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria.
         (a)   A minimum of two openings, having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding, shall be provided.
         (b)   The bottom of all openings shall be not higher than one foot
above grade.
         (c)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
   (D)   Manufactured homes. All manufactured homes to be placed anywhere
within the city within Zones A and AE on the county’s FIRM shall be installed
using methods and practices that minimize flood damage and have the bottom of
the I-beam elevated at or above the BFE. For the purposes of this requirement,
manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse
or lateral movement. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and
local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. The home shall be
installed by a licensed installer according to state law, and compliance
herewith shall be certified in writing to the Floodplain Administrator by said
installer prior to habitation of the manufactured home.
   (E)   Recreational vehicles.
      (1)   Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A and AE on the
county’s FIRM must either:
         (a)   Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
         (b)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
         (c)   Meet the permit requirements of §
154.27 of this chapter and the elevation and anchoring requirements for
manufactured homes in division (D) above.
      (2)   A recreational vehicle is READY FOR HIGHWAY USE if it is on its
wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect-type
utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions.
   (F)   Accessory structures. Accessory structures to be placed on sites
within Zones A and AE on the county’s FIRM shall comply with the following.
      (1)   The structure shall be unfinished on the interior.
      (2)   The structure shall be used only for parking and limited storage.
      (3)   The structure shall not be used for human habitation. Prohibited
activities or uses include, but are not limited to, working, sleeping, living,
cooking or restroom use.
      (4)   Service facilities, such as electrical and heating equipment, must
be elevated to or above the BFE.
      (5)   The structure shall be constructed and placed on the building site
so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters.
      (6)   The structure shall be designed to have low flood damage potential
and constructed with flood-resistance materials.
      (7)   The structure shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse and lateral movement.
      (8)   Floodway requirements must be met in the construction of the
structure.
      (9)   Openings to relieve hydrostatic pressure during a flood shall be
provided below the BFE.
      (10)   The structure shall be located so as not to cause damage to
adjacent and nearby structures.
(Prior Code, § 12-417) (Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-3-2011) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.42 SUBDIVISION STANDARDS.
   (A)   The applicant for a development permit for any subdivision located in
Zones A and AE which is 51 or more lots or greater than five acres shall
generate the base flood elevation data for that subdivision.
   (B)   All subdivisions, including the placement of manufactured home parks
and subdivisions, shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to
flood hazards.
   (C)   All subdivisions, including the placement of manufactured home parks
and subdivisions, shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer,
gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed so as to minimize or
eliminate flood damage.
(Prior Code, § 12-418) (Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-3-2011) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.43 FLOODWAY STANDARDS.
   The following provisions shall apply to floodways.
   (A)   Encroachments, including, but not limited to, fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other development, are prohibited within an
adopted floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and
hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice
that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels
within the city during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
   (B)   If division (A) above is satisfied, then all new construction and
substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of §§
154.40 through
154.43 of this chapter.
   (C)   The city may permit encroachments within an adopted floodway that
would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the
applicant for the development permit complies with all of 44 C.F.R. § 65.12.
(Prior Code, § 12-419) (Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-3-2011) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located,
extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this
chapter and other applicable regulations. A structure or other development
without the elevation certificate or other certifications required in this
chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is
provided.
   (B)   Violation of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with
any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor.
   (C)   Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of
its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $200
for each violation, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved
in the case.
   (D)   Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City Council or its City
Attorney from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or
remedy any violation.
(Prior Code, § 12-421) (Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-3-2011)
CHAPTER 155: OIL AND GAS DRILLING
Section
   
155.01   Definitions
   
155.02   Drilling permit
   
155.03   Seismographic permit
   
155.04   Annual permit for operation, maintenance, cleaning, swabbing or
reworking
   
155.05   Insurance and bond requirements
   
155.06   Wells; permitted locations
   
155.07   Earthen slush pits prohibited
   
155.08   Use of earthen reserve pits
   
155.09   Tanks containing flammable substances
   
155.10   Muffling of internal combustion engines
   
155.11   Maintenance of premises
   
155.12   Approved safety equipment, devices and methods required
   
155.13   Surface casing
   
155.14   Production casing
   
155.15   Master gate; blowout preventers; flow lines and valves
   
155.16   Valves and wellhead equipment; flow tubing
   
155.17   Disposal well tubing and pressure gauges
   
155.18   Blasting prohibited near wells
 
   
155.99   Penalty
§ 155.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly requires a different meaning.
   CIRCULATING MUD PIT. The working pit from which drilling muds are
continuously recirculated during the drilling process into and from the
drilling hole for the purpose of flushing therefrom the drill bit cuttings and
as a lubricant to reduce torque, drag, heat, friction and differential sticking
during the drilling process.
   DISPOSAL WELL. Any well drilled or actually used for the injection of
saltwater or other substances into the earth at a point other or different than
the point of extraction or production thereof from the earth.
   MUD. The drilling fluid used and recirculated through the drilling hole as a
lubricant to reduce torque, drag, heat, friction and differential sticking and
to flush drill bit cuttings from the hole during the drilling process.
   MUD PROGRAM. The planned usage of drilling fluid lubricants, specifying with
particularity the type, name and physical and chemical composition and
characteristics of all ingredients thereof, together with such laboratory and
other technical data as may be necessary or required by the Building Official
to evaluate the same as pollutive, deleterious or otherwise.
   OIL AND GAS WELL. Includes any well drilled, operated or maintained for the
production of oil, gas, casinghead gas or any of them or their byproducts or
derivatives.
   RESERVE PIT. Any excavation, pit or receptacle designed or actually used to
receive, store or hold rocks, drill bit cuttings, shale, sand, fresh water,
drilling mud containing no saltwater or other waste products or deleterious
substances produced or used in the drilling, swabbing, cleaning or reworking of
any oil, gas or disposal well.
(Prior Code, § 5-701)
§ 155.02 DRILLING PERMIT.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to drill an oil, gas or disposal well
within the corporate limits of the city without first having procured a permit
to do so.
   (B)   (1)   Every person desiring to drill an oil, gas or disposal well in
the city shall file a written application for a permit to do so with the City
Clerk. Such application shall be in the form as required by the City Council
and shall be signed by the applicant or his or her agent authorized to sign the
same.
      (2)   Such application shall specify the quarter section thereof so as to
identify the well location within a particular ten-acre tract. All equipment to
be utilized in the drilling, operating or maintenance of the well shall be
specified in the application, with surface casing stating 150 feet or the depth
of surface casing required by the State Corporation Commission, whichever is
greater, and a copy of insurance and bonds shall be attached in writing thereto
for approval by the City Clerk.
   (C)   At the time of filing an application for a permit under this section,
the applicant shall pay to the City Clerk a fee as set by the Council by motion
or resolution to defray the expenses of inspecting the location and drilling
operations and, if the well is completed as a producing well, in payment of the
annual permit fee for the initial year of production and operation. No portion
of any such fee shall be refunded for any reason.
   (D)   A permit required by this section shall be issued by the City Clerk if
the application is in compliance with applicable provisions of this chapter and
if the applicant has complied with §
155.05 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5-702) Penalty, see §
155.99
§ 155.03 SEISMOGRAPHIC PERMIT.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to conduct seismographic exploration,
survey or testing within the corporate limits of the city without first having
procured a permit to do so.
   (B)   (1)   Every person desiring to conduct seismographic operations,
surveys or testing in the city shall first file a written application for a
permit to do so with the City Clerk. Such application shall be in the form
required by the City Council and shall be signed by the applicant or his or her
agent authorized to sign the same.
      (2)   Such applications shall specify the quarter section, the cityship
and range and the location within the quarter section thereof so as to identify
the testing or survey site.
   (C)   At the time of filing an application for a permit under this section,
the applicant shall pay to the City Clerk a fee as set by the Council by motion
or resolution.
   (D)   A permit required by this section shall be issued by the City Clerk if
the application is in compliance with all applicable provisions of this
chapter. The permit shall expire 90 days after issuance and may not be extended
or transferred in any manner whatsoever.
(Prior Code, § 5-703) Penalty, see §
155.99
§ 155.04 ANNUAL PERMIT FOR OPERATION, MAINTENANCE, CLEANING, SWABBING OR
REWORKING.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to engage in the operation, maintenance,
cleaning, swabbing or reworking of any completed and operating oil, gas or
disposal well unless a current annual permit has been issued for such well.
      (1)   Such permit shall be obtained from the City Clerk on the
anniversary date of the drilling permit issued under the provisions of §
155.02 for wells drilled after April 15, 1988.
      (2)   For those wells drilled before April 15, 1988, the initial annual
permit shall have been obtained within 60 days after the effective date of this
chapter, and subsequent permits shall be obtained on the anniversary date of
such initial permit.
   (B)   (1)   An annual permit required by this section shall be issued by the
City Clerk upon payment of a fee as set by the Council by motion or resolution.
      (2)   However, no such permit shall be issued unless the applicant is in
full compliance with §
155.05 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5-704) Penalty, see §
155.99
§ 155.05 INSURANCE AND BOND REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   No person shall drill, operate or maintain any oil, gas or disposal
well within the city unless there is on file with the City Clerk a certificate
of insurance, issued by some corporate insurer licensed to do business in the
state, evidencing current insurance coverage for the owner of such well and his
or her driller, agents and employees, conditioned for the payment of all
damages due to injury to persons or damage to property resulting from the
drilling, operation or maintenance of the well or any structure, machinery,
pipeline or appurtenance used in connection therewith. Such coverage shall be
in an amount not less than $500,000.
   (B)   No person shall drill, operate or maintain any oil, gas or disposal
well within the city unless there is on file with the City Clerk, in addition
to the insurance certificate required by division (A) above, a bond in full
force and effect with minimum limits of $2,000 and with corporate surety by
some insurer licensed to do business in the state, conditioned to assure
compliance by the owner and his or her driller, agents and employees with all
requirements of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5-705) Penalty, see §
155.99
§ 155.06 WELLS; PERMITTED LOCATIONS.
   Oil, gas or disposal wells may be located in any of the zoning districts
within the city where no single-family residence or other dwelling is located
within 300 feet of the proposed well site, unless a zoning variance is obtained
in the manner as provided by the zoning ordinance of the city.
(Prior Code, § 5-706)
§ 155.07 EARTHEN SLUSH PITS PROHIBITED.
   Earthen disposal facilities (pits) shall not be constructed, built,
maintained or used by any person or company to dispose of oil field waste in
any location within the city.
(Prior Code, § 5-707) Penalty, see §
155.99
§ 155.08 USE OF EARTHEN RESERVE PITS.
   Earthen reserve pits which contain no saltwater, oil, oil derivatives,
caustics, acids or other deleterious substances harmful to soil or vegetation,
or injurious to animal or human life, shall be allowed to be constructed or
used in connection with the drilling, swabbing, cleaning out or reworking of
oil and gas wells within the city. The contents thereof need not be transported
from the premises to a disposal facility, provided that the same are leveled
and the surface of the ground restored as nearly as possible to its original
condition within 90 days after completion of the drilling, swabbing, clean out
or reworking operations.
(Prior Code, § 5-708)
§ 155.09 TANKS CONTAINING FLAMMABLE SUBSTANCES.
   (A)   (1)   Storage tanks or other types of tanks containing flammable
substances at any location within the city shall have earthen embankments
constructed around them of sufficient size and height to be able to adequately
contain one and one-half times the volume of such tanks in the event of a
rupture thereof at the floor of such tank.
      (2)   No drain plugs, openings or siphons shall be placed in the walls or
dikes which will permit the escape of any liquids through the same.
   (B)   In no event shall any such tank be located nearer than 100 feet to a
dwelling or business structure, street or highway within the city.
(Prior Code, § 5-709) Penalty, see §
155.99
§ 155.10 MUFFLING OF INTERNAL COMBUSTION ENGINES.
   No steam, gasoline, natural gas, diesel or other internal combustion engine
of any kind shall be operated within 100 feet of any dwelling or business
structure within the city unless the same is adequately muffled.
(Prior Code, § 5-710) Penalty, see §
155.99
§ 155.11 MAINTENANCE OF PREMISES.
   The premises upon which any oil, gas or disposal well is drilled, operated
or maintained shall be kept free of all accumulations of rubbish, litter,
unused equipment or materials, excess rotary mud, saltwater, waste oil or oil
byproducts and other wastes, insofar as the same may be reasonably done in the
conduct of operations offered by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5-711) Penalty, see §
155.99
§ 155.12 APPROVED SAFETY EQUIPMENT, DEVICES AND METHODS REQUIRED.
   Approved equipment, standard devices and ordinary methods such as are
commonly known and used in the oil and gas drilling producing industry for the
safety and protection of property from damage due to drilling and operating
activities shall be used at all locations within the city.
(Prior Code, § 5-712) Penalty, see §
155.99
§ 155.13 SURFACE CASING.
   At least 150 feet, but not less than that required by the State Corporation
Commission, of surface casing shall be set in each well after notification of
intention to do so has been given to the Conservation Department of the State
Corporation Commission, whose representative shall be entitled to inspect the
installation thereof and to direct the type and amount of cement to be used in
cementing the same in the hole.
(Prior Code, § 5-713) Penalty, see §
155.99
§ 155.14 PRODUCTION CASING.
   (A)   Production casing of a size not less than four and one-half inches
outside diameter, in good condition, shall be set no higher than the top of the
producing formation and cemented with a sufficient amount of cement to obtain a
minimum of 500 feet of annular fill above the casing.
   (B)   All of such production casing shall be tested by pressure methods for
either drilling the cement plug or perforating, if the cement is not drilled.
(Prior Code, § 5-714) Penalty, see §
155.99
§ 155.15 MASTER GATE; BLOWOUT PREVENTERS; FLOW LINES AND VALVES.
   All drilling wells shall be equipped with a master gate, or its equivalent,
and with adequate blowout preventers, flow lines and valves commensurate with
the working pressure involved.
(Prior Code, § 5-715) Penalty, see §
155.99
§ 155.16 VALVES AND WELLHEAD EQUIPMENT; FLOW TUBING.
   (A)   Upon completion of any flowing well, the wellhead equipment shall have
on the tubing at least one master valve, plus a flow valve and a valve on the
casing annulus.
   (B)   All wells shall be equipped with flow tubing of a size at least two
inches inside diameter extending from not less than 50 feet from the top of the
lowest producing formation.
(Prior Code, § 5-716) Penalty, see §
155.99
§ 155.17 DISPOSAL WELL TUBING AND PRESSURE GAUGES.
   All disposal wells shall be equipped with at least two inch inside diameter
tubing set on a packer, and a pressure gauge shall be installed on the casing
annulus at all times.
(Prior Code, § 5-717) Penalty, see §
155.99
§ 155.18 BLASTING PROHIBITED NEAR WELLS.
   No blasting shall be allowed around or within any existing well.
(Prior Code, § 5-718) Penalty, see §
155.99
§ 155.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who shall engage in any business,
trade or vocation for which a license, permit, certificate or registration is
required by this chapter without having a valid license, permit, certificate or
registration as required, or who shall fail to do anything required by this
chapter or by any code adopted by this chapter, or who shall violate any lawful
regulation or order made by any of the officers provided for in this chapter,
shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished
as provided in §
10.99(A) of this code. Each day upon which a violation continues shall be
deemed a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 5-719)
   (B)   No penalty imposed by and pursuant to this chapter shall interfere
with the right of the city also to apply to the proper courts of the state for
a mandamus, an injunction or other appropriate action against such person, firm
or corporation.
(Prior Code, § 5-720)
CHAPTER 156: ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
156.01   Zoning ordinance adopted
Specific Use Permits
   
156.15   Purposes
   
156.16   Use conditions
   
156.17   Specific use list
   
156.18   Conditions for approval
   
156.19   Filing petition; fee
   
156.20   Notice of hearing to consider permit
   
156.21   Appeals and consideration by City Council
   
156.22   Reapplication or reconsideration of mining/quarrying, mineral products
processing
   
156.23   Marijuana growth and sales restrictions
 
   
156.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Areas of special flood hazard, regulations and variances, see
Ch. 154
   Building and construction regulations, see
Ch. 150
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 156.01 ZONING ORDINANCE ADOPTED.
   The city’s zoning ordinance, Ord. 78-4, and all amendments thereto are
hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference, applicable in the city
fully as if set out at length herein.
(Prior Code, § 12-201) (Ord. 78-4, passed - -) Penalty, see §
156.99
SPECIFIC USE PERMITS
§ 156.15 PURPOSES.
   (A)   The City Council may, after a public hearing and recommendation by the
Planning Commission, and after conducting a public hearing as is required in
accordance with the provisions of this section, authorize for specific parcels
of land the issuance of a specific use permit.
   (B)   The uses listed in the specific use list are so clarified because of
the size of the land they require or the specialized nature of the use, or they
may more intensely dominate the area in which they are located, or their
effects on the general public are broader in scope than other types of uses
permitted in the district.
   (C)   The designation of a specific use permit as possible on the specific
use list does not constitute an authorization or an assurance that such use
will be permitted. Rather, each specific use permit application shall be valued
as to its probable effect on the adjacent property and community welfare and
may be approved or denied as the findings indicate appropriate.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 9-18-2018) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.16 USE CONDITIONS.
   Specific uses permitted shall comply with the most restrictive yard and
height requirements of the district in which located and, in addition, shall
comply with the requirements, especially for parking and loading, as required
per the related use unit in the City Zoning Code, except as may be modified by
City Council as provided in § 1704.022.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 9-18-2018) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.17 SPECIFIC USE LIST.
   The following uses are allowed in all zoning districts, other than
Residential, by a specific use permit as granted by the City Council:
Specific Uses
Specific Uses
A
Adult entertainment establishments        Airports or heliports
Apartments units of nine units or more    Attractions, public or private
B
Bed and breakfasts                        Bus stations
C
Cemeteries                                Churches
College or university hospitals           Convalescent homes
Convict pre-release centers               Crematories
Cultural or heritage centers               
D
Detention centers, juvenile or adult       
E
Electric generation plants or substations  
F
Fire protection facilities                Fire stations
G
Golf courses                              Golf driving ranges
Governmental services                     Gun clubs
H
Halfway houses                             
I
Industrial uses with a minimum acreage    Inns
requirement of 40 acres
J
Juvenile delinquency centers               
K
Kennels                                    
L
Libraries                                  
M
Marijuana dispensaries                    Marijuana facilities, wholesale
Marijuana growth facilities, commercial   Marijuana storage facilities
Mausoleums                                Mining and mineral processing
Mini-storage                              Museums
N
Nursing homes                              
O
Office uses, when located on a 40-acre or  
larger tract
P
Post offices                              Private schools with a comprehensive
                                          education curriculum
Public schools                             
R
Recycling centers                         Refuse transfer stations
Resort facilities, commercial, with a     Rifle and skeet ranges
minimum acreage requirement of 40 acres
S
Sanitary landfills                        Sewer disposal facilities
T
Theme parks, commercial                   Trade schools
Transmitting towers, excluding amateur     
radio towers
W
Water treatment facilities or water        
storage facilities
 
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 9-18-2018) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.18 CONDITIONS FOR APPROVAL.
   (A)   Plans and data to be submitted.
      (1)   Prior to submission of a request for a specific use permit, the
city may require one or more preapplication conferences with the potential
applicant.
      (2)   In considering and determining its recommendation to the City
Council relative to any application for a specific use permit, the Planning
Commission will establish the requirements necessary for consideration of the
application. The Commission shall also set a deposit amount from the applicant
sufficient for payment of the application and permit expenses. The requirements
and amount of deposit may be adjusted by the Planning Commission as necessary
during the application process.
      (3)   The city may require that the applicant furnish preliminary site
plans and data concerning the operation, location, function and characteristics
of any use of land or building proposed. For uses in which the land use has a
possible environmental impact, the Commission may require those engineering
and/or environmental impact studies necessary for evaluation of the proposed
use.
   (B)   Planning Commission; city requirements. The Planning Commission may
recommend to the City Council that certain safeguards and conditions concerning
bonding, insurance, setbacks, ingress and egress, off-street parking and
loading arrangements and the location or construction of buildings and uses and
operations be required. If the Planning Commission fails to review and make a
recommendation within 45 days from the date the application is accepted for
processing, the City Council can take action on the application.
   (C)   City Council requirements.
      (1)   The City Council may, in the interest of the public welfare and to
assure compliance with the intent of this chapter and the city’s Comprehensive
Plan, require such development standards and operational conditions and
safeguards as are indicated to be important to the welfare and protection of
adjacent property and the community as a whole and be compatible with the
natural environment and the planned capacities of public services and
facilities affected by the land use. This may include the requirement of having
the property platted and/or the requirement of the dedication of sufficient
rights- of-way or easements as necessary to further the public good.
      (2)   The City Council may impose conditions including, but not limited
to, bonding, insurance, permitted uses, lot sizes, setbacks, height limits,
required facilities, buffers, open space areas, lighting, noise levels,
signage, landscaping, parking and loading, compatibility and land use density
as may be indicated depending upon the proposed use and its potential effect on
adjacent areas or the community.
   (D)   Site plans. A site plan (plot plan) setting forth the conditions
specified may be required of the applicant, and such plan, when accepted, shall
be made a part of the permit issued for the specific use.
   (E)   Designation of zoning map. A specific use permit approved under the
provisions of this chapter shall not be considered as an amendment to the
zoning ordinance; however, the specific use permit shall be noted on the zoning
map as follows: SUP - (the number of the request for a specific use permit).
Any of the conditions contained in a specific use permit approval shall be
considered as conditions precedent to the granting of a building permit for the
specific use provided for.
   (F)   Time limits for implementation. If for any reason the approved
specific use ceases operation for a period of two years, then the approval of
said specific use shall be considered void and will require another public
hearing review by the Planning Commission and City Council. This shall also
apply to any approved specific use that does not begin operation within two
years of approval. This voiding of approval shall not apply if orderly progress
toward completion of construction is taking place. Uses existing before the
adoption of the specific use permit provisions, including nonconforming uses
and their incidental and accessory uses, must receive a specific use permit
before any expansion of the use is permitted.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 9-18-2018) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.19 FILING PETITION; FEE.
   (A)   Filing of a petition. A petition for a specific use permit may be
filed with the Planning Commission by the owner or owners of the property
concerned, by the duly-authorized representative thereof, by the holder of an
option to purchase the affected real estate or by the purchaser in a contract
to purchase realty. Such petition shall be on a standard form furnished by the
Planning Department of the city. All petitions for a specific use permit shall
be accompanied by a site plan of the proposed area showing the locations of
buildings and parking and other pertinent data concerning the operation of the
proposed use.
   (B)   Fee for petition. A $100 fee shall be required with the specific use
permit application, and such other fees as the City Council may from time to
time specify by resolution.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 9-18-2018) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.20 NOTICE OF HEARING TO CONSIDER PERMIT.
   (A)   Notice of the public hearing to consider a specific use permit shall
be mailed at least 20 days before the public hearing held by the Planning
Commission by mailing written notice by the Secretary of the Planning
Commission to all owners of property within a 300 foot radius of the exterior
boundary of the subject property, or by such additional notice as deemed
necessary by the Planning Commission.
   (B)   The notice shall contain:
      (1)   The date, time and place of the public hearing;
      (2)   The present zoning classification of the property and the nature of
the specific use permit; and
      (3)   The legal description of the property and street address or
approximate location in the municipality.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 9-18-2018) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.21 APPEALS AND CONSIDERATION BY CITY COUNCIL.
   (A)   An applicant, or any adversely-affected person, may appeal a
recommendation of denial by the Planning Commission to the City Council within
ten days of the Planning Commission’s decision by:
      (1)   Completing a notice of appeal form, which shall be available from
the City Planner; and
      (2)   Paying an appeal fee in the amount of $100, or such fee as set by
Council resolution or motion.
   (B)   If an appeal is not timely filed, the recommendation of the Planning
Commission shall be included on a Council consent agenda for consideration, and
such may be removed from the consent agenda by the Council pursuant to Council
rules, whereupon the Council may either accept the recommendation of the
Planning Commission, reverse the recommendation of the Planning Commission,
modify the decision of the Planning Commission or remand the matter for further
consideration by the Planning Commission.
   (C)   If an appeal is timely filed, the City Council shall establish a date
specific for its decision and may affirm, reverse or remand the decision of the
Planning Commission.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 9-18-2018) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.22 REAPPLICATION OR RECONSIDERATION OF MINING/QUARRYING, MINERAL PRODUCTS
PROCESSING.
   (A)   The city is not required to reconsider requests denied by the
municipality related to mining and quarrying, or mineral products processing,
for the same site unless the municipality determines there has been a material
change in the application. A mining application for any portion of a site
previously denied by the City Council will be reviewed by the city first to
determine if there has been a material change in the application. A MATERIAL
CHANGE is a substantial change in the application as compared with prior
applications such that it warrants consideration as a new application.
   (B)   The city will establish the requirements necessary for consideration
of the application. The city shall also set a deposit amount from the applicant
sufficient for payment of the application and permit expenses. The requirements
and amount of deposit may be adjusted by the city as necessary during the
application process.
   (C)   The city will notify the applicant of the decision. The determination
of the city may be appealed to the City Council within 15 days of the rendering
of the decision.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 9-18-2018) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.23 MARIJUANA GROWTH AND SALES RESTRICTIONS.
   Certain restrictions apply to marijuana growing and sales.
   (A)   All state restrictions and regulations as they apply to marijuana
growing, marketing and sales shall apply to such activities within the city.
   (B)   No marijuana growing, storage, marketing or sales shall be allowed in
any residential neighborhood.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 9-18-2018) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99(A) of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any violation of the city’s zoning regulations as adopted per §
156.01 of this chapter is punishable as provided in §
10.99(A) of this code.
(Prior Code, § 12-201)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   FRANCHISES
      
II.   ANNEXATIONS
TABLE I: FRANCHISES
 
Ord. No. Passed Date Description
                     Cable franchise granting a franchise for cable television
80-1     2-11-1980   to Mission Cable Company. A copy of the franchise is on
                     file with the City Clerk. (Prior Code, Appx. 4)
                     Transfer of cable franchise granting a franchise for cable
                     television from Mission Cable Company to Mission
91-01    4-1-1991    Acquisition Partners. A copy of the franchise and
                     amendments is on file with the City Clerk. (Prior Code,
                     Appx. 4)
                     Electrical franchise granting a 25-year franchise to the
92–01  8-3-1992    Oklahoma Gas and Electric Company for a 3% franchise fee.
                     A copy of the franchise is on file with the City Clerk.
                     (Prior Code, Appx. 2)
                     Electrical franchise granting a 25-year franchise to the
2016-04  12-12-2016  Oklahoma Gas and Electric Company for a 3% franchise fee.
                     A copy of the franchise is on file with the City Clerk.
                    
 
TABLE II: ANNEXATIONS
 
Ord. No. Passed Date Description
2019-02  5-13-2019   De-annexation of real property to allow for utilization of
                     the property as a shooting club.
                    
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Oklahoma Statutes
References to Prior Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO OKLAHOMA STATUTES
O.S. Cites Code Section
O.S. Cites                    Code Section
3A O.S. 200 et seq.           132.13
3A O.S. 401 et seq.           132.13
11 O.S. 1-102                 150.17
11 O.S. 9-101 et seq.         30.20
11 O.S. 14-107                151.01
11 O.S. 14-108                10.01;
                              10.02
                              10.01;
11 O.S. 14-109                10.02;
                              32.049
11 O.S. 14-110                32.049
11 O.S. 16-101 et seq.        30.20
11 O.S. 16-301 et seq.        30.20
11 O.S. 20-101 through 20-105 11.02
11 O.S. 22-106                110.01
11 O.S. 22-107                110.01
11 O.S. 22-109                132.14
                              131.02;
11 O.S. 22-110                133.01;
                              133.04
11 O.S. 22-112                150.15;
                              150.17
11 O.S. 22-112.1              150.15
11 O.S. 22-115                90.001
11 O.S. 27-101 et seq.        32.035
11 O.S. 27-117                32.045
11 O.S. 27-118                32.042
11 O.S. 27-122                32.084
11 O.S. 27-123                32.082
11 O.S. 27-126                32.083
11 O.S. 29-105 et seq.        33.15
11 O.S. 34-104                33.39
11 O.S. 34-104 et seq.        94.09
11 O.S. 45-101 et seq.        31.01
11 O.S. 49-100.1 et seq.      36.16
11 O.S. 49-101 et seq.        36.15
15 O.S. 511 et seq.           33.39
17 O.S. 180.7                 76.99
20 O.S. 1313.2 through 1313.3 32.087
21 O.S. 22                    132.06
21 O.S. 263                   135.09
21 O.S. 264                   135.09
21 O.S. 437                   135.05
21 O.S. 441                   135.05
21 O.S. 641 et seq.           131.02
21 O.S. 649                   135.08
21 O.S. 650                   135.08
21 O.S. 856 et seq.           131.16
21 O.S. 941 et seq.           132.13
21 O.S. 942                   132.13
21 O.S. 943                   132.13
21 O.S. 960                   132.13
21 O.S. 1021                  132.11
21 O.S. 1029                  132.12
21 O.S. 1030                  132.12
21 O.S. 1081                  132.12
21 O.S. 1171                  132.09
21 O.S. 1172                  132.10
21 O.S. 1217                  135.15
21 O.S. 1451 et seq.          134.01
21 O.S. 1518 through 1520     132.05
21 O.S. 1533                  135.09
21 O.S. 1701 et seq.          134.01
21 O.S. 1713                  134.05
21 O.S. 1760                  134.12
21 O.S. 1787                  134.15
21 O.S. 1788                  134.15
22 O.S. 1108                  32.042
22 O.S. 1115.1 through 1115.5 32.066
22 O.S. 1261 et seq.          33.39;
                              132.13
22 O.S. 1321 et seq.          33.39
25 O.S. 301 et seq.           30.21
27A O.S. 2-7-101              35.11
37A O.S.                      111.17
37A O.S. 1-101 et seq.        Ch. 111;
                              111.15
                              111.15;
37A O.S. 1-103                111.24;
                              111.48
37A O.S. 2-101                111.18
37A O.S. 3-101 through 3-127  111.25
37A O.S. 3-125                111.47
37A O.S. 4-103                111.20;
                              111.45
37A O.S. 4-104                111.18
                              111.46;
37A O.S. 6-101                111.49;
                              111.50;
                              132.01
37A O.S. 6-102                111.46;
                              111.49
37A O.S. 6-114                131.19
37A O.S. 6-120                111.46;
                              111.49
37A O.S. 6-123                111.47
37 O.S. 163.11                131.19
37A O.S. 6-127                33.39
43A O.S. 3-401                132.01
47 O.S. 1-101 et seq.         70.01;
                              70.02
47 O.S. 6-101 et seq.         72.02
47 O.S. Art. VI, Ch. 7        70.05
47 O.S. 7-204                 70.05
47 O.S. 7-503                 70.05
47 O.S. 7-606                 70.05
47 O.S. 7-621 through 7-628   70.05
47 O.S. 10-101 et seq.        70.17
47 O.S. 11-101 et seq.        70.01;
                              72.01
47 O.S. 11-104                70.04
47 O.S. 11-106                70.13
47 O.S. 11-201(a)             71.01
47 O.S. 11-201(b)             71.03
47 O.S. 11-204                71.07
47 O.S. 11-207                71.02
47 O.S. 11-301                72.09
47 O.S. 11-308                71.11
47 O.S. 11-309                71.10
47 O.S. 11-402                72.11
47 O.S. 11-403(b)             71.08
47 O.S. 11-403(c)             71.09
47 O.S. 11-405                70.14
47 O.S. 11-601                72.30
47 O.S. 11-604                72.32
47 O.S. 11-703(c)             71.09
47 O.S. 11-703(d)             71.08
47 O.S. 11-704                72.08
47 O.S. 11-751                72.16
47 O.S. 11-901                72.14;
                              72.99
47 O.S. 11-902                72.16
47 O.S. 11-1003               Ch. 77, Schd. I
47 O.S. 11-1004(c)            73.05
47 O.S. 11-1105               70.08
47 O.S. 11-1108(a)            70.15
47 O.S. 11-1109               70.16
47 O.S. 11-1201               75.15
47 O.S. 11-1202               75.16
47 O.S. 11-1203               75.20
47 O.S. 11-1207(a)            75.23
47 O.S. 12-101 et seq.        70.06
47 O.S. 14-101 et seq.        70.07
47 O.S. 15-102                133.06
47 O.S. 15-102(a)             71.11;
                              72.31
47 O.S. 15-108                71.12
47 O.S. 15-112                73.07
47 O.S. 434                   112.16
47 O.S. 790                   32.066
47 O.S. 901 et seq.           94.09
47 O.S. 954A                  74.01
47 O.S. 955                   74.01
47 O.S. 1102                  72.05
47 O.S. 1134                  72.05
50 O.S. 1 et seq.             Ch. 92
50 O.S. 12                    92.31
50 O.S. 14                    92.32
50 O.S. 15                    92.32
50 O.S. 16                    92.25;
                              92.27
51 O.S. 24.A.1 et seq.        36.30;
                              36.31
51 O.S. 151 et seq.           30.27
57 O.S. 227                   32.084
57 O.S. 228                   32.084
59 O.S. 353.1                 35.09
59 O.S. 1001 et seq.          110.20;
                              151.02
59 O.S. 1301 through 1341     32.042
59 O.S. 1332                  32.042
59 O.S. 1333                  32.042
59 O.S. 1335                  32.042
59 O.S. 1680 through 1696     110.21
59 O.S. 1850.1 et seq.        110.23
60 O.S. 655                   33.39
61 O.S. 101 et seq.           34.004
62 O.S. 517.1 through 517.7   34.002
63 O.S. 1-508                 90.056
63 O.S. 1-1011                92.29
63 O.S. 1-1101 et seq.        111.01
63 O.S. 1-1201 et seq.        111.66
63 O.S. 1-1301 through 1-1311 111.65
63 O.S. 1-2530.9              111.99
63 O.S. 2-101 et seq.         132.03;
                              132.04
63 O.S. 2-101.1               132.03
63 O.S. 24-683.2              30.02
66 O.S. 190(B)                76.99
68 O.S. 205                   35.22;
                              35.52
68 O.S. 217                   35.18;
                              35.48
68 O.S. 220                   35.19
                              35.20;
68 O.S. 227                   35.49;
                              35.50
68 O.S. 1350 et seq.          35.01
68 O.S. 1352                  35.02
68 O.S. 1401                  35.36
68 O.S. 1408                  35.46
68 O.S. 1622                  91.16;
                              113.15
68 O.S. 2601 et seq.          34.035;
                              34.050
68 O.S. 2701 et seq.          35.01
68 O.S. 6001 through 6004     35.07
72 O.S. 1                     112.18
74 O.S. 324.8                 151.01
75 O.S. 309                   32.006
82 O.S. 1601 through 1608     154.01
82 O.S. 1601 through 1618     154.26
                              
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code 2022 Code
Prior Code 2022 Code
1-101      10.01
           10.08;
1-102      10.09;
           10.17
1-103      10.02
1-104      10.14
1-105      10.11
1-106      10.07
1-107      10.18
1-108      10.99
1-109      10.99
1-110      10.99
1-111      10.99
1-112      10.03
1-113      10.04
1-114      10.10
1-201      11.01
1-202      11.02
2-101      30.20
2-103      30.01
2-104      30.22
2-105      30.03
2-106      30.04
2-107      30.05
2-108      30.26
2-109      30.23
2-110      30.25
2-111      30.24
2-112      30.27
2-201      36.01
2-211      36.15
2-212      36.16
2-301      36.30
2-302      36.31
2-303      36.32
2-304      36.33
2-305      36.34
2-306      36.35
2-307      36.36
2-308      36.37
3-101      111.15
3-102      111.18
3-103      111.16
3-104      111.17
3-105      111.19
3-106      111.26
           111.24;
3-107      111.48;
           111.99
3-108      111.25
3-109      111.27
3-110      131.20
3-111      111.22
3-112      131.17;
           131.99
3-113      111.20
3-114      111.23
3-115      111.21
3-201      111.40
3-202      111.41
3-203      111.42
3-204      111.43
3-205      111.49
3-206      111.50
3-207      111.46
3-208      111.47
3-210      131.18
3-211      131.19;
           131.99
3-212      131.20
3-213      111.44
3-214      111.45
4-101      90.001
4-102      90.005
4-103      90.004
4-104      90.006
4-105      90.009
4-106      90.008
4-107      90.007
4-108      90.003
4-121      90.040
4-122      90.041
4-131      90.070
4-132      90.072
4-133      90.071
4-141      90.010
4-142      90.011
4-143      90.012
4-151      90.002
4-161      90.055
4-162      90.056
4-163      90.057
4-164      90.058
4-165      90.013
4-166      90.014
4-171      90.999
5-101      151.01
5-102      151.01
5-103      151.99
5-104      150.01
5-201      151.02
5-202      151.02
5-203      110.20
5-204      110.99;
           151.99
5-301      151.03
5-302      110.21
5-303      110.99;
           151.99
5-402      110.22
5-403      110.99
5-501      151.04
5-502      151.99
5-601      151.06
5-602      151.06
5-603      110.23
5-604      110.99;
           151.99
5-701      155.01
5-702      155.02
5-703      155.03
5-704      155.04
5-705      155.05
5-706      155.06
5-707      155.07
5-708      155.08
5-709      155.09
5-710      155.10
5-711      155.11
5-712      155.12
5-713      155.13
5-714      155.14
5-715      155.15
5-716      155.16
5-717      155.17
5-718      155.18
5-719      155.99
5-720      155.99
5-801      110.99;
           151.99
5-802      110.99;
           151.99
6-101      32.035
6-102      32.036
6-103      32.037
6-104      32.038
6-105      32.020
6-106      32.021
6-107      32.022
6-108      32.021
6-109      32.002
6-110      32.065
6-111      32.086
6-112      32.040
6-113      32.039
6-114      32.066
6-115      32.041
6-116      32.042
6-117      32.043
6-118      32.044
6-119      32.045
6-120      32.046
6-121      32.047
6-122      32.048
6-123      32.050
6-124      32.049
6-125      32.080
6-126      32.081
6-127      32.082
6-128      32.083
6-129      32.084
6-130      32.085
6-131      32.089
6-132      32.087
6-133      32.088;
           32.999
6-201      32.001
6-202      32.003
6-203      32.004;
           32.008
6-204      32.009
6-205      32.007
6-206      32.006
6-207      32.005
7-101      34.003
7-102      34.001
7-103      34.002
7-104      34.004
7-105      34.005
7-106      34.006
7-201      35.01
7-202      35.02
7-203      35.03
7-204      35.04
7-205      35.05
7-206      35.06
7-207      35.07
7-208      35.08;
           35.99
7-209      35.09;
           35.99
7-210      35.10;
           35.99
7-211      35.11
7-212      35.12
7-213      35.13
7-214      35.14
7-215      35.15
7-216      35.16
7-217      35.17
7-218      35.18
7-219      35.19
7-220      35.20
7-221      35.21;
           35.99
7-222      35.22
7-223      35.23
7-224      35.24
7-301      34.050
7-302      34.051
7-401      34.035
7-402      34.036
7-403      34.037
7-404      34.038
7-405      34.039
7-501      35.35
7-502      35.40
7-503      35.41
7-504      35.42
7-505      35.43
7-506      35.44
7-507      35.45
7-508      35.46
7-509      35.47
7-510      35.48
7-511      35.49
7-512      35.50
7-513      35.51;
           35.99
7-514      35.52
7-515      35.53
7-517      35.36
7-518      35.37
7-519      35.38
7-520      35.39
7-521      35.99
8-101      92.01
8-102      92.05
8-103      92.02
8-104      92.03
8-105      92.04
8-106      92.31
8-107      92.32
8-108      92.25
8-109      92.27
8-110      92.29
8-111      92.30
8-112      92.09
8-113      91.15
8-114      92.28
8-115      92.33
8-116      92.07
8-117      92.26
8-118      92.08
8-119      92.10
8-120      92.11
8-121      92.12
8-122      91.99;
           92.99
8-123      92.06;
           92.99
8-201      93.01
8-301      150.15
8-302      150.16
8-303      150.17
8-304      150.18
8-305      150.99
8-401      111.01
8-402      111.02
8-420      111.65;
           111.66
8-421      111.99
9-101      110.01
9-102      110.04
9-103      110.02
9-104      110.03
9-105      110.05
9-106      110.06
9-107      110.07
9-108      110.08
9-201      112.15
9-202      112.16
9-203      112.17
9-204      112.19;
           112.20
9-205      112.21
9-206      112.22
9-207      112.23
9-208      112.26
9-209      112.25
9-210      112.18
9-211      112.27
9-212      112.99
9-213      112.24
10-101     130.05
10-102     130.08
10-103     130.01
10-104     130.02
10-105     130.07
10-106     130.04
10-107     130.06
10-108     130.10
10-109     130.03
10-110     130.09
10-111     130.11
10-112     130.12
10-113     130.99
10-201     131.02
10-202     131.01
10-203     131.01
10-204     131.03
10-301     134.01
10-302     134.02
10-303     134.03
10-304     134.05
10-305     134.06
10-306     134.04
10-307     134.07
10-308     134.08
10-309     134.09
10-310     134.12
10-311     134.13
10-312     134.14
10-313     134.10
10-314     134.15
10-315     134.16
10-316     134.11
10-317     134.17
10-318     134.18;
           134.99
10-319     134.19
10-320     134.20
10-321     134.21
10-322     134.22
10-323     134.24
10-324     134.25
10-325     134.26
10-326     134.27
10-327     134.28
10-328     134.23
10-329     91.16;
           113.15
10-330     91.17
10-331     113.17
10-332     91.99;
           113.99
10-401     133.02
10-402     133.03
10-403     133.01
10-404     133.04
10-405     133.05;
           133.99
10-406     133.06
10-501     132.01
10-502     132.04
10-503     132.03
10-504     132.02
10-505     131.15;
           131.99
10-506     132.06
10-507     132.09
10-508     132.05
10-509     132.10
10-510     132.14
10-511     132.11
10-512     132.13
10-513     132.12
10-514     132.08
10-515     132.07
10-516     131.16
10-517     131.21
10-601     135.04
10-602     135.06
10-603     135.05
10-604     135.07
10-605     135.08
10-606     135.01
10-607     135.03
10-608     135.10
10-609     135.09
10-610     135.11
10-611     135.12
10-612     135.13
10-613     135.02
10-614     135.15
10-615     135.14
11-101     95.01
11-102     95.02
11-103     95.99
11-201     96.04
11-202     96.06
11-203     96.07
11-204     96.05
11-205     96.01
11-206     96.03
11-207     96.02
11-208     96.08
11-209     96.09
11-210     96.10
11-211     96.99
12-101     31.01
12-102     31.02
12-103     31.03
12-104     31.04
12-105     31.04
12-106     31.05
12-107     31.06
12-108     31.20
12-109     31.21
12-110     31.22
12-201     156.01;
           156.99
12-202     150.03
12-203     150.02;
           150.99
12-400     154.01
12-401     154.02
12-402     154.03
12-403     154.04
12-404     154.05
12-405     154.06
12-406     154.07
12-407     154.08
12-408     154.09
12-409     154.10
12-410     154.11
12-411     154.12
12-412     154.25
12-413     154.26
12-414     154.27
12-415     154.28
12-416     154.40
12-417     154.41
12-418     154.42
12-419     154.43
12-420     154.13
12-421     154.99
13-101     91.01
13-102     91.02
13-103     91.03
13-104     91.04
13-105     91.99
13-201     33.01
13-202     33.02
13-203     33.03
13-204     33.04
13-205     33.06
13-206     33.05
13-207     33.08
13-208     33.09
13-209     33.10
13-210     33.07
13-211     33.11
13-212     33.12
13-213     33.13
13-214     33.14
13-221     33.15
13-222     33.17
13-223     33.18
13-224     33.16
13-225     33.19
13-226     33.20
13-301     33.35
13-302     33.36
13-303     33.37
13-304     33.38
13-401     33.55
13-402     33.56
13-403     33.57;
           33.58
13-404     33.59
13-501     33.39
13-502     33.40
14-101     152.01
14-102     152.03
14-103     153.01
14-104     152.05
14-105     152.04
14-106     152.06
14-107     153.02
14-108     152.02
14-109     152.07
14-110     152.99;
           153.99
14-201     152.08
14-202     152.08
14-203     152.08
14-204     152.08
14-205     152.08
14-211     152.09
14-212     152.09
14-213     152.09
14-214     152.99
15-101     70.02
15-102     70.03
15-103     70.06
15-104     70.07
15-105     70.11
15-106     70.31
15-107     70.08
15-108     70.09
15-109     70.10
15-110     70.18
15-111     70.04
15-112     70.12
15-113     70.13
15-114     70.14
15-115     70.15
15-116     70.16
15-117     70.30
15-118     70.17;
           70.99
15-119     70.32
15-120     70.33
15-121     70.34
15-122     70.35
15-123     70.36
15-124     70.37
15-125     70.01
15-126     70.05;
           70.99
15-201     72.01
15-202     72.02
15-203     72.03
15-204     73.01
15-205     72.04
15-206     72.06
15-207     72.09
15-208     72.10
15-209     72.11
15-210     72.14
15-211     72.16
15-212     72.12
15-213     72.07
15-214     72.13
15-215     72.08
15-216     72.05;
           72.99
15-217     72.17;
           72.99
15-220     72.45
15-221     72.46
15-222     72.47
15-230     73.02
15-231     73.03
15-232     73.04
15-233     73.05
15-234     73.05
15-235     Ch. 77, Schd. I
15-236     73.06
15-237     73.06
15-238     112.01
15-239     73.09
15-240     73.07;
           73.99
15-241     73.08
15-242     Ch. 77, Schd. II
15-250     72.30
15-251     72.31
15-252     72.32
15-301     71.01
15-302     71.03
15-303     71.02
15-304     71.04
15-305     71.05
15-306     71.06
15-307     71.07
15-308     71.10
15-309     71.11
15-310     71.12
15-311     71.12
15-312     71.08
15-313     71.09
15-401     75.15
15-402     75.16
15-403     75.17
15-404     75.20
15-405     75.19
15-406     75.22
15-407     75.18
15-408     75.21
15-409     75.23
15-410     75.01;
           75.99
15-501     74.01
15-502     74.03
15-503     74.04
15-504     74.02
15-505     74.09
15-506     74.10
15-507     74.12
15-508     74.07
15-509     74.11
15-510     74.06
15-511     74.05
15-512     74.08
15-513     74.14
15-514     74.13
15-515     74.15
           94.01—
15-516     94.11;
           94.99
17-101     50.01
17-102     50.02;
           50.99
17-103     50.03
17-202     51.99
17-301     52.01
17-302     52.99
17-401     53.01
17-402     53.02
17-403     53.10;
           53.99
17-404     53.03—
           53.08
17-405     53.09
Appx. 2    TSO, Table I
Appx. 4    TSO, Table I
Appx. 6    34.065
Appx. 6, 1 34.066
Appx. 6, 2 34.067
Appx. 6, 3 34.068
Appx. 6, 4 34.069
Appx. 6, 5 34.070;
           34.999
           
 
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     35.35—
2007-05  4-2-2007    35.53;
                     35.99
2007-08  8-6-2007    112.17;
                     112.24
2008-01  2-7-2008    91.15
                    
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.   Date Passed Description
78-4       - -         156.01
76-1       - -         34.065
76-4       - -         35.01
80-1       2-11-1980   TSO, Table I
87-3       4-6-1987    35.01;
                       35.05
89-2       4-3-1989    34.065
91-01      4-1-1991    TSO, Table I
92-01      8-3-1992    TSO, Table I
92-02      12-11-1992  34.065
99-10      8-2-1999    150.03
2000-01    2-7-2000    75.01;
                       75.99
2001-2     4-2-2001    150.02;
                       150.99
                       35.01;
2002-01    8-20-2002   35.05;
                       35.06
2005-02    1-3-2005    30.01;
                       30.25
2005-6     11-7-2005   72.05;
                       72.99
                       111.24;
2005-7     11-7-2005   111.48;
                       111.99
2006-03    4-13-2006   11.01;
                       11.02
2006-04    5-1-2006    72.17
                       53.01—
2006-01    9-5-2006    53.10;
                       53.99
2006-7     11-6-2006   33.14
                       30.03;
2007-01    1-12-2007   30.04;
                       30.25
                       90.001;
                       90.002;
                       90.004—
                       90.014;
                       90.040;
2006-01-01 3-1-2007    90.041;
                       90.055—
                       90.058;
                       90.070—
                       90.072;
                       90.999
2007-05    7-12-2007   92.06;
                       92.99
2007-06    8-6-2007    32.049
2007-07    8-6-2007    32.082
2007-08    8-6-2007    10.99
2008-1     5-5-2008    134.25
2008-02    5-14-2008   34.004;
                       34.005
                       94.01—
2008-03    7-7-2008    94.11;
                       94.99
2008-04    7-7-2008    92.27
2008-05    11-3-2008   90.003
2009-03    12-10-2009  131.17;
                       131.99
                       154.01—
                       154.13;
                       154.25—
2011-01    1-3-2011    154.28;
                       154.40—
                       154.43;
                       154.99
2012-03    6-14-2012   34.020;
                       34.021
2012-04    11-8-2012   151.01—
                       151.06
2013-01    12-12-2013  30.20;
                       30.22
                       52.15—
2014-01    2-10-2014   52.17;
                       52.99
2015-04    6-8-2015    150.03
2015-02    9-14-2015   30.21
2015-03    9-14-2015   51.01
2015-05    11-24-2015  72.15;
                       72.99
2016-01    6-13-2016   113.16
                       90.025—
2016-02    7-11-2016   90.029;
                       90.999
2016-03    7-11-2016   151.01—
                       151.06
2016-04    12-12-2016  TSO, Table I
2017-01    9-11-2017   93.02—
                       93.04
2018-02    9-10-2018   93.05
2018-01    9-18-2018   156.15—
                       156.23
2019-01    4-8-2019    50.03
2019-02    5-13-2019   TSO, Table II
                       76.01—
2019-03    8-12-2019   76.03;
                       76.99
2020-01    3-25-2020   30.02
2021-01    5-10-2021   Ch. 77, Schd. II
2022-01    2-17-2022   113.01;
                       113.02
                       95.03;
2022-02    5-9-2022    95.04;
                       95.99
2023-01    3-13-2023   150.03
2024-04    11-12-2024  133.07
2025-01    1-24-2025   30.01
2025-02    1-13-2025   50.03
2025-03    7-14-2025   30.23
                      
 
