BOKCHITO, OKLAHOMA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-3 Supplement contains:
Legislation current through Ord. 75.11, passed 9-8-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
TOWN OFFICIALS
Board of Trustees
Mayor   Cathey Keirsey
Mayor Pro Tem   Taylor Collins
Trustee   Joyce Solis
Trustee   Crystal Mays
Trustee   Jennifer McDonald
Town Administration
Town Manager   Eric Shane Guhl
Town Clerk/Treasurer   Hayleh Lowrey
Town Attorney   David Haggerty
Code Enforcement   Amanda Henry
Town Auditor   Russell & Williams CPA
Municipal Court
Municipal Judge   Jason Pedraza
Prosecutor   David Haggerty
Court Clerk   Kelsey Danford
Public Utility Authority
PUA Director   Misty Gaston
Police Department
Chief of Police   Eric Shane Guhl
Assistant Chief of Police   Roger Christman
Administrative Assistant   Kelsey Danford
Volunteer Fire Department
Volunteer Fire Chief   Johnny Ashby
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE TOWN OF BOKCHITO, OKLAHOMA,
REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN EXISTING GENERAL
ORDINANCES OF THE TOWN OF BOKCHITO, OKLAHOMA DEALING WITH SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN
SUCH CODE OF ORDINANCES AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the Town of Bokchito
are inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient in form and
substance for the complete preservation of the public peace, health, safety and
general welfare of the Town and for the proper conduct of its affairs; and
WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of Oklahoma empower and
authorize the Town of Bokchito to revise, amend, restate, codify and compile
any existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted or
published and to incorporate such ordinances into book form; and
WHEREAS, the Board of Trustees of the Town of Bokchito, Oklahoma has authorized
a general compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances of the Town
of Bokchito of a general and permanent nature and publication of such
ordinances in book form; and
WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the Town
of Bokchito and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the Town of Bokchito that this ordinance take
effect at an early date.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE TOWN OF
BOKCHITO, OKLAHOMA:
   Section 1.      The general ordinances of the Town of Bokchito, Oklahoma as
revised, amended, restated, codified, and compiled in book form are hereby
adopted as and shall constitute the Code of Ordinances of the Town of Bokchito,
Oklahoma.
   Section 2.      Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall
consist of the following Titles:
            Title I: General Provisions       Title III: Administration
            Title V: Public Works       Title VII: Traffic Code
            Title IX: General Regulations   Title XI: Business Regulations
            Title XIII: General Offenses      Title XV: Land Usage
            Table of Special Ordinances
   Section 3.      All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in
such Code of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective
date of this ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or
in part in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense
committed or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective
date of this ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of
ordinances levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory,
establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain persons,
authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing
of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property,
granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use,
vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall
such repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or
pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the Code.
   Section 4.      Such Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the Board of Trustees of the Town of Bokchito,
Oklahoma and the Town Clerk/Treasurer is hereby authorized and ordered to file
a copy of such Code of Ordinances in the Office of the Town Clerk/Treasurer.
   Section 5.      Such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in
Section 6, and such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and places
of the ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties, and regulations
therein contained and of the date of passage, and that the same is properly
signed, attested, recorded, and approved and that any public hearings and
notices thereof as required by law have been given.
   Section 6.      EMERGENCY CLAUSE
            This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary for
the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety, and general welfare of
the people of the Town of Bokchito, Oklahoma, and shall take effect immediately
upon its passage and approval.
THIS ORDINANCE IS HEREBY PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Board of Trustees of the
Town of Bokchito, Oklahoma this 12th day of June 2023.
THE EMERGENCY CLAUSE DECLARING THIS ORDINANCE AN EMERGENCY MEASURE IS HEREBY
PASSED AND APPROVED BY SEPARATE ACTION by the Board of Trustees of the Town of
Bokchito, Oklahoma this 12th day of June 2023.
Signed: Cathey Keisey, MAYOR
ATTEST: Hayleh Lowrey, CLERK/TREASURER
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
11.   TOWN STANDARDS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions and notes
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Rules of interpretation
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Reference to statutes
   
10.09   Reference to other sections
   
10.10   Reference to offices
   
10.11   Errors and omissions
   
10.12   Official time
   
10.13   Reasonable time
   
10.14   Ordinances repealed
   
10.15   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.16   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.17   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.18   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.19   Section histories; statutory references
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This code may be cited as the “Bokchito Town Code,” or another properly
identifying description. When a change or changes have been prepared and
inserted in the code, as provided herein below, the words “as amended” may be
added to the citation or title when referring to the code as amended.
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code, unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS AND NOTES.
   (A)   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter,
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only, and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
   (B)   Notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information, or
referring to statutes or to other parts of the code are inserted in the code,
and may be inserted in changes to the code for the convenience of persons using
the code, and shall have no legal effect.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain,
ordinary, and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different
meaning.
      CODE, THIS CODE, or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This municipal code as
modified by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or
sections.
      BOARD OF TRUSTEES. The Town Board of Trustees of Bokchito.
      COUNTY. Bryan County, Oklahoma.
      JOINT AUTHORITY. All words giving JOINT AUTHORITY to three or more
persons or officers shall be construed as giving authority to a majority of the
persons or officers.
      LAW. Applicable federal law, provisions of the state constitution and
state statutes, the ordinances of the town, and, when appropriate, any and all
rules and regulations promulgated thereunder.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
      MAYOR. The Mayor of the town.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
      OTHER OFFICIALS or OFFICERS AND THE LIKE. Whenever reference is made to
officers, agencies, or departments by title only, such as “Clerk/Treasurer,”
“Town Clerk/Treasurer,” “Town Attorney,” “Fire Chief,” “Police Chief,” and the
like, they shall mean the officers, agencies, or departments of the town.
      PERSON. Includes natural persons, corporations (private and public),
partnerships, and all other unincorporated organizations, trusts, estates, and
government agencies, except when a contrary intention plainly appears.
      PRECEDING; FOLLOWING. Next before and next after, respectively.
      PROPERTY. Real and personal property.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE. The State of Oklahoma.
      STATUTORY REFERENCES. References to the statutes of the state as they now
are or as they may be amended.
      STREET. Street, avenue, boulevard, road, alley, lane, viaduct, highway,
court, place, square, curb, or any other public way in the town which is
dedicated and open to public use.
      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading
in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
      TOWN, THIS TOWN, or MUNICIPALITY. The Town of Bokchito, Oklahoma.
      WEEK. Seven days.
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year.
§ 10.06 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   The construction of all ordinances of the town shall be by the following
rules, unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the
legislative body or of the context of the ordinance.
   (A)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or,” if the sense requires it.
   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be
done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, the
requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the act by an authorized
agent or deputy.
   (C)   Gender. Words used in the masculine gender in this code or in other
ordinances of the town include the feminine and neuter.
   (D)   Singular and plural. Words used in the singular number in this code or
in other ordinances of the town include the plural, and the plural the
singular.
   (E)   Tenses. The use of a verb in the present tense shall include the
future, if applicable.
   (F)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms
is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   If a part of this code or of any ordinance passed by the Town Board of
Trustees after this code goes into effect is invalid, all valid parts which are
severable from the invalid parts remain in effect. If a part of this code or of
any ordinance passed hereinafter is invalid in one or more of its applications,
the part remains in effect in all valid applications which are severable from
the invalid applications.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO STATUTES.
   Reference to the statutes of the state means the statutes as they are now or
as they may be amended, and a reference to the Oklahoma Statutes for a certain
year also means the comparable provision when included in future codifications.
§ 10.09 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section, reference is made to another section hereof, the
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.10 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of the town exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.11 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached, or the use of a word or words when another word or words were clearly
intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected, and the word
or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
the error.
§ 10.12 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws, shall be
the official time within the town for the transaction of all municipal
business.
§ 10.13 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
be Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   (A)   All ordinances and parts of ordinances of a permanent and general
nature passed prior to and in effect at the time the code is adopted, but not
included in the code, are hereby repealed as of the time when the code goes
into effect.
   (B)   Ordinances passed on or after that date shall not be repealed or
amended by the adoption of the code.
§ 10.15 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.16 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   (A)   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication
shall take effect from and after due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided.
   (B)   Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from their
passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.
§ 10.17 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force,
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.18 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Ordinances and parts of ordinances of a permanent and general nature
passed or adopted on and after the most recent ordinance included in this code
of ordinances may be passed or adopted either in the form of amendments to this
code of ordinances or without specific reference to the code, but in either
case, all ordinances and parts of ordinances shall be deemed amendments to the
code, and all of the substantive permanent and general parts of the ordinances
and changes made thereby in the code shall be inserted and made in the code
whenever authorized or directed by motion, resolution, or ordinance of the Town
Board of Trustees, as provided hereinafter.
§ 10.19 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance are listed following the text of the code
section. Example: (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord.
20, passed 1-1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example: (11 O.S. § 1-402) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-1980; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-
1985)
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information. Example:
      § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
         This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
      Statutory reference:
      For provisions concerning the inspection of public records, see 51 O.S.
§§ 24A.1 et seq.
   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the previous code of
ordinances of the town and subsequently amended, the Prior Code section number
shall be indicated in the history by “(Prior Code, § 50.01).”
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Whenever in this code, in any ordinance of the town, or in any rule or
regulation promulgated pursuant to this code, any act or failure to do a
required act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful, or an offense
or a misdemeanor, where no specific penalty is provided herein or therefor, the
violation of any such provision of this code or any ordinance or rule shall be
punished in accordance with 11 O.S. § 14-111, “Enforcement and Penalties for
Violation of Municipal Ordinances,” and 11 O.S. § 27-119, “Jury Trials -
Qualifications of Jurors,” except where another specific penalty is established
in this code. If a penalty is limited by state law, such violations shall be
punishable by not to exceed the maximum permitted by state law.
   (B)   The suspension or revocation of any license, certificate, or other
privilege conferred by the town shall not be regarded as a penalty for the
purposes of this code, but shall be in addition thereto.
(Ord. 1-108, passed 5-10-2021)
Statutory reference:
   Enforcement and penalties for violation of municipal ordinances, see 11 O.S.
§ 14-111
   Jury trials; qualifications of jurors, see 11 O.S. § 27-119
CHAPTER 11: TOWN STANDARDS
Section
   
11.01   Map of town
   
11.02   Ward boundaries
§ 11.01 MAP OF TOWN.
   The map of the town showing its territorial limits, as maintained in the
office of the Town Clerk/Treasurer, is hereby designated as the official map of
the town, and the corporate limits as shown thereon, and as amended, are
declared to be the true and correct corporate limits of the town, including all
annexations made to the town through and including the date of January 1, 2006.
(Prior Code, § 1-201)
§ 11.02 WARD BOUNDARIES.
   The town is not divided into wards.
(Prior Code, § 1-202)
Statutory reference:
   Procedure for proposing ward changes, see 11 O.S. § 20-102
   Similar provisions, see 11 O.S. § 20-101 and 11 O.S. § 20-105
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   MAYOR AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES
      
31.   OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
      
32.   ORGANIZATIONS
      
33.   COURTS
      
34.   PUBLIC SAFETY AND LAW ENFORCEMENT
      
35.   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
      
36.   FINANCES AND FEES
      
37.   TAXATION
      
38.   GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE POLICES
CHAPTER 30: MAYOR AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES
Section
General Provisions
   
30.01   Town elections
Board of Trustees
   
30.15   Board of Trustees
   
30.16   Meetings
Mayor
   
30.30   Powers and duties
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01 TOWN ELECTIONS.
   (A)   Pursuant to 11 O.S. § 16-302, the town hereby declares that it shall
not be governed by the State Town Meeting Act, being 11 O.S. §§ 16-301 et seq.,
for electing its officers and deciding initiative and referendum questions.
   (B)   The town shall elect its officers and decide initiative and referendum
questions through elections conducted by the County Election Board pursuant to
11 O.S. §§ 16-101 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 2-104)
Statutory reference:
   Municipalities required to hold town meetings, see 11 O.S. § 16-302
   Notice of municipal elections, see 11 O.S. § 16-101
BOARD OF TRUSTEES
§ 30.15 BOARD OF TRUSTEES.
   The town is governed under the town form of government. The Board of
Trustees shall consist of five Trustees. All powers of the town shall be
exercised in the manner prescribed by the town code, by state statute, and in
such manner prescribed by ordinances adopted by the Town Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 2-101)
§ 30.16 MEETINGS.
   (A)   Regular meetings of the Board of Trustees shall be held on the second
Monday of every month at 5:30 p.m. at the Town Hall unless, in the case of an
emergency, the Board of Trustees designates another place. If such a Monday
falls on a town holiday, the regular meeting shall be held at that time on the
next day which is not a holiday. Any adjourned meting may be held at any other
place in the town designated by the Board of Trustees.
   (B)   The Board of Trustees may, from time to time, adopt rules to govern
the proceedings of the Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 2-102) (Ord. 30.16, passed 3-10-2025)
Statutory reference:
   Actions taken in willful violation of act, see 25 O.S. § 313
   Circumvention of act; teleconferences to be expected, see 25 O.S. § 306
   Definitions, see 25 O.S. § 304
   Executive sessions, see 25 O.S. § 307
   Legislative committee members attending executive sessions, see 25 O.S. §
310
   Legislature on meetings, see 25 O.S. § 309
   Minutes of meetings, see 25 O.S. § 312
   Public bodies; notice, see 25 O.S. § 311
   Public policy, see 25 O.S. § 302
   Recording of votes, see 25 O.S. § 305
   Similar provisions, see 25 O.S. § 301
   Teleconferences and video conferences, see 25 O.S. §§ 307.1v1 and 307.1v2
   Times and places, advanced notice, see 25 O.S. § 303
   Violations, misdemeanor, penalty; municipal meetings, see 25 O.S. § 314
MAYOR
§ 30.30 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Mayor and Acting Mayor shall have all the powers and duties prescribed
by state law, and as may be prescribed by ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 2-103)
CHAPTER 31: OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
Section
General Provisions
   
31.01   Administrative departments; officers, agencies
   
31.02   Bonds for officers, employees
   
31.03   Compensation
   
31.04   Books delivered to successor
   
31.05   Officers and employees under federal social security
Officials and Employees
   
31.20   Town Clerk/Treasurer
   
31.21   Town Attorney
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.01 ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS; OFFICERS, AGENCIES.
   There shall be such other administrative departments, agencies, and officers
as the Board of Trustees may establish.
(Prior Code, § 2-107)
§ 31.02 BONDS FOR OFFICERS, EMPLOYEES.
   The Town Clerk/Treasurer, and such officers and employees as are designated
by the Town Board of Trustees, shall, before entering upon the discharge of his
or her duties, execute and file with the Town Clerk/Treasurer surety bonds
issued by a surety company authorized to operate in the state conditioned upon
the faithful performance of his or her duties. The town shall pay the premium
on such bonds.
(Prior Code, § 2-108)
§ 31.03 COMPENSATION.
   (A)   Compensation of elected officers of the town shall be as provided by
in this section. The compensation of other officers and employees shall be set
by motion or resolution.
   (B)   Compensation for elected officers of the Town of Bokchito Board of
Trustees shall be in the sum of $50 per meeting attended by the elected
officer, to be paid quarterly.
   (C)   Compensation for the Town of Bokchito Clerk/Treasurer shall be in the
sum of $702 per month, in addition to any other compensation for additional
duties performed, to be paid bi-weekly.
(Prior Code, § 2-109) (Ord. 31.03, passed 6-10-2024; Ord. 31.03, passed 9-8-
2025)
§ 31.04 BOOKS DELIVERED TO SUCCESSOR.
   All books, vouchers, monies, or other property belonging to the corporation
in charge or possession of any officer of the same shall be delivered to his or
her successor when qualified.
(Prior Code, § 2-110)
§ 31.05 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES UNDER FEDERAL SOCIAL SECURITY.
   (A)   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the town to extend, at the
earliest date, to the employees and officials thereof, not excluded by law or
this section, and whether employed in connection with a governmental or
proprietary function, the benefits of the system of federal old age and
survivors insurance as authorized by the Federal Social Security Act, being 42
U.S.C. subch. II, §§ 401 et seq. and amendments thereto. In pursuance of this
policy, the town shall take such action as may be required by applicable state
or federal laws or regulations.
   (B)   The Mayor is hereby authorized and directed to execute all necessary
agreements and amendments thereto with the State Department of Human Services
as agent or agency, to secure coverage of employees and officials as provided
in division (A) above.
   (C)   Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees and officials for the
purpose provided in division (A) above are hereby authorized to be made in the
amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal
laws or regulations, and shall be paid over to the state or federal agency
designated by the laws or regulations.
   (D)   There shall be appropriated from available funds such amounts at such
times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations for
the employer’s contributions, which shall be paid over to the state or federal
agency designated by said laws or regulations.
   (E)   The town shall keep such records and make such reports as may be
required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations.
   (F)   There is hereby excluded from this section any authority to make any
agreement with respect to any position, or any employee or official, now
covered or authorized to be covered by any other ordinance creating any
retirement system for any employee or official of the town.
   (G)   There is hereby excluded from this section any authority to make an
agreement with respect to any position or any employee or official,
compensation for which is on a fee basis, or any position or any employee or
official not authorized to be covered by applicable state or federal laws or
regulations.
(Prior Code, § 2-201)
OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
§ 31.20 TOWN CLERK/TREASURER.
   (A)   The Town Clerk/Treasurer is an officer of the town.
   (B)   The Clerk/Treasurer shall:
      (1)   Keep the journal of proceedings of the Board of Trustees;
      (2)   Enroll all ordinances and resolutions passed by the Board of
Trustees in a book or set of books kept for that purpose;
      (3)   Have custody of documents, records, and archives as may be provided
for by law or by ordinance, and have custody of the town seal;
      (4)   Attest and affix the seal of the town to documents as required by
law or ordinance;
      (5)   Maintain accounts and books to show where and from what source all
monies paid to the town have been derived, and to whom and when any monies have
been paid;
      (6)   Deposit daily funds received for the town in depositories as the
Board of Trustees may designate; and
      (7)   Have such other powers, duties, and functions related to the
statutory duties of the Clerk/Treasurer as may be prescribed by law or
ordinance.
   (C)   The pay period for the Clerk/Treasurer shall be bi-weekly in such sum
as set in §
31.03 contingent upon the Clerk/Treasurer’s performance of the Clerk/
Treasurer’s statutory duties.
   (D)   The person serving as Town Clerk/Treasurer may be employed by the town
to perform duties not related to the statutory duties of Clerk/Treasurer as an
employee of the town. The additional duties shall be performed by the person
serving as Clerk/Treasurer, or as otherwise provided by motion or other action
of the Town Board. The person performing additional duties shall serve at the
pleasure of the Board, and shall perform such duties as may be prescribed by
the Board. The pay period for performing additional duties shall be the same as
for other town employees and in accordance with any personnel policy or other
policy of the town. The salary for performing additional duties shall not be
subject to constitutional restrictions.
(Prior Code, § 2-105)
§ 31.21 TOWN ATTORNEY.
   The Town Attorney is an officer of the town appointed by the Mayor with the
confirmation of the Board of Trustees. The Town Attorney shall have such duties
as are prescribed by the Town Board.
(Prior Code, § 2-106)
CHAPTER 32: ORGANIZATIONS
Section
   
32.01   Traffic Violations Bureau
Cross-reference:
   Town Court regulations, see §§
33.01 through
33.03,
33.15 through
33.39, and
33.50 through
33.56
§ 32.01 TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU.
   (A)   A Traffic Violations Bureau is established as a division of the office
of the Clerk of the court, to be administered by the Clerk or by subordinates
designated for that purpose. Persons who are cited for violation of one of the
traffic ordinances of the town, other than a driver’s license offense, or an
offense punishable by more than $100, may elect to pay a fine in the Violations
Bureau according to a schedule of fines prescribed from time to time by the
Town Board of Trustees. The payment shall constitute a final determination of
the cause against the defendant.
   (B)   The court may adopt rules to carry into effect this section. If a
defendant who has elected to pay a fine under this section fails to do so,
prosecution shall proceed under the provisions of §§
33.01 through
33.03,
33.15 through
33.39, and
33.50 through
33.56.
(Prior Code, § 6-110)
CHAPTER 33: COURTS
Section
General Provisions
   
33.01   Definitions
   
33.02   Purpose
   
33.03   Jurisdiction
Court Procedure
   
33.15   Change of venue; disqualification of Judge
   
33.16   Chief of Police as Principal Officer of court
   
33.17   Clerk of courts; duties
   
33.18   Town Attorney; powers and duties
   
33.19   Bond
   
33.20   Authority of Judge to prescribe rules
   
33.21   Schedule of fines
   
33.22   Prosecutions; filing of complaints; fees; defects raised
   
33.23   Ordinance violation
   
33.24   Traffic bail bond
   
33.25   Issuance of summons; failure to appear
   
33.26   Issuance of warrant
   
33.27   Procedures for bail or bond
   
33.28   Arraignment
   
33.29   Postponement of trial
   
33.30   Defendant’s presence required at trial
   
33.31   Procedure for trials not within scope of subchapter
   
33.32   Right to trial by jury; waiver
   
33.33   Judgment
   
33.34   Payment of costs by defendant
   
33.35   Enforcement of fines, costs; imprisonment, work, community service
   
33.36   Same offense punishable by different sections of code
   
33.37   Contempt of court
   
33.38   Penalty assessments
   
33.39   Fines recoverable by civil action; failure to pay
Judge
   
33.50   Judge created; qualifications
   
33.51   Term of office
   
33.52   Appointment of Judge; Alternate Judge
   
33.53   Acting Judge
   
33.54   Compensation
   
33.55   Removal of Judge from office
   
33.56   Vacancy
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 33.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   CHIEF OF POLICE. The peace officer in charge of the police force of the
town.
   CLERK. The Court Clerk as appointed by the town, including any deputy or
member of the office staff of the Clerk while performing duties of the Clerk’s
office.
   COURT. The Municipal Criminal Court of the town.
   JUDGE. The Judge of the Municipal Criminal Court, including any acting Judge
or alternate Judge thereof as provided for by the statutes of the state and
this chapter.
   THIS JUDICIAL DISTRICT. The District Court Judicial District of the state
wherein the government of the town is situated.
(Prior Code, § 6-101)
Statutory reference:
   Creation of municipal court not of record, see 11 O.S. § 27-101
§ 33.02 PURPOSE.
   This chapter shall govern the organization and operation of the Municipal
Criminal Court of the town, as put into operation by resolution duly passed and
filed in accordance with law, as authorized by state statutes. To the extent of
conflict between any provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any other
ordinance of the town, the provisions of this chapter shall control.
(Prior Code, § 6-102)
§ 33.03 JURISDICTION.
   The court shall exercise original jurisdiction to hear and determine all
prosecutions wherein a violation of any ordinance of the town is charged,
including any such prosecutions transferred to the court in accordance with
applicable law.
(Prior Code, § 6-103)
COURT PROCEDURE
§ 33.15 CHANGE OF VENUE; DISQUALIFICATION OF JUDGE.
   In prosecutions before the court, no change of venue shall be allowed. The
Judge before whom the case is pending may certify his or her disqualification
or he or she may be disqualified from sitting under the terms, conditions, and
procedure provided by law for courts of record. If a Judge is disqualified, the
matter shall be heard by an acting Judge, appointed as provided in this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-104)
§ 33.16 CHIEF OF POLICE AS PRINCIPAL OFFICER OF COURT.
   All writs or processes of the court shall be directed, in his or her
official title, to the Chief of Police, who shall be the Principal Officer of
the court.
(Prior Code, § 6-105)
§ 33.17 CLERK OF COURTS; DUTIES.
   (A)   The Town Clerk/Treasurer, or a deputy designated by him or her, shall
be the Clerk of the court.
   (B)   The Clerk shall:
      (1)   Assist the Judge in recording the proceedings of the court and in
preparing writs, processes, and other papers;
      (2)   Administrator oaths required in proceedings before the court;
      (3)   Enter all pleadings, processes, and proceedings in the dockets of
the courts;
      (4)   Perform such other clerical duties relating to the proceedings of
the court as the Judge shall direct; and
      (5)   Receive any receipt for forfeitures, fees, deposits, and sums of
money payable to the court, and as may be established by the court or the Town
Board of Trustees.
   (C)   The Clerk shall pay to the Clerk/Treasurer of the town all money so
received by him or her, except such special deposits or fees as shall be
received to be disbursed by him or her for special purposes. All money paid to
the Clerk shall be placed in the General Fund of the town, or in such other
fund as the Board of Trustees may direct.
(Prior Code, § 6-106)
§ 33.18 TOWN ATTORNEY; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Town Attorney, or his or her duly designated assistant, may be the
prosecuting officer of the court. He or she may prosecute, in his or her
discretion, all alleged violations of the ordinances of the town. He or she
shall be authorized, in his or her discretion, to prosecute and resist appeals,
proceedings in error, and review from the court to any other courts of the
state, and to represent the town in all proceedings arising out of matters in
the court.
(Prior Code, § 6-107)
§ 33.19 BOND.
   The Clerk of the court shall give bond in such sum as set by the Board of
Trustees, in the form provided by state law. When executed, the bond shall be
submitted to the Board of Trustees for approval. When approved, it shall be
filed with the Clerk and retained in the municipal archives.
(Prior Code, § 6-108)
§ 33.20 AUTHORITY OF JUDGE TO PRESCRIBE RULES.
   The Judge may prescribe rules, consistent with the laws of the state and
with the ordinances of the town, for the proper conduct of the business of the
court.
(Prior Code, § 6-109)
§ 33.21 SCHEDULE OF FINES.
   The Town Board of Trustees may establish a minimum fine schedule. The
minimum fine schedule, when established, shall provide for a minimum amount
which a person may pay upon a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to the listed
offenses. The minimum fine schedule shall include fines, court costs, and any
assessments set by state law within the specified amount. Upon plea of guilty
or nolo contendere and payment of the required minimum fine prior to the date
scheduled for court appearance, no further court appearance shall be required.
The Judge may authorize the Court Clerk to accept pleas of guilty and nolo
contendere where the amount of the minimum fine is paid at the time of such
plea and prior to the scheduled court appearance date.
(Prior Code, § 6-111)
§ 33.22 PROSECUTIONS; FILING OF COMPLAINTS; FEES; DEFECTS RAISED.
   (A)   All prosecutions for violation of ordinances of the town shall be
styled “The Town of Bokchito, Oklahoma vs. (naming defendant or defendants).”
Except as provided hereinafter, prosecutions shall be initiated by the filing
of a written complaint, subscribed and verified by the person making the
complaint, and setting forth concisely the offense charged.
   (B)   There is no duty on the part of the town or any of its officers or
employees to formally prosecute actions in the court. In the absence of a
prosecuting officer, the Judge shall proceed with the case and hear evidence
and examine witnesses in such manner as he or she may deem necessary to effect
justice.
   (C)   Any person, except a police officer or other employee of the town,
filing a criminal offense complaint in the Municipal Court shall deposit with
the Clerk of the court, unless waived by order of the court, the court cost fee
as provided in this subchapter. The court costs so deposited by such a
complainant shall be refunded to the complainant or person depositing the same
upon conviction or acquittal of the defendant; the court costs shall not be
refunded if the charges are dismissed at the request of the complainant who
made the deposit because the complainant fails or refuses to appear in court to
testify or aid in the prosecution of the charge filed by such complainant.
   (D)   All defects in the form or substance apparent on the face of a
complaint charging a violation of an ordinance of the town, and being grounds
for motion or demur, may only be raised by an accused in writing and prior to
trial.
   (E)   A complaint may be amended in the matter of substance or form at any
time before the defendant pleads, without leave, and may be amended after the
plea or order of the court where the same can be done without material
prejudice to the rights of the defendant. No amendment shall cause any delay of
the trial, unless good cause is shown by affidavit.
(Prior Code, § 6-112)
§ 33.23 ORDINANCE VIOLATION.
   (A)   If a resident of the town is arrested by a law enforcement officer for
the violation of any traffic ordinance for which other provisions of this
subchapter do not apply, or is arrested for the violation of a non-traffic
ordinance, the officer shall immediately release the person if the person
acknowledges receipt of a citation by signing it. However, the arresting
officer need not release the person if it reasonably appears to the officer
that the person may cause injury to himself or herself or others, or damage to
property if released, that the person will not appear in response to the
citation, or the person is arrested for an offense against a person or
property. If the person fails to appear in response to the citation, a warrant
shall be issued for his or her arrest, and his or her appearance shall be
compelled.
   (B)   If the arrested resident is not released by being permitted to sign a
citation as provided in this section, he or she shall be admitted to bail
either before or after arraignment, or shall be released on personal
recognizance.
   (C)   If a nonresident of the town is arrested by a law enforcement officer
for a violation of any ordinance for which §
33.24 does not apply, the defendant shall be eligible to be admitted to bail
either before or after arraignment.
   (D)   If the alleged offense is found to be a violation of an ordinance
restricting or regulating the parking of vehicles, including any regulations
issued under such an ordinance, and the operator is not present, the police
officer shall place on the vehicle, at a place reasonably likely to come to the
notice of the operator, a citation conforming substantially to that prescribed
in this section, with such variation as the circumstances require, the operator
of the vehicle shall be under the same obligation to respond to the citation as
if it had been issued to him or her personally under division (A) above.
(Prior Code, § 6-113)
§ 33.24 TRAFFIC BAIL BOND.
   (A)   In addition to other provisions of law for posting bail, any person,
whether a resident of the state or a nonresident, who is arrested by a law
enforcement officer solely for a misdemeanor violation of a state traffic law,
or municipal traffic ordinance, shall be released by the arresting officer upon
personal recognizance if:
      (1)   The arrested person has been issued a valid license to operate a
motor vehicle by the state, another state jurisdiction within the United States
which is a party to the nonresident violator compact, or any party jurisdiction
of the nonresident violator compact;
      (2)   The arresting officer is satisfied as to the identity of the
arrested person;
      (3)   The arrested person signs a written promise to appear as provided
for on the citation; and
      (4)   The violation does not constitute:
         (a)   A felony;
         (b)   Negligent homicide;
         (c)   Driving or being in actual physical control of a motor vehicle
while impaired or under the influence of alcohol or other intoxicating
substances;
         (d)   Eluding or attempting to elude a law enforcement officer;
         (e)   Operating a motor vehicle without having been issued a valid
driver’s license, or while the license is under suspension, revocation, denial,
or cancellation;
         (f)   An arrest based upon an outstanding warrant;
         (g)   A traffic violation coupled with any offense stated in divisions
(A)(4)(a) through (A)(4)(f) above;
         (h)   An overweight violation, or the violation of a special permit
exceeding the authorized permitted weight; or
         (I)   A violation relating to the transportation of hazardous
materials.
   (B)   (1)   If the arrested person is eligible for release on personal
recognizance, as provided for in division (A) above, then the arresting officer
shall:
         (a)   Designate the traffic charge;
         (b)   Record information from the arrested person’s driver’s license
on the citation form, including the name, address, date of birth, personal
description, type of driver’s license, driver’s license number, issuing state,
and expiration date;
         (c)   Record the motor vehicle make, model, and tag information;
         (d)   Record the arraignment date and time on the citation; and
         (e)   Permit the arrested person to sign a written promise to appear
as provided for in the citation.
      (2)   The arresting officer shall then release the person upon personal
recognizance based upon the signed promise to appear. The citation shall
contain a written notice to the arrested person that release upon personal
recognizance based upon a signed written promise to appear for arraignment is
conditional, and that failure to timely appear for arraignment shall result in
the suspension of the arrested person’s driver’s license in the state, or in
the nonresident’s home state pursuant to the nonresident violator compact.
   (C)   Procedures for arraignment, continuances and scheduling, timely
appearances, pleas of guilty or nolo contendere, posting bail, payment of fines
and costs, issuance of arrest warrants, and requests for suspension of the
driver’s license shall be as required in state law, 22 O.S. §§ 1115.1 through
1115.5.
   (D)   A defendant released upon personal recognizance may elect to enter a
plea of guilty or nolo contendere to the violation charged at any time before
he or she is required to appear for arraignment by indicating such plea on the
copy of the citation furnished to him or her, or on a legible copy thereof,
together with the date of the plea and his or her signature. The defendant
shall be responsible for assuring full payment of the fine and costs to the
Court Clerk. The defendant shall not use currency for payment by mail. If the
defendant has entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere as provided for in
this section, such plea shall be accepted by the court and the amount of the
fine and costs shall be as prescribed by ordinance for the violation charged or
as prescribed by the court.
   (E)   (1)   If, pursuant to the provisions of division (D) above, the
defendant does not timely elect to enter a plea of guilty or nolo contendere
and fails to timely appear for arraignment, the court may issue a warrant for
the arrest of the defendant and the Municipal or District Court Clerk, within
120 calendar days from the date the citation was issued by the arresting
officer, shall notify the State Department of Public Safety that:
         (a)   The defendant was issued a traffic citation and released upon
personal recognizance after signing a written promise to appear for arraignment
as provided for in the citation;
         (b)   The defendant has failed to appear for arraignment without good
cause shown;
         (c)   The defendant has not posted bail, paid a fine, or made any
other arrangement with the court to satisfy the citation; and
         (d)   The citation has not been satisfied as provided by law.
      (2)   The Court Clerk shall request the State Department of Public Safety
to either suspend the defendant’s driver’s license to operate a motor vehicle
in the state, or notify the defendant’s home state and request suspension of
the defendant’s driver’s license in accordance with the provisions of the
nonresident violator compact. Such notice and request shall be on a form
approved or furnished by the State Department of Public Safety. The Court Clerk
shall not process the notification and request provided for in this division
(E) if, with respect to such charges:
         (a)   The defendant was arraigned, posted bail, paid a fine, was
jailed, or otherwise settled the case;
         (b)   The defendant was not released upon personal recognizance upon a
signed written promise to appear as provided for in this section, or if
released, was not permitted to remain on such personal recognizance for
arraignment;
         (c)   The violation relates to parking or standing, an overweight
violation, an overweight permit, or the transportation of hazardous materials;
or
         (d)   A period of 120 calendar days or more has elapsed from the date
the citation was issued by the arresting officer.
   (F)   The Court Clerk shall maintain a record of each request for driver’s
license suspension submitted to the State Department of Public Safety pursuant
to the provisions of this section. When the court or Court Clerk receives
appropriate bail or payment of the fine and costs, settles the citation, makes
other arrangements with the defendant, or otherwise closes the case, the Court
Clerk shall furnish proof thereof to such defendant, if the defendant
personally appears, or shall mail such proof by first class mail, postage
prepaid, to the defendant at the address noted on the citation or at such other
address as is famished by the defendant. Additionally, the court or Court Clerk
shall notify the home jurisdiction of the defendant, as listed on the citation,
if such jurisdiction is a member of the nonresident violator compact, and
shall, in all other cases, notify the State Department of Public Safety of the
resolution of the case. The form of proof and the procedures for notification
shall be approved by the State Department of Public Safety. Provided however,
the court or Court Clerk’s failure to furnish such proof or notice in the
manner provided for in this division (F) shall, in no event, create any civil
liability upon the court, the Court Clerk, the state or any political
subdivision thereof, or any state department or agency, or any employee
thereof, but duplicate proof shall be furnished to the person entitled thereto
upon request.
(Prior Code, § 6-114)
Statutory reference:
   Court Clerk not liable on dishonored check; bench warrant and arrest of
issuer, see 22 O.S. § 1115.4
   Department of Public Safety; power and duties relative to suspension of
driving privilege, see 22 O.S. § 1115.5
   Posting bail after release on personal recognizance for traffic violation;
failure to appear; person ineligible for release on personal recognizance;
juveniles, see 22 O.S. § 1115.2
   Release on personal recognizance; arrangement; plea; failure to plead or
appear, see 22 O.S. § 1115.1
   State traffic-related offenses; state wildlife-related or water safety-
related offenses; bail, see 22 O.S. § 1115.3
§ 33.25 ISSUANCE OF SUMMONS; FAILURE TO APPEAR.
   (A)   (1)   Upon the filing of a complaint charging violation of an
ordinance, the Judge, unless he or she determines to issue a warrant of arrest,
or unless the defendant previously has been issued a citation or has been
arrested and has given bond for appearance, shall issue a summons, naming the
person charged, specifying his or her address or place of residence, if known,
stating the offense with which he or she is charged and giving him or her
notice to answer the charge in the court on a day certain, and containing a
provision for the official return of the summons, and including such other
pertinent information as may be necessary.
      (2)   The summons shall be served by delivering a copy to the defendant
personally or by certified mail. If he or she fails to appear and to answer the
summons within the prescribed period, a warrant shall be issued for his or her
arrest, as provided by this subchapter.
      (3)   Any person who has been duly served with a summons or traffic
citation and who has signed a written promise to appear in court as directed in
the summons or the citation, or as subsequently directed by the court, and who
fails to appear pursuant to his or her written promise or as directed by the
court, shall be deemed guilty of an offense.
(Prior Code, § 6-115)
   (B)   (1)   If, without sufficient excuse, a defendant fails to appear
according to the terms or conditions of his or her bond, either for hearing,
arraignment, trial, or judgment, or upon any other occasion when his or her
presence in court or before the Judge may be lawfully required or ordered, the
Judge may direct that fact to be entered upon the court minutes, thereby
declaring the bond to be forfeited. The Judge may also order a bench warrant to
be issued for the defendant as provided in this subchapter.
      (2)   The Judge, without advancing court costs, may also cause the
forfeiture to be certified to the district court of the county, where it shall
be entered upon the judgment docket, and shall have their full force and effect
of a district court judgment. At such time as the forfeiture is entered upon
the district court judgment docket, the district court Clerk shall proceed in
accordance with the provisions of 59 O.S. §§ 1301 et seq., and a surety shall
have all remedies available under the provisions of 22 O.S. § 1108 and 59 O.S.
§§ 1301 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 6-116)
   (C)   No person, having signed a complaint in the municipal court of the
town alleging the violation of an ordinance, or any other person in response to
an order of the court, shall fail, refuse, or neglect to appear, for the
purpose of testifying as a witness, at the trial of the case, after having been
notified of the time, date, and place at which the case is set for trial.
(Prior Code, § 6-117)
Statutory reference:
   Failure to appear according to the terms of bond, see 11 O.S. § 27-118
§ 33.26 ISSUANCE OF WARRANT.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided by town ordinance, upon the filing of a
complaint approved by endorsement by the Town Attorney or by the Judge, there
shall be issued a warrant of arrest, in substantially the following form:
 
The Town of Bokchito, Oklahoma to the police chief of the Town of Bokchito, Oklahoma. Complaint upon oath this day has been
made by (naming complainant) that the offense of (naming the offense in general terms) has been committed and accusing (name of
defendant) thereof you are commanded therefore forthwith to arrest the above named (name of defendant) and bring (insert him,
her or them, as appropriate) before me, at (naming place).
 
   Witness my hand this _____ day of ____________, 2______.
 
                                                ___________________________
                                                Judge of the Municipal Criminal
                                                Court of Bokchito, Oklahoma
 
   (B)   It is the duty of the Police Chief personally, or through a duly
constituted member of the town police force or through any other person
lawfully authorized so to act, to execute the warrant as promptly as possible.
   (C)   Each warrant of arrest that shall be issued and approved by
endorsement by the Town Attorney or by the Judge, there shall be assessed
against the defendant a warrant fee in the amount of $150 in addition to all
other fees assessed at that time.
(Prior Code, § 6-118)
§ 33.27 PROCEDURES FOR BAIL OR BOND.
   (A)   Upon arrest, or upon appearance without arrest in response to citation
or summons, or at any time before trial, before or after arraignment, the
defendant may be eligible to be released upon giving bail for his or her
appearance in an amount and upon conditions fixed by this subchapter or the
Judge, who shall prescribe appropriate rules of court for the receipt of bail
and release of the defendant. The Judge or Police Chief is authorized, subject
to conditions as may be prescribed by the Judge, to release a resident of the
municipality on personal recognizance.
   (B)   The town’s bail bond schedule setting forth specific offenses and bail
bond amounts and procedures therefor, as amended from time to time, is hereby
adopted and incorporated herein by reference.
(Prior Code, § 6-119)
Statutory reference:
   Arrest for misdemeanor traffic violation other than parking or standing;
bail, see 11 O.S. § 27-117
§ 33.28 ARRAIGNMENT.
   Upon making his or her appearance before the court, the defendant shall be
arraigned. The Judge, or the Town Attorney, shall read the complaint to the
defendant, inform him or her of his or her legal rights, including the right of
trial by jury, if available, and of the consequences of conviction, and ask him
or her whether he or she pleads guilty or not guilty. If the defendant pleads
guilty, the court may proceed to judgment and sentence or may continue the
matter for subsequent disposition. If the plea is not guilty, and the case is
not for jury trial, the court may proceed to try the case, or may set it for
hearing at a later date.
(Prior Code, § 6-120)
§ 33.29 POSTPONEMENT OF TRIAL.
   Before trial commences, either party, upon good cause shown, may obtain a
reasonable postponement thereof.
(Prior Code, § 6-121)
§ 33.30 DEFENDANT’S PRESENCE REQUIRED AT TRIAL.
   The defendant must be present in person at the trial of his or her case in
court.
(Prior Code, § 6-122)
§ 33.31 PROCEDURE FOR TRIALS NOT WITHIN SCOPE OF SUBCHAPTER.
   In all trials, as to matters not covered in this subchapter, by the statutes
relating to municipal criminal courts, or by rules duly promulgated by the
State Supreme Court, the procedure applicable in trials of misdemeanors in the
district courts shall apply to the extent that they can be made effective.
(Prior Code, § 6-123)
§ 33.32 RIGHT TO TRIAL BY JURY; WAIVER.
   (A)   In all prosecutions for violations of ordinances punishable by a fine
of not more than $500, or by imprisonment, or by both fine and imprisonment,
trial shall be by jury unless waived by the defendant. If trial by jury is
waived, trial shall be by the court.
   (B)   At arraignment, the defendant shall be asked whether he or she demands
or waives trial by jury. His or her election shall be recorded in the minutes
of the arraignment and entered on the docket of the court respecting
proceedings in the case.
   (C)   An election waiving jury trial, made at the arraignment, may be
changed by the defendant at any time prior to the day for which trial by the
court is set. An election demanding jury trial may be changed at any time prior
to the commencement of proceedings to impanel the jury for the trial; but if
that change occurs after the case has been set for jury trial, it may not
thereafter be recharged so as again to demand trial by jury.
(Prior Code, § 6-124)
§ 33.33 JUDGMENT.
   (A)   At the close of trial, judgment must be rendered without undue delay
by the Judge, who shall cause it to be entered in his or her docket:
      (1)   If judgment is of acquittal, and the defendant is not to be
detained for any other legal cause, he or she must be discharged at once;
      (2)   If the defendant pleads guilty or is convicted after trial, the
court must render judgment thereon, fixing the penalty within the limits
prescribed by the applicable ordinance and imposing sentence accordingly; and
      (3)   A judgment that the defendant pay a fine may direct also that he or
she be imprisoned until the fine is satisfied, as provided in §
33.35.
(Prior Code, § 6-125)
   (B)   If, after conviction, judgment of imprisonment is entered, a copy
thereof certified by the Clerk shall be delivered to the Chief of Police, the
Sheriff of the county, or other appropriate officer. Such copy shall be
sufficient warrant for execution of the sentence.
(Prior Code, § 6-126)
   (C)   (1)   The Judge of the court in imposing a judgment and sentence, at
his or her discretion, is empowered to modify, reduce, or suspend, or defer the
imposition of such sentence, or any part thereof, and to authorize the person
to be released upon his own recognizance for a period not to exceed six months
from the date of the sentence, under such terms or conditions as the Judge may
specify. The Judge may, with the consent of the defendant, defer further
proceedings, after a verdict, finding, or plea of guilty, but before passing a
judgment of guilt and imposing a fine, and place the defendant on probation for
a period not to exceed six months, under such terms and conditions as
prescribed by the court, which may include, but not be limited to, work on the
streets, parks, or other town-owned or maintained projects, with proper
supervision.
      (2)   A defendant is not entitled to a deferred sentence if the defendant
has been previously convicted of a felony.
      (3)   Upon a finding of the court that the conditions of release have
been violated, the municipal Judge may enter a judgment of guilty and may cause
a warrant to be issued for the defendant.
      (4)   Upon the issuance of the warrant or judgment of guilty being
entered, the person shall be delivered forthwith to the place of confinement to
which he or she is sentenced, and shall serve out the full term or pay the full
fine for which he or she was originally sentenced, as may be directed by the
Judge.
      (5)   The Judge may continue or delay imposing a judgment and sentence
for a period of time to exceed six months from the date of the sentence. At the
expiration of such period, the Judge may allow the Town Attorney to amend the
charge to a lesser offense.
      (6)   If a deferred sentence is imposed, an administrative fee of $50 may
be imposed as costs in the case. The court may make payment of the fee a
condition of granting or continuing the imposition of a sentence, if the
defendant is able to pay.
      (7)   The court may also require restitution and, in the event there was
damage done to public or private property during the commission of the offense,
the court may require the defendant to repair or replace such damaged property
as a condition to a deferred sentence as may be directed by the court.
(Prior Code, § 6-127)
Statutory reference:
   Suspension of judgment or costs, see 11 O.S. § 27-123
§ 33.34 PAYMENT OF COSTS BY DEFENDANT.
   If judgment of conviction is entered, the Clerk of the court shall tax the
costs to the defendant in the sum of $30, or the maximum sum permitted by state
law, whichever is greater, plus the fees and mileage of jurors and witnesses,
all of which the defendant shall pay in addition to any fine that may be
imposed.
(Prior Code, § 6-128)
Statutory reference:
   Costs, see 11 O.S. § 27-126
§ 33.35 ENFORCEMENT OF FINES, COSTS; IMPRISONMENT, WORK, COMMUNITY SERVICE.
   (A)   If a defendant who is financially able refuses or neglects to pay a
fine or costs, or both, payment may be enforced by imprisonment until the same
shall be satisfied at the rate specified by state law.
   (B)   If the defendant is without means to pay the fine or costs, the
municipal Judge may direct the total amount due to be entered upon the court
minutes, and to be certified to the district court where it shall be entered
upon the district court docket and shall have the full force and effect of a
district court judgment. Thereupon the same remedies shall be available for the
enforcement as are available to any other judgment creditor.
   (C)   All prisoners confined to jail on conviction or on a plea of guilty
may be compelled, if their health permits, to work on community projects, the
public streets, avenues, or ways, public buildings, or other public premises or
property. For each day of such work, the prisoner or defendant shall be
credited for two days of imprisonment toward any fine or costs, or witness or
juror fees or mileage until the same are satisfied.
   (D)   The town shall direct where the work shall be performed. The
appropriate officer shall oversee the work. If a guard is necessary, the Chief
of Police shall make provisions therefor.
(Prior Code, § 6-129)
Statutory reference:
   Application; exemption from Worker’s Compensation Act; liability for
injuries, see 57 O.S. § 227
   Community service in lieu of fine or in conjunction with imprisonment;
violation of community     service conditions, see 11 O.S. 27-122.2
   Enforcement of payment of fines or costs by imprisonment; persons unable to
pay, see 11 O.S. § 27-122
   Execution of sentences of municipal court, see 11 O.S. § 27-122.1
   Tort immunity; waiver; insurance, see 57 O.S. § 228
§ 33.36 SAME OFFENSE PUNISHABLE BY DIFFERENT SECTIONS OF CODE.
   In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by
different sections of this code, the Town Attorney may elect under which to
proceed, but not more than one recovery shall be had against the same person
for the same offense.
(Prior Code, § 6-130)
§ 33.37 CONTEMPT OF COURT.
   Obedience to the orders, rules, and judgments made by the court may be
enforced by the Judge, who may fine or imprison for contempt committed as to
him or her while holding court, or committed against process issued by him or
her, in the same manner and to the same extent as the district courts of the
state.
(Prior Code, § 6-131)
§ 33.38 PENALTY ASSESSMENTS.
   (A)   (1)   Any person shall pay a sum as set by state law as a separate
penalty assessment for law enforcement training, and as a separate
fingerprinting fee, which shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for,
any and all fines and penalties, and costs, otherwise provided for such
offense:
         (a)   Convicted of an offense punishable by a fine of $10 or more, or
by imprisonment, excluding parking and standing violations; or
         (b)   Forfeiting bond when charged with such an offense under division
(A)(1) above.
      (2)   The court shall provide for separate bail for the assessments;
however, a defendant admitted to bail on an undertaking by a surety may include
the amount of the assessment in the undertaking.
   (B)   Upon conviction or bond forfeiture, the court shall collect the
assessment and deposit the monies for payment as required by state law.
   (C)   At the end of every quarter, the town shall deposit with the State
Treasury the funds deposited in the law enforcement training funds and the
A.F.I.S. (automated fingerprint identification) Fund as required by law. The
Court Clerk shall also furnish to the State Treasury reports required on the
funds collected and penalty assessments imposed each quarter.
   (D)   For the purpose of this section, CONVICTION means any final
adjudication of guilt, whether pursuant to a plea of guilty or nolo contendere,
or otherwise, and any deferred or suspended sentence or judgment.
(Prior Code, § 6-132)
Statutory reference:
   Definitions pertaining to penalty assessments, see 20 O.S. § 1313.2
§ 33.39 FINES RECOVERABLE BY CIVIL ACTION; FAILURE TO PAY.
   (A)   All fines shall be recoverable by civil action before any court of
competent jurisdiction in addition to any other method provided by law.
   (B)   The failure to pay a fine levied pursuant to this code shall
constitute a separate offense against the town, subject to a fine as provided
in §
10.99.
   (C)   If a fine is not paid by the defendant, the fine may be collected by
committing the defendant to the town jail, where he or she shall remain until
his or her fine, and any costs assessed against him or her, are discharged,
either by payment or by confinement in jail, or by working in accordance with
other provisions of this code or state law.
(Prior Code, § 6-133)
JUDGE
§ 33.50 JUDGE CREATED; QUALIFICATIONS.
   There shall be one judge of the court. A Judge need not be a licensed
attorney at law, but, if not, he or she must be a resident of the town of the
age of 21 years, and possessed of good moral character. A Judge who is a
licensed attorney may engage in the practice of law in other courts, but he or
she shall not accept employment inconsistent with his or her duties as Judge,
or arising out of facts which give rise to, or are connected with, cases within
the jurisdiction of the court, pending therein or which might become subject of
proceedings therein.
(Prior Code, § 6-201)
§ 33.51 TERM OF OFFICE.
   The official term of the Judge shall be two years, expiring in each odd-
numbered year.
(Prior Code, § 6-202)
§ 33.52 APPOINTMENT OF JUDGE; ALTERNATE JUDGE.
   (A)   Judges shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the Town
Board of Trustees. A proposed appointment shall be submitted in writing to the
Town Board of Trustees at the next to the last regularly scheduled meeting
prior to the day upon which the appointment is to take effect, and shall be
acted upon at the next regularly scheduled meeting. The Town Board of Trustees
may decide upon the proposed appointment by a majority vote of all the members
of the Board of Trustees. Failure of a decision upon a proposed appointment
shall not prevent action thereon at a later regularly scheduled meeting of the
Board of Trustees unless the Mayor, in writing, withdraws the proposed
appointment.
   (B)   There may be appointed for each Judge of the court an alternate Judge
possessed of the same qualifications as the Judge. His or her appointment shall
be for the same term and made in the same manner as the Judge. He or she shall
sit as Judge of the court in any case if the Judge is absent from court, unable
to act as Judge, or disqualified from acting as Judge in the case.
(Prior Code, § 6-203)
§ 33.53 ACTING JUDGE.
   If, at any time, there is no judge duly appointed and qualified available to
sit as Judge, a person possessing the qualifications required by this
subchapter for the Judge shall be appointed as Acting Judge. The Acting Judge
shall preside as Acting Judge over the court in the disposition of pending
matters until such time as a Judge or alternate Judge shall be available.
(Prior Code, § 6-204)
§ 33.54 COMPENSATION.
   A Judge shall receive such salary as may be established, and shall be paid
as established by the town.
(Prior Code, § 6-205)
§ 33.55 REMOVAL OF JUDGE FROM OFFICE.
   (A)   Judges shall be subject to removal from office by the Board of
Trustees for the causes prescribed by the constitution and laws of the state
for the removal of public officers. Proceedings for removal shall be instituted
by the filing of a verified written petition, setting forth facts sufficient to
constitute one or more legal grounds for removal. Petitions may be signed and
filed by the Mayor, or 25 or more qualified electors of the town. In the latter
event, verification may be executed by one or more of the petitioners.
   (B)   The Board of Trustees shall set a date for hearing the matter and
shall cause notice thereof, together with a copy of the petition, to be served
personally upon the Judge at least ten days before the hearing. At the hearing,
the Judge shall be entitled to representation by counsel, to present testimony
and to cross-examine the witnesses against him or her, and to have all evidence
against him or her presented in open hearing.
   (C)   So far as can be made applicable, the provisions of the State
Administrative Procedure Act governing individual proceedings (75 O.S. §§ 308a
through 323, and any amendments or additions thereto in effect at the time of
the hearing) shall govern removal proceedings hereunder.
   (D)   Judgment of removal shall be entered only upon individual votes, by a
majority of all members of the Board of Trustees, in favor of such removal.
(Prior Code, § 6-206)
§ 33.56 VACANCY.
   (A)   A vacancy in the office of the Judge shall occur if the incumbent:
      (1)   Dies;
      (2)   Resigns;
      (3)   Ceases to possess the qualifications for the office; or
      (4)   Is removed, and the removal proceeding has been affirmed finally in
judicial proceedings, or is no longer subject to judicial review.
   (B)   Upon the occurrence of a vacancy in the office of the Judge, the Mayor
shall appoint a successor to complete the unexpired term, upon the same
procedure as an original appointment is made.
(Prior Code, § 6-207)
CHAPTER 34: PUBLIC SAFETY AND LAW ENFORCEMENT
Section
Fire Department
   
34.001   Definitions
   
34.002   Volunteer Fire Department
   
34.003   Fire Chief
   
34.004   Assistant Chief
   
34.005   Company officers
   
34.006   Secretary-Treasurer
   
34.007   New members
   
34.008   Bylaws
   
34.009   Rules and regulations
   
34.010   Use of fire equipment; inventory, repair
   
34.011   Authority of firefighters at fires
   
34.012   Right of entry
   
34.013   Contracts respecting fire protection
   
34.014   Authority to answer calls
   
34.015   Municipalities, fire protection contracts
   
34.016   Charges for calls made outside town
   
34.017   Firefighters serving in regular line of duty
   
34.018   Department considered agent of state
   
34.019   Firefighters Pension and Retirement System
Police Department
   
34.030   Police Department created
   
34.031   Chief of Police
   
34.032   Police officers
   
34.033   Performance of police functions outside employing municipality
   
34.034   Disposition of personal property; money or legal tender
   
34.035   Identification cards, insignia to be carried
   
34.036   Removal or resignation
   
34.037   Uniform, badge
   
34.038   Police records
Police Reserve Unit
   
34.050   Established Police Reserve Unit
   
34.051   Members to be under control of Chief of Police
   
34.052   Appointment of members
   
34.053   Qualifications of members; application; oath
   
34.054   Number of members
   
34.055   Power; authority of Police Reserve Unit
Unclaimed Property
   
34.070   Delivery required; records
   
34.071   Disposition of personal property
   
34.072   Seized property related to gambling; report, disposition
   
34.073   Seized property related to alcoholic beverages; disposition
   
34.074   Property of deceased person
   
34.075   Exchange of unclaimed or confiscated weapons
   
34.076   Recovery by owner
FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 34.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   MUNICIPALITY. A municipality which has qualified to participate in the State
Firefighters Pension and Retirement System.
   VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT. A fire department which has in its employ not
more than two full-time salaried firefighters.
   VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTER. A person who is enrolled as a member of a fire
department and who serves in such capacity without receiving a regular salary.
(Prior Code, § 13-201)
Statutory reference:
   Definitions pertaining to fire departments and personnel, see 11 O.S. § 29-
202
§ 34.002 VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   There shall be a Volunteer Fire Department, the head of which shall be the
Chief of the Volunteer Fire Department appointed by the Town Board of Trustees
for an indefinite term. The Chief of the Volunteer Fire Department shall be an
officer of the town and shall have supervision and control of the Volunteer
Fire Department. There shall be such additional firefighters as the Board may
authorize. All firefighters shall be officers of the town. It is the duty of
the Volunteer Fire Department, among others, to extinguish fires; to rescue
persons endangered by fire; to resuscitate and to administer first aid to
persons injured in, or about, burning structures, or elsewhere in case of an
emergency; to promote fire prevention; and, unless otherwise provided, to
enforce all ordinances relating to fires, fire prevention, and safety of
persons from fire and explosions in theaters, stores, and other public
buildings.
(Prior Code, § 13-202)
Statutory reference:
   General powers, see 11 O.S. § 29-101
   Oklahoma Volunteer Firefighters Act; purpose, see 11 O.S. § 29-201
§ 34.003 FIRE CHIEF.
   (A)   The Chief shall be the head of the Department, subject to the laws of
the state, ordinances of the municipality, and the rules and regulations
adopted pursuant to this section. The Chief shall be appointed by the Town
Board of Trustees for an indefinite term.
   (B)   The Chief shall be responsible for the general condition and efficient
operation of the Department, the training of members, and the performance of
all other duties imposed upon him or her by law or the municipality.
   (C)   The Chief may inspect, or cause to be inspected, by members of the
Department, the municipal fire hydrants, cisterns, and other sources of water
supply of the municipality at least twice a year.
   (D)   The Chief shall maintain a library or file of publications on fire
prevention and fire protection, and shall make use of it to the best advantage
of all members.
   (E)   The Chief shall make every effort to attend all fires, and shall
direct the officers and members in the performance of their duties
   (F)   The Chief shall see that the citizens are kept informed on fire
hazards in the community and on the activities of the Department.
   (G)   The Chief shall see that each fire is carefully investigated to
determine its cause and, in the case of suspicion of incendiaries, shall notify
proper authorities. The Chief shall secure and preserve all possible evidence
for future use in the case of suspicious incendiaries.
   (H)   The Chief shall file the appropriate activity report forms with the
office of the State Fire Marshal in Oklahoma City on an annual basis. The
activity report forms shall be designed by the State Fire Marshal and shall
include, but not be limited to, the amount of property and vehicle fire loss,
types of fires, and inspections and investigations. The report shall include
notification of all fire-related civilian deaths and injuries in their
respective jurisdiction, and of firefighter deaths in the line of duty and of
firefighter injuries in the line of duty requiring the services of a hospital
or physician, or both.
(Prior Code, § 13-203)
§ 34.004 ASSISTANT CHIEF.
   In the absence of the Chief, the Assistant Chief on duty shall command the
Department, and shall have the full powers and responsibilities of the Chief.
(Prior Code, § 13-204)
§ 34.005 COMPANY OFFICERS.
   The company officers shall be selected upon their:
   (A)   Knowledge of firefighting;
   (B)   Leadership ability; and
   (C)   Knowledge of firefighting equipment.
(Prior Code, § 13-205)
§ 34.006 SECRETARY-TREASURER.
   (A)   One member elected by the Fire Department shall be the Secretary-
Treasurer.
   (B)   His or her duties shall consist of the following:
      (1)   Calling the roll at the opening of each meeting;
      (2)   Keeping the minutes of each meeting; and
      (3)   Collecting any money due to the Department by the members.
(Prior Code, § 13-206)
§ 34.007 NEW MEMBERS.
   (A)   All new members shall be on probation for one year after their
appointment.
   (B)   New volunteer members, upon completion of their probation period, must
be approved by the majority of the Fire Department.
(Prior Code, § 13-207)
§ 34.008 BYLAWS.
   The bylaws of the Department shall include, but shall not be limited to, the
following.
   (A)   All volunteer firefighters are required to respond to alarms of fire
and other emergencies when notified.
   (B)   A volunteer firefighter is required to be present at all regular
meetings, call meetings, and schools presented for the benefit of the
firefighters.
   (C)   There shall be at least one regular business meeting each month.
   (D)   Any volunteer firefighter having two unexcused absences in succession
or three unexcused absences in a period of three months will be expelled from
the Fire Department rolls.
   (E)   Volunteer firefighters leaving the municipality for an extended period
of time will be required to notify the Chief.
   (F)   Any volunteer firefighter refusing to attend training classes provided
for him or her will be expelled from the rolls.
   (G)   Any volunteer member of the Fire Department shall be expelled from the
rolls for the following offenses:
      (1)   Conduct unbecoming a firefighter;
      (2)   Any act of insubordination;
      (3)   Neglect of duty;
      (4)   Any violation of rules and regulations governing the Fire
Department; or
      (5)   Conviction of a felony.
(Prior Code, § 13-208)
Statutory reference:
   Minimum rules and regulations of Volunteer Fire Department, see 11 O.S. §
29-204
§ 34.009 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Town Board of Trustees, by motion or resolution, may adopt and change
regulations relating to the Fire Department, its organization, operation, and
compensation.
(Prior Code, § 13-209)
§ 34.010 USE OF FIRE EQUIPMENT; INVENTORY, REPAIR.
   (A)   No person shall use any fire apparatus or equipment for any private
purpose, nor shall any person willfully and without proper authority take away
or conceal any article used in any way by the Department. No person shall enter
any place where a fire apparatus is housed or handle any apparatus or equipment
belonging to the Department unless accompanied by, or having the special
permission of, an officer or authorized member of the Department.
   (B)   The Chief shall prepare and keep a complete inventory of all property
belonging to the Fire Department, and shall, at the expiration of his or her
term, turn over such inventory and all such property to his or her successor,
together with all books, records, reports, and data of the Department.
   (C)   The Department shall be equipped with such apparatus and other
equipment as required from time to time to maintain its efficiency and properly
protect life and property from fire.
   (D)   Recommendations of apparatus and equipment needed shall be made by the
Chief, and purchased after approval as other town purchases.
(Prior Code, § 13-210) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 34.011 AUTHORITY OF FIREFIGHTERS AT FIRES.
   The Fire Chief, Assistant Fire Chief, or other Fire Department officers in
charge shall have complete charge and control at all fires. Fire orders shall
be obeyed. The Chief, or his or her officers, may prescribe limits in the
vicinity of a fire, which persons accept those residing or owning property
therein shall be permitted to enter except on the order of the officer in
command. Police officers may aid in carrying into effect the provisions of this
section.
(Prior Code, § 13-211)
§ 34.012 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The Chief of the Fire Department, and his or her designee, may be allowed,
at all reasonable hours entry into any building or premises within his or her
jurisdiction for the purpose of making any inspection or investigation, which,
under the provisions of this subchapter and other provisions of this code, he
or she may deem necessary to make.
(Prior Code, § 13-212)
§ 34.013 CONTRACTS RESPECTING FIRE PROTECTION.
   Any contract for fire protection entered into by the governing bodies of
municipalities shall expressly stipulate the terms and conditions upon, and in
compliance with, which each party thereof is to cooperate in furnishing,
maintaining, and operating fire equipment for outside aid or mutual aid, or
making payment for such service. Governing bodies may contract to supply fire
protection to owners of any individual properties.
(Prior Code, § 13-213)
Statutory reference:
   Contracts respecting fire protection, see 11 O.S. § 29-106
§ 34.014 AUTHORITY TO ANSWER CALLS.
   Provide fire protection for persons and property outside its corporate
limits, provided that said fire protection has been authorized by the governing
body of the municipality.
(Prior Code, § 13-214)
Statutory reference:
   Municipalities and fire protection districts; contracts, see 11 O.S. § 29-
105
§ 34.015 MUNICIPALITIES, FIRE PROTECTION CONTRACTS.
   A municipality may:
   (A)   Provide protection from fire for all persons and property within its
boundaries;
   (B)   Contract to give or receive such protection to or from one or more
municipalities or private organizations;
   (C)   Provide fire protection jointly with one or more municipalities or
private organizations;
   (D)   Contribute toward the support of any fire department in return for
fire protection service; and
   (E)   Create fire protection districts within the limits of the municipality
encompassing areas served by fire protection services.
(Prior Code, § 13-215)
Statutory reference:
   Municipalities and fire protection districts; contracts, see 11 O.S. § 29-
105
§ 34.016 CHARGES FOR CALLS MADE OUTSIDE TOWN.
   The town may enter into a contract with persons, organizations, or
associations to provide fire protection service outside the town limits. Such
contracts shall be conditioned upon the determination of the Fire Chief that
the property in question is within a reasonable distance from the town, and
that, prior to any fire protection equipment being dispatched for any fire call
for such property, the Fire Chief shall first approve such call and determine
that the equipment and personnel to be dispatched are not needed for other
purposes within the town. The charges for such calls shall be as specified in
the fee schedule.
(Prior Code, § 13-216)
§ 34.017 FIREFIGHTERS SERVING IN REGULAR LINE OF DUTY.
   All firefighters of the Fire Department of the town attending and serving at
fires or doing fire prevention work outside the corporate limits of the town,
as herein provided, shall be considered as serving in their regular line of
duty as fully as if they were serving within the corporate limits of the town.
The firefighters shall be entitled to all the benefits of any firefighters
pension and relief fund in the same manner as if the firefighting or fire
prevention work was being done within the corporate limits of the town.
(Prior Code, § 13-217)
§ 34.018 DEPARTMENT CONSIDERED AGENT OF STATE.
   A municipal fire department answering any fire alarms or performing fire
prevention services, or rescue, resuscitation, first aid, inspection, or any
other official work outside the corporate limits of its municipality, shall be
considered an agent of the state, and acting solely and alone in a governmental
capacity. Said municipality shall not be liable in damages for any act of
commission, omission, or negligence while answering or returning from any fire
or reported fire, or doing or performing any fire prevention work or rescue,
resuscitation, or first aid.
(Prior Code, § 13-218)
Statutory reference:
   Fire departments answering calls outside corporate limits considered agent
of state; liability for damages, see 11 O.S. 29-108
§ 34.019 FIREFIGHTERS PENSION AND RETIREMENT SYSTEM.
   (A)   There is hereby created, for the purpose of providing pension
retirement allowance and other benefits for firefighters of the town, a
Firefighters Pension and Retirement System. It is declared to be the official
policy of the town to participate in the pension system as provided by state
law.
(Prior Code, § 2-211)
   (B)   The Firefighters Pension and Retirement System, as established by 11
O.S. §§ 49-100.1 et seq., is hereby adopted by reference.
(Prior Code, § 2-212)
Statutory reference:
   Certain volunteers to be considered paid firefighters; physical and agility
requirements; Fire Chief qualifications, see 11 O.S. § 49-101.2
   Purchase of credited service, see 11 O.S. § 49-101.1
   Right to pension; amount, see 11 O.S. § 49-101
   Similar provisions, see 11 O.S. § 49-100.1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 34.030 POLICE DEPARTMENT CREATED.
   There is hereby created a Police Department in and for the town. It shall be
the duty of the Police Department and the members thereof to apprehend and
arrest on view or on warrant and bring to justice all violators of the
ordinances of the town; to suppress all riots, affrays, and unlawful assemblies
which may come to their knowledge, and generally to keep the peace; to serve
all warrants, writs, executions, and other processes properly directed and
delivered to them; to apprehend and arrest persons violating federal or state
law as provided by law, and to turn them over to proper authorities; and in all
respects to perform all duties pertaining to the offices of police officers.
(Prior Code, § 13-301)
§ 34.031 CHIEF OF POLICE.
   (A)   The Chief of Police of the town shall be a peace officer and shall
enforce the municipal ordinances. He or she shall have such other powers,
duties, and functions as may be prescribed by law or ordinance.
   (B)   The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the Town Board of Trustees
for an indefinite term and shall be removable by the Board.
   (C)   The Chief of Police shall be the head of the Police Department and
shall have supervision and control of the Department.
(Prior Code, § 13-302)
Statutory reference:
   Chief of Police, see 11 O.S. § 34-102
§ 34.032 POLICE OFFICERS.
   (A)   The town police officer shall at all times have the power to make or
order an arrest for any offense against the laws of the state or the ordinances
of the municipality. The officer shall have such other powers, duties, and
functions as may be prescribed by law or ordinance.
   (B)   (1)   In addition to regular full-time town police officers, reserve
police officers may also be appointed by the Chief of Police. Reserve police
officers shall have the powers, duties, and functions as set forth in law or
ordinance for regular full-time police officers, including serving as police
officers in another municipality requesting assistance pursuant to 11 O.S. §
34-103 of this title. A reserve police officer shall serve on a part-time basis
and shall perform duties only while on authorized duty. Non-compensated reserve
police officers may serve as dispatchers or confinement officers at municipal
jails.
      (2)   The calculation for part-time reserve officers shall be as follows:
         (a)   For cities having a total population of less than 200,000
persons, a reserve officer shall serve not more than 140 hours per calendar
month; and
         (b)   For cities having a total population of 200,000 or more persons,
a reserve officer shall serve not more than 140 hours per calendar month.
   (C)   Such reserve police officers must meet the minimum requirements of 70
O.S. § 3311.
   (D)   Employment as security guard, or other like employment while attired
in official police or police reserve uniforms must have the consent of the
Chief of Police.
(Prior Code, § 13-303)
Statutory reference:
   Police officers, see 11 O.S. § 34-101
§ 34.033 PERFORMANCE OF POLICE FUNCTIONS OUTSIDE EMPLOYING MUNICIPALITY.
   (A)   Members of the regular Police Department of the town, upon request of
the Mayor or a designee, or the Chief of Police or a designee, of any other
municipality, may serve as police officers in the municipality requesting their
assistance upon approval of the governing body of the municipality where such
officers are regularly employed. While so serving in another municipality, such
police officers shall have the same powers and duties as though employed by the
municipality where such duties are performed, except that salaries, insurance,
and other benefits shall be provided in their regular manner by the
municipality in which the police officers are regularly employed.
   (B)   Members of the regular Police Department of the town, upon request of
a County Sheriff or a designee, or upon request by a member of the State
Highway Patrol, may serve as law enforcement officers for the Sheriff’s office
or the State Highway Patrol, respectively, if such service has been authorized
by prior resolution by the governing body of the town where employed. While so
serving, such police officers shall have the same powers and duties as though
employed by the requesting law enforcement agency, and when so acting they
shall be deemed to be acting within the scope of employment of the requesting
law enforcement agency; except that salaries, insurance, and other benefits
shall be provided in their regular manner by the town.
   (C)   Members of the regular Police Department of the town may be deputized
by the County Sheriff, or a designee, subject to interlocal governmental
agreement to combine town and county law enforcement efforts and to encourage
cooperation between towns and county law enforcement officials. Liability for
the conduct of any town police officers deputized under the terms and
conditions of interlocal governmental agreement shall remain the responsibility
of their town.
   (D)   The governing body of a town may, by resolution, authorize the Chief
Executive Officer of the town to respond to any request from any other
jurisdiction within the state for law enforcement assistance in cases of
emergency. The police officers of the town serving in response to the emergency
request shall have the same powers and duties as though employed by the
requesting law enforcement agency and, when so acting, they shall be deemed to
be acting within the scope of employment of the requesting law enforcement
agency; provided, however, that salaries, insurance, and other benefits shall
be provided in the regular manner by the town in which the police officers are
regularly employed.
   (E)   As used in this section, EMERGENCY means a sudden and unforeseeable
occurrence or condition either as to its onset or its extent of such severity
or magnitude that immediate response or action is necessary to assist law
enforcement agencies having jurisdiction at the scene of the emergency to carry
out their functions.
(Prior Code, § 13-304)
Statutory reference:
   Performance of police functions outside employing municipalities, see 11
O.S. § 34-103
§ 34.034 DISPOSITION OF PERSONAL PROPERTY; MONEY OR LEGAL TENDER.
   (A)   The Chief of Police is authorized to dispose of personal property or
money, or legal tender, as provided in this section, which has come into the
possession of the Chief of Police in any manner if:
      (1)   The owner of the personal property or money, or legal tender, is
unknown or has not claimed the property;
      (2)   The property or money, or legal tender, has been in the custody of
the Chief of Police for at least 90 days; and
      (3)   The property or money, or legal tender, or any part thereof, is no
longer needed to be held as evidence or for any other purpose in connection
with any litigation.
   (B)   The Chief of Police shall file an application in the district court in
which the situs of government of the town is located requesting the authority
of the court to conduct a sale of the personal property, which has a fair
market value of more than its face value. The Chief of Police shall attach to
the application a list describing the property including any identifying
numbers and marks, the date the property came into the possession of the Chief
of Police, and the name of the owner and the person in last possession, if
different, and the address of the person, if known. The court shall set the
application for hearing not less than ten days, or more than 20 days, after
filing of the application.
   (C)   In any instance where the property has an actual or apparent value of
more than $100, at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing, notice of
the hearing shall be sent by certified mail to each owner at the address as
listed in the application. If the owner of any property with an actual or
apparent value exceeding $500 is unable to be served notice by certified mail,
notice shall be provided by one publication in a newspaper of general
circulation in the county where the property is in custody. The notice shall
contain a brief description of the property of the owner and the place and date
of the hearing. The notice shall be posted at the assigned place for the
posting of town notices, and at two other public places in the town.
   (D)   If no owner appears and establishes ownership to the property at the
hearing, the court shall enter an order authorizing the Chief of Police to
dispose of the property as follows:
      (1)   Donate the property having value of less than $500 to a not-for-
profit corporation, as defined in 18 O.S. § 1084, for use by needy families;
      (2)   Sell the personal property for cash to the highest bidder after at
least five days’ notice of the sale has been published;
      (3)   Transfer the property to a third-party agent under contract with
the governing body of the Chief of Police for sale by Internet or other
electronic means, regardless of whether the sale structure or distribution site
is within the state; or
      (4)   By any other means as determined appropriate by the court,
including, but not limited to, destruction.
   (E)   Regardless of the means of disposition, the Chief of Police shall make
a return of the donation or sale and the order of the court confirming the
donation or sale shall vest title to the property in the recipient or
purchaser. After payment of court costs and other expenses, the remainder of
money received from the sale of the personal property shall be deposited in the
town’s Municipal Court Fund.
   (F)   All money or legal tender which has come into the possession of the
Chief of Police pursuant to the circumstances provided for in division (A)
above shall be transferred by the Chief of Police to the Town Clerk/Treasurer
for deposit in the town’s Municipal Court Fund. Prior to any transfer, the
Chief of Police shall file an application in the district court requesting the
court to enter an order authorizing the Chief of Police to transfer the money
for deposit in the town’s Municipal Court Fund. The application shall describe
the money or legal tender, the date the same came into the possession of the
Chief of Police, and the name of the owner and the address of the owner, if
known. Upon filing the application which may be joined with an application as
described in division (B) above, a hearing shall be set not less than ten days,
nor more than 20 days, from the filing of the application. Notice of the
hearing shall be given as provided for in division (C) above. The notice shall
state that, upon failure of anyone to appear to prove ownership to the money or
legal tender, the court shall order the same to be deposited in the Municipal
General Fund. The notice may be combined with a notice to sell personal
property as provided for in division (B) above. If no one appears to claim and
prove ownership to the money or legal tender at the hearing, the court shall
order the same to be transferred to the town’s Municipal Court Fund as provided
in this division (F).
   (G)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any dangerous or
deadly weapons, narcotic or poisonous drugs, explosives, or any property of any
kind or character, which the possession of is prohibited by law. By order of
the trial court, any property filed as an exhibit or held by the municipality
shall be destroyed or sold or disposed of, pursuant to the conditions
prescribed in the order.
   (H)   The town is hereby authorized to establish a procedure for the
registration of “lost and found” property. The procedure shall give the finder
of any property the option of relinquishing any future claim to found property
at the time its possession is surrendered to the police or other agent of the
town, or of retaining possession of the property after registering its
description and the finder’s identity with the Police Department or other agent
of the municipality. Only property in which the finder relinquishes any future
claim to its ownership will be stored in municipal police property rooms.
   (I)   The town may provide by ordinance that a percentage of the money or
legal tender deposited in the town’s Municipal Court Fund as provided in
divisions (D) or (E) above may be paid as a finders fee for services rendered
to any person who found the unclaimed personal property or money, or legal
tender, and delivered it to, or registered it with, the Chief of Police or
other agent of the town.
(Prior Code, § 13-305)
Statutory reference:
   Disposition of personal property or money or legal tender, see 11 O.S. § 34-
104
§ 34.035 IDENTIFICATION CARDS, INSIGNIA TO BE CARRIED.
   An identification card, and such other insignia or evidence of identity as
the Chief may prescribe, shall be issued to each officer and reserve officer
who must carry the card and other identification at all times while on duty.
Officers and reserve officers shall surrender the card and other identification
upon termination.
(Prior Code, § 13-306)
§ 34.036 REMOVAL OR RESIGNATION.
   Any officer or reserve officer may be terminated by the Chief of Police at
any time for any cause deemed sufficient by the Chief of Police. Any member may
resign from the Police Department at any time, but it shall be his or her duty
to notify the Chief of his or her resignation.
(Prior Code, § 13-307)
§ 34.037 UNIFORM, BADGE.
   The Chief of Police shall prescribe the uniform and badges for the members
of the Police Department and Police Reserve Unit, and direct the manner in
which the same shall be worn. Any person other than an officer or reserve
officer shall wear such uniform or badge as may be prescribed by the Chief of
Police.
(Prior Code, § 13-308)
§ 34.038 POLICE RECORDS.
   (A)   In addition to the authority granted in 11 O.S. § 22-131, the Chief of
Police is designated the official custodian of police records and may destroy,
sell for salvage, or otherwise dispose of the following papers, documents, and
records after the expiration of the specified period of time following the end
of the fiscal year in which the paper, document, or record was created, except
as otherwise specified.
      (1)   One year. Parking citations, warning tickets, vehicle inventories,
extra patrol request, wrecker logs, and pawn tickets, and all other documents
and records not otherwise described herein.
      (2)   Two years. Time sheets, attendance records of police officers and
employees, uniform crime reports (UCR), dispatch logs, and 911 printouts.
      (3)   Five years. Accident reports, offense reports, traffic citations,
department reports, receipt books, sign-in sheets, and vacation and sick-leave
records.
      (4)   Indefinitely. All records, papers, or documents pertaining to
allegations of murder, manslaughter, forcible rape, or robbery.
   (B)   No records, papers, or documents pertaining to pending litigation,
juvenile, civil, or criminal, shall be disposed of until such litigation is
finally terminated and sufficient time has elapsed for a final appeal.
(Prior Code, § 13-309)
POLICE RESERVE UNIT
§ 34.050 ESTABLISHED POLICE RESERVE UNIT.
   (A)   An auxiliary police force to be known as the Police Reserve Unit is
hereby established.
   (B)   It shall be composed of personnel who have volunteered to join the
organization and whose application for membership has been accepted, and who
have complied with all the rules, regulations, and orders provided for the
conduct and control of the members thereof. The number of members is to be
approved by the Police Chief and the Town Board members.
(Prior Code, § 13-401)
§ 34.051 MEMBERS TO BE UNDER CONTROL OF CHIEF OF POLICE.
   The members of the Police Reserve Unit shall be under the authority,
control, and command of the Chief of Police.
(Prior Code, § 13-402)
§ 34.052 APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS.
   Members of the Police Reserve Unit shall be appointed from applications
submitted to the Chief of Police by persons applying for membership.
(Prior Code, § 13-403)
§ 34.053 QUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS; APPLICATION; OATH.
   An application accompanied by a complete set of fingerprints or supplemented
immediately by fingerprinting by the police division, which fingerprints shall
be checked by the identification bureau to ascertain any criminal record of
such person. Each applicant shall be an actual resident of the county, and
shall furnish satisfactory proof of good character, temperate habits, freedom
from communicable diseases, and physical ability to perform the duties of the
position for which he or she seeks appointment. The Police Reserve Unit shall
subscribe to an oath that he or she will observe and obey the constitution of
the United States, the constitution of the state, and the laws of the United
States, the state, and the town, and that he or she will carry out the duties
of a member the Police Reserve Unit in the town to the best of his or her
ability.
(Prior Code, § 13-404)
§ 34.054 NUMBER OF MEMBERS.
   All commissions shall be valid until surrendered by the member or revoked by
the Chief. The number of members of the Police Reserve Unit will be up to ten,
unless an emergency is declared.
(Prior Code, § 13-405)
§ 34.055 POWER; AUTHORITY OF POLICE RESERVE UNIT.
   (A)   Members of the Police Reserve Unit shall, while on duty, carry
firearms only on express written order of the Chief of Police.
   (B)   No member of the Police Reserve Unit shall break into or otherwise
forcefully enter upon any private property or enter the dwelling or habitation
of another person without the consent of the owner or occupant, except when
immediately accompanied by a regular member of the Town Police Department, who
then and there request his or her aid in enforcement of the law.
   (C)   A member of the Police Reserve Unit will have the following powers of
arrest and none other:
      (1)   He or she may arrest for a public offense committed in his or her
presence;
      (2)   He or she may arrest a person who in fact committed a felony,
although not in his or her presence;
      (3)   When a felony has in fact been committed, he or she may make an
arrest when he or she has reasonable cause for believing the person arrested to
have committed it; and
      (4)   He or she may go lend physical aid to any regular member of the
Police Department in making any lawful arrest when authorized by the Chief of
Police, or requested by any regular member of the Police Department of the
town.
(Prior Code, § 13-406)
UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
§ 34.070 DELIVERY REQUIRED; RECORDS.
   (A)   All personal property which comes into the possession of any police
officer, which has been found or stolen, or taken off the person or out of the
possession of any prisoner or person suspected of or charged with being a
criminal, and which is not known to belong to some person laying claim thereto
shall be, by the officer securing possession thereof, delivered into the charge
of the Police Chief. The Police Chief shall, in a permanent record book kept
for that purpose, make a record sufficient to identify the property, with the
date and circumstances of the receipt thereof and the name of the person from
whom it was taken and the place where it was found. The record shall also
disclose the subsequent disposal thereof, giving the date of sale, name, and
address of the purchaser, and the amount for which it was sold.
   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, POLICE CHIEF means the Police Chief,
or his or her designee.
(Prior Code, § 13-601)
§ 34.071 DISPOSITION OF PERSONAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   The Chief of Police is authorized to dispose of personal property or
money, or legal tender as provided in this section or the charter of the
municipality, which has come into the possession of the Chief of Police in any
manner if:
      (1)   The owner of the personal property or money, or legal tender, is
unknown or has not claimed the property;
      (2)   The property or money, or legal tender, has been in the custody of
the Chief of Police for at least 90 days; and
      (3)   The property or money, or legal tender, or any part thereof, is no
longer needed to be held as evidence or for any other purpose in connection
with any litigation.
   (B)   The Chief of Police shall file an application in the district court in
which the situs of government of the municipality is located requesting the
authority of the court to conduct a sale of the personal property, which has a
fair market value of more than its face value. The Chief of Police shall attach
to the application a list describing the property including any identifying
numbers and marks, the date the property came into the possession of the Chief
of Police, and the name of the owner and the person in last possession, if
different, and the address of the person, if known. The court shall set the
application for hearing not less than ten days, or more than 20 days, after
filing of the application.
   (C)   In any instance where the property has an actual or apparent value of
more than $100, at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing, notice of
the hearing shall be sent by certified mail to each owner at the address as
listed in the application. If the owner of any property with an actual or
apparent value exceeding $500 is unable to be served notice by certified mail,
notice shall be provided by one publication in a newspaper of general
circulation in the county where the property is in custody. The notice shall
contain a brief description of the property of the owner and the place and date
of the hearing. The notice shall be posted at the assigned place for the
posting of municipal notices, and at two other public places in the
municipality.
   (D)   If no owner appears and establishes ownership to the property at the
hearing, the court shall enter an order authorizing the Chief of Police to
dispose of the property as follows:
      (1)   Donate the property having value of less than $500 to a not-for-
profit corporation, as defined in 18 O.S. § 1084, for use by needy families;
      (2)   Sell the personal property for cash to the highest bidder, after at
least five days’ notice of the sale has been published;
      (3)   Transfer the property to a third-party agent under contract with
the governing body of the Chief of Police for sale by Internet or other
electronic means, regardless of whether the sale structure or distribution site
is within the state; or
      (4)   By any other means as determined appropriate by the court,
including, but not limited to, destruction.
   (E)   Regardless of the means of disposition, the Chief of Police shall make
a return of the donation or sale and the order of the court confirming the
donation or sale shall vest title to the property in the recipient or
purchaser. After payment of court costs and other expenses, the remainder of
money received from the sale of the personal property shall be deposited in the
Municipal Fund.
   (F)   All money or legal tender which has come into the possession of the
Chief of Police pursuant to the circumstances provided for in division (A)
above shall be transferred by the Chief of Police to the Municipal Clerk for
deposit in the Municipal General Fund. Prior to any transfer, the Chief of
Police shall file an application in the district court requesting the court to
enter an order authorizing the Chief of Police to transfer the money for
deposit in the Municipal Fund. The application shall describe the money or
legal tender, the date the same came into the possession of the Chief of
Police, and the name of the owner and the address of the owner, if known. Upon
filing the application which may be joined with an application as described in
this section, a hearing shall be set not less than ten days, nor more than 20
days, from the filing of the application. Notice of the hearing shall be given
as provided for in this section. The notice shall state that, upon failure of
anyone to appear to prove ownership to the money or legal tender, the court
shall order the same to be deposited in the Municipal General Fund. The notice
may be combined with a notice to sell personal property as provided for in this
section. If no one appears to claim and prove ownership to the money or legal
tender at the hearing, the court shall order the same to be transferred to the
Municipal Fund as provided in this division (F).
   (G)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any dangerous or
deadly weapons, narcotic or poisonous drugs, explosives, or any property of any
kind or character, which the possession of is prohibited by law. By order of
the trial court, any property filed as an exhibit or held by the town shall be
destroyed or sold or disposed of, pursuant to the conditions prescribed in the
order.
   (H)   (1)   The municipality is hereby authorized to establish a procedure
for the registration of “lost and found” property. The procedure shall give the
finder of any property the option of relinquishing any future claim to found
property at the time its possession is surrendered to the police or other agent
of the municipality, or of retaining possession of the property after
registering its description and the finder’s identity with the Police
Department or other agent of the municipality. Only property in which the
finder relinquishes any future claim to its ownership will be stored in
municipal police property rooms.
      (2) The municipality may provide by ordinance that a percentage of the
money or legal tender deposited in the Municipal Fund as provided in this
section may be paid as a finder’s fee for services rendered to any person who
found the unclaimed personal property or money or legal tender and delivered it
to, or registered it with, the Chief of Police or other agent of the
municipality.
(Prior Code, § 13-602)
Statutory reference:
   Disposition of personal property or money, or legal tender, see 11 O.S. §
34-104
§ 34.072 SEIZED PROPERTY RELATED TO GAMBLING; REPORT, DISPOSITION.
   In all cases where wines, whiskey, beer, or other intoxicating liquors
mentioned in the constitution or laws of the state, or any personal property
used for the purpose of violating any of the prohibitory liquor laws or
gambling laws of the state, shall be seized by any officer or person with or
without a search warrant, such officer or person is hereby required within five
days to make a written report under oath and file the same with the County
Clerk of the proper or respective county where the same shall be so seized,
which report shall in detail state the name of the officer or person making the
seizure, the place where seized, and an inventory of the property, articles, or
intoxicating liquors so taken into possession, and within said five days said
person is hereby required to deliver the same to the Sheriff of the county and
take the Sheriff’s receipt therefor in duplicate, and such Sheriff shall retain
the same and all thereof, until the same shall be destroyed pursuant to the
orders of the court. In computing the time of five days, Sundays and holidays
shall be excluded and not counted. A duplicate copy of said receipt shall
immediately be filed with said County Clerk, who shall keep a record of same,
provided the Sheriff, and his or her deputies, shall be required to make the
affidavit and issue the receipt and otherwise comply with the provisions of
this act. Provided, that all liquors so seized shall be preserved for use as
evidence in the trial of any action growing out of such seizure and all
officers seizing any such liquors are hereby required to mark the bottles or
containers for identification by writing thereon the date of the seizure and
the name of the person from whom seized. The Sheriff shall be liable on his or
her bond for the safe keeping of all such property so turned over to him or her
under the provisions of this act.
(Prior Code, § 13-603)
Statutory reference:
   Seized property; report and disposition, see 22 O.S. § 1261
§ 34.073 SEIZED PROPERTY RELATED TO ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; DISPOSITION.
   (A)   A search warrant may be issued pursuant to the provisions of 22 O.S.
§§ 1221 through 1264, as amended, for the purpose of searching for, seizing,
destroying, or holding any alcoholic beverages possessed, sold, transported,
manufactured, kept, or stored in violation of the State Alcoholic Beverage
Control Act; for the purpose of searching for and seizing any apparatus,
vehicle, equipment, or instrumentality used for, or intended for use in,
manufacturing or transporting any alcoholic beverage in violation of the State
Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, being 37A O.S. §§ 1-101 et seq.; and all such
property shall be forfeited to the state. This section shall not be construed
to require a search warrant for duly authorized agents of the Alcoholic
Beverage Laws Enforcement Commission to enter upon and inspect any licensed
premises, but such right of entry and inspection shall be a condition on which
every license shall be issued and the application for, and acceptance of, any
license hereunder shall conclusively be deemed to be consent of the applicant
and licensee to such entry and inspection.
   (B)   Any alcoholic beverages upon which the appropriate federal excise tax
has not been paid at the time of seizure under this section shall be destroyed
by the Sheriff who seized the same, or to whom the same has been delivered in
accordance with the provisions of 22 O.S. § 1261, as amended, after the same is
no longer needed as evidence in any criminal prosecution. All other property,
including alcoholic beverages upon which the appropriate federal excise tax has
been paid, seized under this section shall be forfeited to the state by order
of the court issuing the process by virtue of which such property was seized,
or before which the persons violating the law, or to which such property was
taken by the officer or officers making the seizure. Said court shall, without
a jury, order an immediate hearing as to whether the property so seized was
subject to seizure under this section, and take such legal evidence as is
offered, and determine the same as in civil cases. If the court finds from a
preponderance of the evidence that the property so seized was subject to
seizure under this section, it shall render judgment accordingly and order said
property forfeited to the state unless seized by county or municipal law
enforcement officers, in which case said property shall be forfeited to the
county or municipality, whichever is appropriate, in which the seizure of the
property took place. Such seized property shall be sold by the officer having
the same in charge, after giving ten days’ notice by one publication in a legal
newspaper of the county or, if no legal newspaper is published in said county,
after five notices of such sale have been posted in conspicuous places in the
city or town wherein such sale is to be made, at least ten days before such
sale. Appeal from such an order may be taken as in civil cases. When such
property is sold under the provisions of this section, the proceeds thereof
shall be distributed as follows: First, to the payment of the costs of the case
in which the order of forfeiture was made and the actual expenses of preserving
the property; and second, the remainder shall be deposited with the county or
Municipal Treasurer of the county or municipality in which the seizure took
place if the property was seized by county or municipal law enforcement
officials, or with the State Treasurer to the credit of the General Revenue
Fund of the state in all other cases.
(Prior Code, § 13-604)
Statutory reference:
   Search warrant; seizure and destruction; forfeiture and sale, see 37A O.S. §
6-127
§ 34.074 PROPERTY OF DECEASED PERSON.
   The personal property of a deceased person shall be delivered only to the
next of kin of such person or to the legally appointed representative of his or
her estate. If the personal property is claimed by the legally appointed
representative of the estate of the deceased a certified copy of the order of
the District Court appointing such person shall be deemed sufficient authority
to support the claim. If the personal property is claimed by the next of kin,
the claimant shall furnish a sufficient authority to support the claim. If
personal property of a deceased person remains unclaimed for a period of 90
days, it shall be disposed of in the appropriate manner provided in this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 13-605)
§ 34.075 EXCHANGE OF UNCLAIMED OR CONFISCATED WEAPONS.
   (A)   Unclaimed or confiscated weapons, which have been in the possession of
the Police Department for 120 days or more, may be traded by the Police Chief,
or his or her designee, for new weapons for use by the Police Department. The
unclaimed or confiscated weapons may only be traded to such gun dealers who
have complied with applicable state and federal regulations concerning firearms
and, in the opinion of the Police Chief, or his or her designee, are reputable.
   (B)   In trading such unclaimed or confiscated weapons, the Police Chief, or
his or her designee, shall advertise for as formulated by the purchasing entity
of the town.
   (C)   The value of such unclaimed and confiscated weapons, as herein
discussed, shall in all cases be determined by their fair market value of the
new weapons received in such trade.
(Prior Code, § 13-606)
§ 34.076 RECOVERY BY OWNER.
   If any property is sold as herein provided, and the owner thereof takes and
recovers possession of it from the purchaser, the amount paid therefor shall be
returned to the purchaser, upon verified claim being submitted and approved by
the Police Chief.
(Prior Code, § 13-607)
CHAPTER 35: EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Section
   
35.01   Definitions
   
35.02   Emergency Management Program; Director; declaration
   
35.03   Mutual aid arrangements
Cross-reference:
   National Incident Management System, see §
38.01
§ 35.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   EMERGENCY. Any occasion or instance for which, in the determination of the
President of the United States or the Governor of the state, federal or state
assistance is needed to supplement state and local efforts and capabilities to
save lives and to protect property and public health and safety, or to lessen
or avert the threat of a catastrophe in any part of the state.
   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. The preparation for, and the coordination of, all
emergency functions by organized and trained persons, who will extend existent
governmental functions and provide other necessary non-governmental functions,
to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from natural or
human-made disasters developing to such an extent to cause an extreme emergency
situation to arise which, by declaration of the Governor, jeopardizes the
welfare of the citizens of the state. These emergency functions include, but
are not limited to, firefighting, law enforcement, medical and health, search
and rescue, public works, warnings, communications, hazardous materials and
other special response functions, evacuations of persons from affected areas,
emergency assistance services, emergency transportation, and other functions
related to preparedness, response, recovery, and mitigation.
   EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN. The plan which sets forth the organization,
administration, and functions for emergency management by the state or local
government.
   HAZARD MITIGATION. Any cost-effective measure which will reduce or eliminate
the effects of a natural or human-made disaster.
   HUMAN-MADE DISASTER. A disaster caused by acts of humans including, but not
limited to, an act of war, terrorism, chemical spill or release, or power
shortages that requires assistance from outside the local political
subdivision.
   LOCAL ORGANIZATION FOR EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. An organization created in
accordance with the provisions of the Oklahoma Emergency Management Act of
2003, being 63 O.S. §§ 683.1 et seq., by state or local authority to perform
local emergency management functions.
   NATURAL DISASTER. Any natural catastrophe, including, but not limited to, a
tornado, severe storm, high water, floodwaters, wind-driven water, earthquake,
landslide, mudslide, snowstorm, or drought which causes damage of sufficient
severity and magnitude to warrant hazard mitigation or the use of resources of
the federal government, or the state and political subdivisions thereof to
alleviate the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering caused thereby.
   POLITICAL SUBDIVISION. Any county, city, town, or municipal corporation of
the state represented by an elected governing body.
   SIGNIFICANT EVENTS. All hazardous material releases of any size and type,
earthquakes, fires involving large buildings or facilities and large grass or
wild fires, explosions, bomb threats, terrorist/civil disturbance, aircraft
crash, natural disaster, utility disruption, dam breach, technological/human-
made incident, search and rescue, structural collapse, and any other incident
that poses significant consequences to the jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 13-503)
Statutory reference:
   Definitions pertaining to emergency management, see 63 O.S. § 683.3
§ 35.02 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PROGRAM; DIRECTOR; DECLARATION.
   (A)   All incorporated jurisdictions of the state are required to develop an
Emergency Management Program in accordance with the State Emergency Management
Act of 2003, being 63 O.S. §§ 683.1 et seq. County jurisdictions are required
to have a qualified Emergency Management Director as outlined in this section.
Incorporated municipalities are required to either have an Emergency Management
Director or create an agreement with the county for emergency management
services. Each local organization for emergency management shall have a
Director who shall be appointed by the Executive Officer or governing body of
the political subdivision, who shall report directly to the Chief Executive
Officer or Chief Operating Officer, and who shall have direct responsibility
for the organization, administration, and operation of such local organization
for emergency management, subject to the direction and control of such
Executive Officer or governing body. Each local organization for emergency
management shall perform emergency management functions within the territorial
limits of the political subdivisions within which it is organized, and, in
addition, shall conduct such functions outside of such territorial limits as
may be required pursuant to this act. Each local emergency management
organization shall develop, maintain, and revise, as necessary, an Emergency
Operations Plan for the jurisdiction. Each Plan shall address the emergency
management system functions of preparedness, response, recovery, and
mitigation. Such Plan shall be coordinated with the state.
   (B)   Emergency Management Directors (EMD) shall meet the qualifications
promulgated by the Oklahoma Department of Emergency Management (OEM). The
minimum qualifications include:
      (1)   U.S. citizenship;
      (2)   High school diploma or equivalent;
      (3)   Valid state driver’s license;
      (4)   Social Security number;
      (5)   Has not been convicted of a felony in the state; and
      (6)   Within one year of appointment, the EMD must complete basic
emergency management training provided by the OEM.
   (C)   Prior to employment, the employing agency shall obtain a name-based
background search by the State Bureau of Investigation to determine if the EMD
has been convicted of a felony.
   (D)   Each Emergency Management Director shall be responsible for all
aspects of emergency management in their jurisdiction including: conducting a
hazard analysis detailing risks and vulnerabilities, annually updating the
existing all hazard Emergency Operations Plan (EOP), conducting and arranging
for necessary training of all relevant personnel, conducting annual exercises
to evaluate the Plan, managing resources, determining shortfalls in equipment,
personnel, and training, revising the EOP as necessary, establishing and
maintaining an office of emergency management, communications, warnings,
conducting, or supervising damage assessment and other pre- and post-disaster-
related duties.
   (E)   Local fire departments, law enforcement, and other first response
agencies shall notify the Emergency Management Director of all significant
events occurring in the jurisdiction. Emergency Management Directors shall
promptly report significant events to the Oklahoma Department of Emergency
Management.
   (F)   In carrying out the provisions of this act, each political
subdivision, in which any disaster as described in 63 O.S. § 683.11, occurs,
shall have the authority to declare a local emergency and the power to enter
into contracts and incur obligations necessary to combat such disaster,
protecting the health and safety of persons and property, and providing
emergency assistance to the victims of such disaster. Each political
subdivision is authorized to exercise the powers vested under this section in
the light of the exigencies of the extreme emergency situation without regard
to time-consuming procedures and formalities prescribed by law (excepting
mandatory constitutional requirements) pertaining to the performance of public
work, entering into contracts, the incurring of obligations, the employment of
temporary workers, the rental of equipment, the purchase of supplies and
materials, and the appropriation and expenditure of public funds.
(Prior Code, § 13-501)
Statutory reference:
   Political subdivisions; Emergency Management Programs; Emergency Management
Directors; declaration of local emergency, see 63 O.S. § 683.11
§ 35.03 MUTUAL AID ARRANGEMENTS.
   The Director of each local organization for emergency management may, in
collaboration with other public and private agencies within the state, develop
or cause to be developed mutual aid arrangements for reciprocal emergency
management aid and assistance in case of a disaster too great to be dealt with
unassisted. Such arrangements shall be consistent with the State Emergency
Management Plan and Program, and in time of emergency it shall be the duty of
each local organization for emergency management to render assistance in
accordance with the provisions of such mutual aid arrangements.
(Prior Code, § 13-502)
Statutory reference:
   Mutual aid arrangement for reciprocal emergency management, see 63 O.S. §
683.12
CHAPTER 36: FINANCES AND FEES
Section
General Provisions
   
36.01   Investments
   
36.02   Depositories designated; deposit of funds
   
36.03   Purchasing policy
   
36.04   When bidding not required
   
36.05   Depositing of surplus, obsolete materials; bidding
   
36.06   Lapsing of appropriations policy
Telephone Exchange Fee
   
36.20   Inspection fee and service charge
   
36.21   Charge in lieu of other license tax
Utility Fee
   
36.35   Utility fee levied
   
36.36   Fee to be in lieu of franchise
   
36.37   Tax payable
   
36.38   Tax constitutes lien
   
36.39   Ouster for failure to pay
   
36.40   Permit
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 36.01 INVESTMENTS.
   The Town Clerk/Treasurer, or any other person authorized to invest public
monies, shall invest the same in those investments authorized by the Town Board
of Trustees or authorized by state law in a manner authorized by either or both
such Board of Trustees and statutes.
(Prior Code, § 7-101)
§ 36.02 DEPOSITORIES DESIGNATED; DEPOSIT OF FUNDS.
   All banks and financial institutions, as are designated by the Town Board of
Trustees, shall be designated as depositories for the funds of the town. The
Town Clerk/Treasurer shall deposit daily all public funds received by him or
her in these banks. Funds may be transferred from one depository to another
upon direction of the Clerk/Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 7-102)
§ 36.03 PURCHASING POLICY.
   (A)   All purchases of supplies, materials, equipment, and contractual
services for the town shall be made by the Town Board of Trustees, or pursuant
to authorizations granted by it.
   (B)   The Town Purchasing Authority shall contract for and purchase all
supplies, materials, and equipment for the offices, departments, and agencies
of the town. The Purchasing Authority may also transfer to or between offices,
departments, and agencies, or sell surplus or obsolete supplies, materials, and
equipment.
   (C)   Before a contract shall be entered into, or any such purchase made
involving the expenditure of more than $25,000, or any sale made of property
the value of which is more than $1,000, such contract or sale shall:
      (1)   Be approved by the Town Board of Trustees;
      (2)   Be submitted for competitive bidding, except as provided in this
chapter; or
      (3)   Have written notice given by the town purchasing authority for
sealed bids for the furnishing of such supplies, materials, or equipment where
competitive bidding is required hereunder.
   (D)   The notice required in this section shall state the time and place for
filing the bids, shall contain an ample description of the supplies, materials,
and equipment to be purchased or sold, the time and place the bids will be
opened, and that all bids may be rejected. The bids shall be in writing and
sealed and filed with the Town Clerk/Treasurer prior to the time they are to be
opened. The bids may be rejected or the town may readvertise for bids, or after
due consideration thereof, may award a contract to purchase such supplies,
materials, or equipment from the lowest and best responsible bidder. However,
the Town Purchasing Authority may, at his or her option, purchase any such
materials, supplies, and equipment through central purchasing of the state.
(Prior Code, § 7-103)
Statutory reference:
   Short title, see 61 O.S. § 101
§ 36.04 WHEN BIDDING NOT REQUIRED.
   (A)   The following may be purchased without giving an opportunity for
competitive bidding:
      (1)   Supplies, materials, equipment, or contractual services where cost
does not exceed $25,000 in a single transaction;
      (2)   Supplies, materials, equipment, or contractual services which can
be furnished only by a single dealer or a sole source vendor, or which have a
uniform price wherever bought;
      (3)   Supplies, materials, equipment, or contractual services purchased
from another unit of government at a price deemed below that obtainable from
private dealers, including war surplus, or purchased at auction at a price
deemed below that obtainable elsewhere;
      (4)   Contractual services (gas, electricity, telephone service, and the
like) purchased from a public utility at a price or rate determined by the
State Corporation Commission or other government authority;
      (5)   Supplies, materials, equipment, or contractual services when
purchased at a price not exceeding a price set therefor by the State Purchasing
Agency or any other state agency authorized to regulate prices for things
purchased by the state (whether such price is determined by a contract
negotiated with a vendor or otherwise);
      (6)   Contractual services of a professional nature, such as engineering,
architectural, or medical and legal services; or
      (7)   When an emergency is declared to exist.
   (B)   The term CONTRACTUAL SERVICES, for the purpose of this chapter, means
services performed for the town by persons not in the employment of the town,
and may include the use of equipment or the furnishing of commodities in
connection with such services under express or implied contract. CONTRACTUAL
SERVICES includes travel; freight; express; parcel post; postage; telephone;
telegraph; utilities; rents; repairs, alterations, and maintenance of
buildings, equipment, streets, and bridges, and other physical facilities of
the town; and other services performed for the town by persons not in the
employment of the town.
(Prior Code, § 7-104)
§ 36.05 DEPOSITING OF SURPLUS, OBSOLETE MATERIALS; BIDDING.
   (A)   No surplus or obsolete supplies, materials, or equipment of a value of
more than $10,000 may be sold until the procedures outlined in this section
have been followed.
   (B)   The Town Purchasing Authority may sell the following without giving
opportunity for competitive bidding:
      (1)   Surplus or obsolete supplies, materials, or equipment whose total
value does not exceed $10,000 in a single transaction;
      (2)   Supplies, materials or equipment when sold at a price of fair
market value by the town for the same; or
      (3)   Where the Board of Trustees has authorized the sale of surplus
property at public auction under such terms, conditions, and notice as the
Board of Trustees may prescribe or as the Town Purchasing Authority deems
appropriate.
(Prior Code, § 7-105)
§ 36.06 LAPSING OF APPROPRIATIONS POLICY.
   (A)   The Town Board of Trustees does hereby adopt an annual policy to lapse
all unexpended appropriations at the close of business on the last day of the
town’s fiscal year. All unexpended fund balances at the end of said fiscal year
will carry forward into the immediately following fiscal year as income and
revenue available to be provided for such new year.
   (B)   Any open encumbrances existing at fiscal year end are hereby cancelled
and lapsed and such appropriations are also lapsed. Any such purchase orders or
other contractual commitments outstanding at fiscal year end that are intended
to be honored subsequent to year end will require re-approval in the
immediately following fiscal year through the issuance of a new purchase order,
or the re-approval or renewal of a contract.
   (C)   Supplemental appropriations will be presented to the Town Board of
Trustees for approval in the amount of the new purchase orders and re-approved
contract commitments that were carried forward from the prior year and honored
in a subsequent fiscal year.
(Res. 2019-04, passed 6-24-2019)
TELEPHONE EXCHANGE FEE
§ 36.20 INSPECTION FEE AND SERVICE CHARGE.
   (A)   There is hereby levied an annual inspection fee and service charge
upon each and every person operating a telephone exchange in the town to
compensate the town for the expenses incurred and services rendered incident to
the exercise of its police power, supervision, police regulation, and police
control of the construction of lines and equipment of the telephone company in
the town.
   (B)   The amount of the inspection fee and service charge shall be an amount
equal to 2% of the gross revenues for each current year for exchange telephone
transmission service rendered wholly within the limits of the town.
   (C)   The inspection fee and charge shall be due and payable to the town on
or before May 1 of each year, and shall be paid into and appropriated and
expended from the General Revenue Fund of the town. Payment shall be
accompanied by a report showing the gross sales by service classification
(residential, commercial, and industrial).
(Prior Code, § 7-301)
Statutory reference:
   Power to levy and assess tax; tax in lieu of other taxes, see 68 O.S. § 2601
§ 36.21 CHARGE IN LIEU OF OTHER LICENSE TAX.
   During continued substantial compliance with the terms of this subchapter by
the owner of any telephone exchange, the charge levied by this subchapter shall
be, and continue to be, in lieu of all concessions, charges, excise, franchise,
license, privilege, and permit fees or taxes, or assessments, except ad valorem
taxes. This section is not intended to extinguish or abrogate any existing
arrangement whereby the town is permitted to use the underground conduit, duct
space, or pole contracts of the company for the fire alarm and police call
systems of the town, or either of them.
(Prior Code, § 7-302)
UTILITY FEE
§ 36.35 UTILITY FEE LEVIED.
   There is hereby levied and assessed an annual tax of 2% upon the gross
receipts from residential and commercial sales of power, light, heat, gas,
electricity, or water in the town, which tax shall be in lieu of any other
franchise, license, occupation, or excise tax levied by the town, all as
provided by 68 O.S. §§ 2601 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 7-401)
Statutory reference:
   Power to levy and assess tax; tax in lieu of other taxes, see 68 O.S. § 2601
§ 36.36 FEE TO BE IN LIEU OF FRANCHISE.
   The tax levied under this subchapter shall, when levied, apply to all
persons, firms, associations, or corporations engaged in the business of
furnishing power, light, heat, gas, electricity, or water within the corporate
limits of the town, except it shall not apply to any person, firm, association,
or corporation operating under a valid franchise from the town.
(Prior Code, § 7-402)
§ 36.37 TAX PAYABLE.
   The tax levied under this subchapter shall remain in effect until repealed,
and shall be payable quarterly. The tax shall be placed in the General Revenue
Fund of the town. Amounts not paid when due shall bear interest at the rate of
10% per annum until paid.
(Prior Code, § 7-403)
§ 36.38 TAX CONSTITUTES LIEN.
   The tax so imposed in this subchapter shall constitute a first prior lien on
all the assets located within the town of any person, firm, or corporation
engaged in the business of selling power, light, heat, gas, electricity, or
water within the town limits.
(Prior Code, § 7-404)
§ 36.39 OUSTER FOR FAILURE TO PAY.
   Any person, firm, or corporation failing or refusing to pay such tax when
levied shall be regarded as a trespasser and may be ousted from the town. In
addition thereto, an action may be maintained against such person, firm, or
corporation for the amount of the tax, and all expenses of collecting the same,
including reasonable attorney’s fees.
(Prior Code, § 7-405)
§ 36.40 PERMIT.
   Any person subject to this subchapter not operating under a valid franchise
from the town, and upon whom the tax provided herein is imposed and paid, is
hereby granted a revocable permit by the town for so long as this subchapter is
in effect and the taxes are paid in accordance with the terms of this
subchapter to acquire, construct, erect, install, extend, repair, remove,
relocate, replace, operate, and maintain a system of works, pipes, pipelines,
apparatus, structures, and appurtenances in, across, upon, and under the
streets, alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, parks, parkways, sidewalks,
parking, driveways, rights-of-way, utility easements, and other public ways,
places, areas, and grounds in the town, for the purpose of transporting,
distributing, and selling utilities to the town, its citizens, and the public
generally, and for any and all other purposes for which utilities, during the
period of this revocable permit, may be used, together with the right to enter
upon the street, alleys, avenues, and other public ways, places, and grounds of
the town for the purposes herein.
(Prior Code, § 7-406)
CHAPTER 37: TAXATION
Section
Sales Tax
   
37.01   Citation of subchapter
   
37.02   Definitions
   
37.03   Classification of taxpayers
   
37.04   Subsisting state permits
   
37.05   Purpose of revenues; disposition of proceeds
   
37.06   Tax rate; sales subject to tax
   
37.07   Exemptions; sales subject to other tax
   
37.08   Tax due and payable
   
37.09   Payment of tax; brackets
   
37.10   Tax constitutes prior claim
   
37.11   Vendor’s duty to collect tax
   
37.12   Returns and remittances; discounts
   
37.13   Interest and penalties; delinquency; discount forfeiture
   
37.14   Waiver of interest and penalties
   
37.15   Erroneous payments; claim for refund
   
37.16   Failure to file; fraudulent returns; penalties
   
37.17   Tax records confidential
   
37.18   Provisions cumulative
   
37.19   Amendments to chapter
Use Tax
   
37.30   Excise tax on storage, use, or other consumption of tangible property
levied
   
37.31   Exemptions
   
37.32   Time due; returns; payment
   
37.33   Tax constitutes debt
   
37.34   Collection of tax by retailer or vendor
   
37.35   Collection of tax by retailer, vendor; not maintaining place of
business; permits
   
37.36   Revoking permits
   
37.37   Remunerative deductions allowed; vendors or retailers of other states
   
37.38   Interests and penalties; delinquency
   
37.39   Waiver of interest and penalties
   
37.40   Erroneous payments; claim for refund
   
37.41   Records confidential
   
37.42   Definitions
   
37.43   Classifications of taxpayers
   
37.44   Subsisting state permits
   
37.45   Purpose of revenues
 
   
37.99   Penalty
SALES TAX
§ 37.01 CITATION OF SUBCHAPTER.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Town of Bokchito
Sales Tax Ordinance.”
(Prior Code, § 7-201)
Statutory reference:
   Authorization to tax for purposes of municipal government; exceptions and
limitations, see 68 O.S. § 2701
   Citation, see 68 O.S. § 1350
§ 37.02 DEFINITIONS.
   The definitions of words, terms, and phrases contained in the State Sales
Tax Code, being 68 O.S. §§ 1350 et seq., are hereby adopted by reference and
made a part of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 7-202)
Statutory reference:
   Definitions, see 68 O.S. § 1352
   Mixed beverage, bottle club, beer and wine, caterer or special event
licensee; responsibility for    violations, see 37A O.S. § 2-133
§ 37.03 CLASSIFICATION OF TAXPAYERS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the classification of taxpayers
hereunder shall be as prescribed by state law for purposes of the State Sales
Tax Code.
(Prior Code, § 7-203)
§ 37.04 SUBSISTING STATE PERMITS.
   All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the State Tax
Commission pursuant to the State Sales Tax Code are, for the purpose of this
subchapter, hereby ratified, confirmed, and adopted in lieu of any requirement
for an additional town permit for the same purpose.
(Prior Code, § 7-204)
§ 37.05 PURPOSE OF REVENUES; DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS.
   It is hereby declared to be the purpose of the revenues generated by the
first and second cent sales taxes levied herein to provide revenues for the
support of the functions of the municipal government of the town.
(Prior Code, § 7-205)
§ 37.06 TAX RATE; SALES SUBJECT TO TAX.
   There is hereby levied an excise tax of 3% upon the gross proceeds or gross
receipts derived from all sales taxable under the State Sales Tax Code,
including, but not exclusive of, the following:
   (A)   Tangible personal property;
   (B)   Natural or artificial gas, electricity, ice, steam, or any other
utility or public service except water and those specifically exempt by this
subchapter;
   (C)   Transportation for hire of persons by common carriers, including
railroads, both steam and electric, motor transportation companies, taxicab
companies, Pullman car companies, airlines, and all other means of
transportation for hire;
   (D)   Service by telephone and telegraph companies to subscribers or users,
including transmission of messages, whether local or long distance. This shall
include all services and rental charges having any connection with transmission
of any message;
   (E)   Printing or printed matter of all types, kinds, and characters and the
service of printing or over-printing, including the copying of information by
mimeograph or multigraph, or by otherwise duplicating written or printed matter
in any manner, or the production of microfiche containing information on
magnetic tapes furnished by customers;
   (F)   Service of furnishing rooms by hotel, apartment hotel, public rooming
house, motel, public lodging house, or tourist camps;
   (G)   Service of furnishing storage or parking privileges by auto hotels and
parking lots;
   (H)   Selling, renting, or otherwise furnishing computer hardware or
software or coding sheets, cards, or magnetic tapes on which prewritten
programs have been coded, punched, or otherwise recorded;
   (I)   Food, confections, and all drinks sold or dispensed by hotels,
restaurants, or other dispensers, and sold for immediate consumption upon the
premises, or delivered or carried away from the premises for consumption
elsewhere;
   (J)   Advertising of all kinds, types, and character, including any and all
devices used for advertising purposes and the servicing of any advertising
devices, except those specifically exempt by this subchapter;
   (K)    Dues or fees to clubs, including free or complimentary dues or fees
which shall have the value equivalent to the charge that would have otherwise
been made, including any fees paid for the use of facilities or services
rendered at a health spa or club, or any similar facility or business;
   (L)   Sales of tickets, fees, or other charges made for admission to or
voluntary contributions made to places of amusement, sports entertainment,
exhibition, display, or other recreational events or activities, including free
or complimentary admissions which shall have the value equivalent to the charge
that would have otherwise been made;
   (M)   Charges made for the privilege of entering or engaging in any kind of
activity when no admission is charged spectators, such as tennis, racquet ball,
or handball courts;
   (N)   Charges made for the privilege of using items for amusement, sports,
entertainment, or recreational activity, such as trampolines or golf carts;
   (O)   The rental of equipment for amusement, sports, entertainment, or other
recreational activities, such as bowling shoes, skates, golf carts, or other
sports and athletic equipment;
   (P)   The gross receipts from sales through any vending machine without any
deduction for rental to locate the vending machine on the premises of a person
who is not the owner, or any other deductions therefrom;
   (Q)   Gross receipts or gross proceeds from the rental or lease of tangible
personal property, including rental or lease of personal property when the
rental or lease agreement requires the vendor to launder, clean, repair, or
otherwise service the rented or leased property on a regular basis, without any
deduction for the cost of the service rendered. Provided if the rental or lease
charge is based on the retail value of the property at the time of making the
rental or lease agreement, and the expected life of the property and the rental
or lease charge is separately stated from the service cost in the statement,
bill, or invoice delivered to the consumer, the cost of services rendered shall
be deducted from the gross receipts or gross proceeds;
   (R)   Any licensing agreement, rental, lease, or other device or instrument
whereby rights to possess or exhibit motion pictures or filmed performances, or
rights to receive images, pictures, or performances for telecast by any method
are transferred. Provided, persons regularly engaged in the business of
exhibiting motion pictures for which the sale of tickets or admissions is taxed
under this subchapter shall not be deemed to be consumers or users in respect
to the licensing or exhibiting of copyrighted motion picture features, shorts,
cartoons, and scenes from copyrighted features, and the sale or licensing of
such films shall not be considered a sale within the purview of this
subchapter;
   (S)   (1)   Flowers, plants, shrubs, trees, and other floral items, whether
or not the same was produced by the vendor, sold by persons engaged in florist
or nursery business in this state, including all orders taken by a state
business for delivery in another state.
      (2)   Provided, all orders taken outside the state for delivery within
the state shall not be subject to the tax levied by this subchapter.
   (T)   Tangible personal property sold to persons, peddlers, solicitors, or
other salespersons for resale where there is likelihood that the state will
lose tax revenue due to the difficulty of enforcing this subchapter because of:
      (1)   The operation of the business;
      (2)   The nature of the business;
      (3)   The turnover of independent contractors;
      (4)   The lack of place of business in which to display a permit or keep
records;
      (5)   Lack of adequate records;
      (6)   The persons are minors or transients;
      (7)   The persons are engaged in service businesses; or
      (8)   Any other reasonable reason.
   (U)   Any taxable services and tangible personal property, including
materials, supplies, and equipment, sold to contractors for the purpose of
developing and improving real estate, even though such real estate is intended
for resale as real property, are hereby declared to be sales to consumers or
users and taxable; and
   (V)   Any taxable services and tangible personal property sold to persons
who are primarily engaged in selling their services, such as repair people, are
hereby declared to be sales to consumers or users and taxable.
(Prior Code, § 7-206)
§ 37.07 EXEMPTIONS; SALES SUBJECT TO OTHER TAX.
   (A)   There is hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this
subchapter the gross receipts or gross proceeds exempted from the State Sales
Tax Code, being 68 O.S. §§ 1350 et seq., inclusive, but not exclusive of, and
derived from the:
      (1)   Sale of gasoline or motor fuel on which the motor fuel tax,
gasoline excise tax, or special fuels tax levied by state law has been paid;
      (2)   Sale of motor vehicles or any optional equipment or accessories
attached to motor vehicles on which the State Motor Vehicle Excise Tax levied
by state law has been paid;
      (3)   Sale of a crude petroleum or natural or casinghead gas and other
products subject to gross production tax under state law. This exemption shall
not apply when such products are sold to consumer or user for consumption or
use, except when used for injection into the earth for the purpose of promoting
or facilitating the production of oil or gas. This division (A) shall not
operate to increase or repeal the gross production tax levied by the laws of
the state; and
      (4)   Sale of aircraft on which the tax levied pursuant to 68 O.S. §§
6001 through 6004 has been paid.
(Prior Code, § 7-207)
   (B)   There are hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this
subchapter:
      (1)   Sale of tangible personal property or services to the United States
government or to the state, any political subdivision of the state or any
agency of a political subdivision of the state; provided, all sales to
contractors in connection with the performance of any contract with the United
States government, state, or any of its political subdivisions shall not be
exempted from the tax levied by this subchapter, except as hereinafter
provided;
      (2)   Sales of property to agents appointed or contracted with by
agencies or instrumentalities of the United States government if ownership and
possession of such property transfers immediately to the United States
government;
      (3)   Sales made directly by county, district, or state fair authorities
of the state, upon the premises of the fair authority, for the sole benefit of
the fair authority;
      (4)   Sale of food in cafeterias or lunch rooms of elementary schools,
high schools, colleges, or universities which are operated primarily for
teachers and pupils, and are not operated primarily for the public or for
profit;
      (5)   Dues paid to fraternal, religious, civic, charitable, or
educational societies or organizations by regular members thereof, provided,
such societies or organizations operate under what is commonly termed the lodge
plan or system, and provided such societies or organizations do not operate for
a profit which inures to the benefit of any individual member or members
thereof to the exclusion of other members;
      (6)   Sale of tangible personal property or services to or by churches,
except sales made in the course of business for profit or savings, competing
with other persons engaged in the same or similar business;
      (7)   The amount of proceeds received from the sale of admission tickets
which is separately stated on the ticket of admission for the repayment of
money borrowed by any accredited state-supported college or university for the
purpose of constructing or enlarging any facility to be used for the staging of
an athletic event, a theatrical production, or any other form of entertainment,
edification, or cultural cultivation to which entry is gained with a paid
admission ticket. Such facilities include, but are not limited to, athletic
fields, athletic stadiums, field houses, amphitheaters, and theaters. To be
eligible for this sales tax exemption, the amount separately stated on the
admission ticket shall be a surcharge which is imposed, collected, and used for
the sole purpose of servicing or aiding in the servicing of debt incurred by
the college or university to effect the capital improvements hereinbefore
described;
      (8)   Sales of tangible personal property or services to the Board of
Trustees organizations or similar state supervisory organizations of the Boy
Scouts of America, Girl Scouts of U.S.A., and the Campfire Girls shall be
exempt from sales tax;
      (9)   Sale of tangible personal property or services to any county,
municipality, public school district, the institutions of the state system of
higher education and the Grand River Dam Authority, or to any person with whom
any of the above named subdivisions or agencies of the state has duly entered
into a public contract pursuant to law necessary for carrying out such public
contract or to any subcontractor to such a public contract. Any person making
purchases on behalf of such subdivision or agency of the state shall certify,
in writing, on the copy of the invoice or sales ticket to be retained by the
vendor that the purchases are made for and on behalf of such subdivision or
agency of the state and set out the name of such public subdivision or agency;
      (10)   Sales of tangible personal property or services to private
institutions of higher education and private elementary and secondary
institutions of education accredited by the State Department of Education or
registered by the State Board of Education for purposes of participating in
federal programs or accredited as defined by the State Regents for Higher
Education which are exempt from taxation pursuant to the provisions of § 501(c)
(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, including materials, supplies, and equipment
used in the construction and improvement of buildings and other structures
owned by the institutions and operated for educational purposes. Any person,
firm, agency, or entity making purchases on behalf of any institution, agency,
or subdivision in the state, shall certify in writing, on the copy of the
invoice of sales ticket the nature of the purchases, and violation of this act
shall be a misdemeanor as set forth in §
37.99(B);
      (11)   Tuition and educational fees paid to private institutions of
higher education and private elementary and secondary institutions of education
accredited by the State Department of Education or registered by the State
Board of Education for purposes of participating in federal programs or
accredited as defined by the State Regents for Higher Education which are
exempt from taxation pursuant to the provisions of the § 501(c)(3) of the
Internal Revenue Code; and
      (12)   Sales of tangible personal property made by public or private
school for grade levels kindergarten through twelfth grade, a public school
district, public school board, public school student group or organization, or
public school district personnel for purposes of raising finds for the benefit
of such school, school district, school board, student group, or organization.
For purposes of this division (B)(12), PUBLIC OR PRIVATE SCHOOL shall mean any
public or private institution of education accredited by the State Department
of Education or registered by the State Board of Education for purposes of
participating in federal programs. Sale of tangible personal property in this
division (B)(12) shall not include sale of admission tickets or concessions at
athletic events.
(Prior Code, § 7-208)
   (C)   There are hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this
subchapter:
      (1)   Transportation of school pupils to and from elementary schools or
high schools in motor or other vehicles;
      (2)   Transportation of persons where the fare of each person does not
exceed $1, or local transportation of persons within the corporate limits of a
municipality except by taxicab;
      (3)   Carrier sales of newspapers and periodicals made directly to
consumers, other sales of newspapers and periodicals where any individual
transaction does not exceed $0.75. A CARRIER is a person who regularly delivers
newspapers or periodicals to subscribers on an assigned route;
      (4)   Sales for resale to persons engaged in the business of reselling
the articles purchased, whether within or without the state, provided that such
sales to residents of the state are made to persons to whom sales tax permits
have been issued as provided in this subchapter. This exemption shall not apply
to the sales of articles made to persons holding permits when such persons
purchase items for their use, and which they are not regularly engaged in the
business of reselling; neither shall this exemption apply to sales of tangible
personal property to peddlers, solicitors, and other salespeople who do not
have an established place of business and a sales tax permit;
      (5)   Sales of advertising space in newspapers and periodicals, and
billboard advertising service, and any advertising through the electronic
media, including radio, television, and cable television;
      (6)   Eggs, feed, supplies, machinery, and equipment purchased by persons
regularly engaged in the business of raising worms, fish, and insects or any
other form of terrestrial or aquatic animal life, and used for the purpose of
raising the same for marketing. This exemption shall only be granted and
extended to the purchaser when the items are to be used and in fact are used in
the raising of animal life as set out above. Each purchaser shall certify, in
writing, on the invoice or sales ticket retained by the vendor that he or she
is regularly engaged in the business of raising such animal life, and that the
items purchased will be used only in such business. The vendor shall certify to
the State Tax Commission that the price of the items has been reduced to grant
the full benefit of the exemption. Violation hereof by the purchaser or vendor
shall be a misdemeanor;
      (7)   Sales of medicine or drugs prescribed for the treatment of human
beings by a person licensed to prescribe the medicine or drugs. This exemption
shall not apply to proprietary or patent medicines;
      (8)   Transfers of title or possession of empty, partially filled, or
filled returnable oil drums to any person who is not regularly engaged in the
business of selling, reselling, or otherwise transferring empty, partially
filled, or filled returnable oil drums;
      (9)   Sales of food or food products for home consumption which are
purchased in whole or in part with coupons issued pursuant to the federal food
stamp program, as authorized by 7 U.S.C. §§ 2011 through 2029, as to that
portion purchased with such coupons. The exemption provided for such sales
shall be inapplicable to such sales upon the effective date of any federal law
that removes the requirement of the exemption as a condition for participation
by the state in the Federal Food Stamp Program; and
      (10)   Nothing herein shall be construed as limiting or prohibiting the
town from levying and collecting taxes on the sale of natural or artificial gas
and electricity, whether sold for residential or commercial purposes. Any sales
tax levied by the town on natural or artificial gas and electricity shall be in
effect regardless of ordinance or contractual provisions referring to
previously imposed state sales tax on such items.
(Prior Code, § 7-209)
   (D)   There are hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by 68 O.S.
§§ 1350 et seq., the State Sales Tax Code:
      (1)   Sales of agricultural products produced in the state by the
producer thereof directly to the consumer or user when such articles are sold
at or from a farm and not from some other place of business, as follows:
         (a)   Farm, orchard, or garden products; and
         (b)   Dairy products sold by a dairy producer or farmer who owns all
the cows from which the dairy products offered for sale are produced; provided,
the provisions of this division (D) shall not be construed as exempting sales
by florists, nursery operators, or chicken hatcheries, or sales of dairy
products by any other business except as set out herein.
      (2)   Livestock, including cattle, horses, mules, or other domestic or
draft animals, sold by the producer by private treaty or at a special livestock
sale;
      (3)   Sale of baby chicks, turkey poults, and starter pullets used in the
commercial production of chickens, turkeys, and eggs, provided that the
purchaser certifies, in writing, on the copy of the invoice or sales ticket to
be retained by the vendor that the pullets will be used primarily for egg
production;
      (4)   (a)   Sale of salt, grains, tankage, oyster shells, mineral
supplements, limestone, and other generally recognized animal feeds for the
following purposes and subject to the following limitations:
            1.   Feed which is fed to poultry and livestock, including breeding
stock and wool-bearing stock, for the purpose of producing eggs, poultry, milk,
or meat for human consumption;
            2.   Feed purchased in the state for the purpose of being fed to
and which is fed by the purchaser to horses, mules, or other domestic or draft
animals used directly in the producing and marketing of agricultural products;
and
            3.   Any stock tonics, water purifying products, stock sprays,
disinfectants, or other such agricultural supplies.
         (b)   POULTRY shall not be construed to include any fowl other than
domestic fowl kept and raised for the market or production of eggs. LIVESTOCK
shall not be construed to include any pet animals such as dogs, cats, birds, or
such other fur-bearing animals. This exemption shall only be granted and
extended where the purchaser of feed that is to be used and in fact is used for
a purpose that would bring about an exemption hereunder executes an invoice or
sales ticket in duplicate on a form to be prescribed by the State Tax
Commission. The purchaser may demand and receive a copy of the invoice or sales
ticket, and the vendor shall retain a copy;
      (5)   Sales of items to be and in fact used in the production of
agricultural products. Sale of the following items shall be subject to the
following limitations:
         (a)   Sales of agricultural fertilizer to any person regularly
engaged, for profit, in the business of farming or ranching;
         (b)   Sales of agricultural fertilizer to any person engaged in the
business of applying such materials on a contract or custom basis to land owned
or leased and operated by persons regularly engaged, for profit, in the
business of farming or ranching. In addition to providing the vendor proof of
eligibility, as provided in 68 O.S. § 1358.1, the State Sales Tax Code, the
purchaser shall provide the name or names of such owner or lessee and operator,
and the location of the lands on which said materials are to be applied to each
such land;
         (c)   Sales of agricultural fertilizer, pharmaceuticals, and
biologicals to persons engaged in the business of applying such materials on a
contract or custom basis shall not be considered to be sales to contractors
under this division (D), and said sales shall not be considered to be taxable
sales within the meaning of the State Sales Tax Code. As used in this division
(D)(5)(c), AGRICULTURAL FERTILIZER, PHARMACEUTICALS, and BIOLOGICALS mean any
substance sold and used for soil enrichment or soil corrective purposes, or for
promoting the growth and productivity of plants or animals;
         (d)   Sales of agricultural seed or plants to any person regularly
engaged, for profit, in the business of farming or ranching. This division (D)
shall not be construed as exempting from sales tax seed which is packaged and
sold for use in noncommercial flower and vegetable gardens;
         (e)   1.   Sales of agricultural chemical pesticides to any person
regularly engaged, for profit in the business of farming or ranching. For the
purposes of this division (D)(5)(e), AGRICULTURAL CHEMICAL PESTICIDES shall
include any substance or mixture of substances intended for preventing,
destroying, repelling, or mitigating any insect, snail, slug, rodent, bird,
nematode, fungus, weed, or any other form of terrestrial or aquatic plant or
animal life, or virus, bacteria, or other microorganism, except viruses,
bacteria, or other microorganisms on or in living humans, or any substance or
mixture of substances intended for use as a plant regulator, defoliant, or
desiccant.
            2.   The exemption provided in this division (D)(5)(e) shall only
be granted and extended to the purchaser where the items are to be used and in
fact are used in the production of agricultural products.
         (f)   Sale of farm machinery, repair parts thereto or fuel, oil,
lubricants, and other substances used for operation and maintenance of the farm
machinery to be used directly on a farm or ranch in the production,
cultivation, planting, sowing, harvesting, processing, spraying, preservation,
or irrigation of any livestock, poultry, agricultural, or dairy products
produced from such lands. The exemption specified in this division (D)(5)(f)
shall apply to such farm machinery, repair parts or fuel, oil, lubricants, and
other substances used by persons engaged in the business of custom production,
cultivation, planting, sowing, harvesting, processing, spraying, preservation,
or irrigation of any livestock, poultry, agricultural, or dairy products for
farmers or ranchers. The exemption provided for herein shall not apply to motor
vehicles;
         (g)   Sales of supplies, machinery, and equipment to persons regularly
engaged in the business of raising evergreen trees for retail sale in which
such trees are cut down on the premises by the consumer purchasing such tree.
This exemption shall only be granted and extended when the items in fact are
used in the raising of such evergreen trees; and
         (h)   1.   Sales of materials, supplies, and equipment to an
agricultural permit holder or to any person with whom the permit holder has
contracted to construct facilities which are or which will be used directly in
the production of any livestock, including, but not limited to, facilities used
in the production and storage of feed for livestock owned by the permit holder.
Any person making purchases on behalf of the agricultural permit holder shall
certify, in writing, on the copy of the invoice or sales ticket to be retained
by the vendor that the purchases are made for and on behalf of such permit
holder and set out the name and permit number of such holder.
            2.   As used in this section:
               a.   AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS shall include horses; and
               b.   RANCHING or RANCH shall include the business, or facilities
for the business, of raising horses.
            3.   Exemptions for agriculture, and proof of eligibility are as
follows.
               a.   In order to qualify for any exemption authorized by 68 O.S.
§ 1358 of the State Sales Tax Code, at the time of sale, the person to whom the
sale is made shall be required to furnish the vendor proof of eligibility for
the exemption as required by this division (D)(5)(h)3.
               b.   All vendors shall honor the proof of eligibility for sales
tax exemption as authorized by this division (D)(5)(h)3. and sales to a person
providing such proof shall be exempt from the tax levied by this division (D)
(5)(h)3.
               c.   The agricultural exemption permit, the size and design of
which shall be prescribed by the State Tax Commission, shall constitute proof
of eligibility for sales tax exemptions. The permit shall be obtained by
listing personal property used in farming or ranching by the person with the
County Assessor each year as provided by law. If the Assessor determines that
the personal property is correctly listed and assessed for ad valorem taxation,
and the County Treasurer certifies whether the person has delinquent accounts
appearing on the personal property tax lien docket in the County Treasurer’s
office, the Assessor shall certify the assessment upon a form prescribed by the
State Tax Commission. One copy shall be retained by the Assessor, one copy
shall be forwarded to the State Tax Commission and one copy shall be given to
the person listing the personal property. Upon verification that the applicant
qualifies for the exemptions, and that the applicant has no delinquent accounts
appearing on the personal property tax lien docket in the office of the County
Treasurer, a permit shall be issued as prescribed by this division (D)(5)(h)3.
The permit shall be renewable every three years in the manner provided by this
section.
               d.   A person who does not otherwise qualify for a permit
pursuant to division (D)(5)(h)3.c. above, except as provided in division (D)(5)
(h)3.e. below, shall file with the State Tax Commission an application for an
agricultural exemption permit constituting proof of eligibility for the sales
tax exemptions, setting forth such information as the Tax Commission may
require. The application shall be certified by the applicant that the applicant
is engaged in custom farming operations or in the business of farming or
ranching. If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall be certified
by a legally constituted officer thereof.
               e.   Except as provided in this division (D)(5)(e), for a person
who is a resident of another state and who is engaged in custom farming
operations in the state, the person shall provide the vendor proof of
residency, the name, address, and telephone number of the person engaging the
custom farmer and certification on the face of the invoice, under the penalty
of perjury, that the property purchased shall be used in agricultural
production as proof of eligibility for the sales tax exemption. Any person who
is a resident of another state and who is engaged in custom farming operations
in the state and who owns property in the state, shall obtain proof of
eligibility as provided in division (D)(5)(h)3.c. or (D)(5)(h)3.d. above.
               f.   If an agricultural exemption permit holder purchases
tangible personal property from a vendor on a regular basis, the permit holder
may furnish the vendor proof of eligibility as provided for in division (D)(5)
(h)3.c. or (D)(5)(h)3.d. above, and the vendor may subsequently make sales of
tangible personal property to the permit holder without requiring proof of
eligibility for each subsequent sale. Provided, the permit holder shall notify
the vendor of all purchases which are not exempt from sales tax, and remit the
applicable amount of tax thereon. If the permit holder fails to notify the
vendor of purchases not exempt from sales tax, then sufficient grounds shall
exist for the State Tax Commission to cancel the agricultural exemption permit
of the permit holder who so failed to notify the vendor.
(Prior Code, § 7-210)
   (E)   There are hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied:
      (1)   Sales of goods, wares, merchandise, tangible personal property,
machinery, and equipment to a manufacturer for use in a manufacturing
operation. Goods, wares, merchandise, property, machinery, and equipment used
in a non-manufacturing activity or process shall not be eligible for the
exemption provided for in this division (E) by virtue of the activity or
process being performed in conjunction with or integrated into a manufacturing
operation;
      (2)   Ethyl alcohol, when sold and used for the purpose of blending same
with motor fuel on which motor fuel tax is levied;
      (3)   Sales of containers when sold to a person regularly engaged in the
business of reselling empty or filled containers, or when purchased for the
purpose of packaging raw products of farm, garden, or orchard for resale to the
consumer or processor. This exemption shall not apply to the sale of any
containers used more than once and which are ordinarily known as returnable
containers, except returnable soft drink bottles and the cartons, crates,
pallets, and containers used to transport returnable soft drink bottles. Each
and every transfer of title or possession of such returnable containers in the
state to any person who is not regularly engaged in the business of selling,
reselling, or otherwise transferring empty or filled containers shall be
taxable under this division (E). Additionally, this exemption shall not apply
to the sale of labels or other materials delivered along with items sold but
which are not necessary or absolutely essential to the sale of the sold
merchandise;
      (4)   Sales of or transfers of title to, or possession of any containers,
after June 30, 1987, used or to be used more than once and which are ordinarily
known as returnable containers and which do or will contain beverages, defined
by 37A O.S. § 1-103, or water for human consumption and the cartons, crates,
pallets, and containers used to transport such returnable containers;
      (5)   Sale of tangible personal property when sold by the manufacturer to
a person who transports it to a state other than the state for immediate, and
exclusive use in a state other than this state. Provided, no sales at a retail
outlet shall qualify for the exemption under this division (E)(5);
      (6)   Machinery, equipment, fuels, and chemicals or other materials
incorporated into and directly used or consumed in the process of treatment to
substantially reduce the volume or harmful properties of hazardous waste at
treatment facilities specifically permitted pursuant to the State Hazardous
Waste Management Act, being 27A O.S. §§ 2-7-101 et seq., and operated at the
place of waste generation, or facilities approved by the Department of
Environmental Quality for the cleanup of a site of contamination. The term
HAZARDOUS WASTE may include low-level radioactive waste for the purpose of this
division (E)(6);
      (7)   (a)   Sales of tangible personal property to a qualified
manufacturer or distributor to be consumed or incorporated in a new
manufacturing or distribution facility or to expand an existing manufacturing
or distribution facility. For purposes of this division (E)(7)(a), sales made
to a contractor or subcontractor that has previously entered into a contractual
relationship with a qualified manufacturer or distributor for construction or
expansion of a manufacturing or distribution facility shall be considered sales
made to a qualified manufacturer or distributor.
         (b)   For the purposes of this division (E)(7), QUALIFIED MANUFACTURER
OR DISTRIBUTOR means:
            1.   Any manufacturing enterprise whose total cost of construction
of a new or expanded facility exceeds the sum of $5,000,000, and in which at
least 100 new full-time-equivalent employees, as certified by the State
Employment Security Commission, are added and maintained for a period of at
least 36 months as a direct result of the new or expanded facility;
            2.   Any manufacturing enterprise whose total cost of construction
of a new or expanded facility exceeds the sum of $10,000,000, and the combined
cost of construction material, machinery, equipment, and other tangible
personal property exempt from sales tax under the provisions of this division
(E)(7)(b)2. exceeds the sum of $50,000,000 and in which at least 75 new full-
time-equivalent employees, as certified by the State Employment Security
Commission, are added and maintained for a period of at least 36 months as a
direct result of the new or expanded facility;
            3.   Any manufacturing enterprise whose total cost of construction
of an expanded facility exceeds the sum of $300,000,000, and in which the
manufacturer has and maintains an average employment level of at least 1,750
full-time-equivalent employees, as certified by the Employment Security
Commission; or
            4.   a.   Any enterprise primarily engaged in the general wholesale
distribution of groceries defined or classified in the North American Industry
Classification System (NAICS) manual under Industry Groups No. 4244 and 4245,
and which has at least 75% of its total sales to in-state customers or buyers,
and whose total cost of construction of a new or expanded facility exceeds the
sum of $40,000,000 with such construction commencing on or after July 1, 2005,
and before December 31, 2005, and which at least 50 new full-time-equivalent
employees, as certified by the State Employment Security Commission, are added
and maintained for a period of at least 36 months as a direct result of the new
or expanded facility.
               b.   For purposes of this division (E)(7)(b)4.b., the total cost
of construction shall include building and construction material and
engineering and architectural fees or charges directly associated with the
construction of a new or expanded facility. The total cost of construction
shall not include attorney’s fees. For purposes of division (E)(7)(b)3. above,
the total cost of construction shall also include the cost of qualified
depreciable property and labor services performed in the construction of an
expanded facility. The employment requirement of this division (E)(7)(b)4.b.
can be satisfied by the employment of a portion of the required number of new
full-time-equivalent employees at a manufacturing or distribution facility that
is related to or supported by the new or expanded manufacturing or distribution
facility as long as both facilities are owned by one person or business entity.
For purposes of this division (E)(7)(b)4.b., MANUFACTURING FACILITY shall mean
building and land improvements used in manufacturing as defined by the Standard
Industrial Classification Code, and shall also mean building and land
improvements used for the purpose of packing, repackaging, labeling, or
assembling for distribution to market, products at least 70% of which are made
in the state by the same company but at an off-site, in-state manufacturing or
distribution facility or facilities. It shall not include a retail outlet
unless the retail outlet is operated in conjunction with, and on the same site
or premises as, the manufacturing facility. Up to 10% of the square feet of a
manufacturing or distribution facility building may be devoted to office space
used to provide clerical support for the manufacturing operation. Such 10% may
be in a separate building as long as it is part of the same contiguous tract of
property on which the manufacturing or distribution facility is located. Only
sales of tangible personal property made after June 1, 1988, shall be eligible
for the exemption provided by this division (E)(7)(b)4.b. The exemption
authorized pursuant to division (E)(7)(b)4.a. above shall only become effective
when the governing body of the municipality in which the enterprise is located
approves a resolution expressing the municipality’s support for the
construction for such new or expanded facility. Upon approval by the
municipality, the municipality shall forward a copy of such resolution to the
State Tax Commission.
      (8)   Sales of tangible personal property purchased and used by a
licensed radio or television station in broadcasting. This exemption shall not
apply unless such machinery and equipment is used directly in the manufacturing
process, is necessary for the proper production of a broadcast signal or is
such that the failure of the machinery or equipment to operate would cause
broadcasting to cease. This exemption begins with the equipment used in
producing live programming or the electronic equipment directly behind the
satellite receiving dish or antenna, and ends with the transmission of the
broadcast signal from the broadcast antenna system. For purposes of this
division (E)(8), PROPER PRODUCTION shall include, but not be limited to,
machinery or equipment required by Federal Communications Commission rules and
regulations;
      (9)   Sales of tangible personal property purchased or used by a licensed
cable television operator in cablecasting. This exemption shall not apply
unless such machinery and equipment is used directly in the manufacturing
process, is necessary for the proper production of a cablecast signal, or is
such that the failure of the machinery or equipment to operate would cause
cablecasting to cease. This exemption begins with the equipment used in
producing local programming or the electronic equipment behind the satellite
receiving dish, microwave tower, or antenna, and ends with the transmission of
the signal from the cablecast head-end system. For purposes of this division
(E)(9), PROPER PRODUCTION shall include, but not be limited to, machinery or
equipment required by Federal Communications Commission rules and regulations;
      (10)   Sales of packaging materials for use in packing, shipping, or
delivering tangible personal property for sale when sold to a producer of
agricultural products. This exemption shall not apply to the sale of any
packaging material which is ordinarily known as a returnable container;
      (11)   Sales of any pattern used in the process of manufacturing iron,
steel, or other metal castings. The exemption provided by this division (E)(11)
shall be applicable irrespective of ownership of the pattern provided that such
pattern is used in the commercial production of metal castings;
      (12)   Deposits or other charges made and which are subsequently refunded
for returnable cartons, crates, pallets, and containers used to transport
cement and cement products;
      (13)   Beginning January 1, 1998, machinery, electricity, fuels,
explosives, and materials, excluding chemicals, used in the mining of coal in
the state; and
      (14)   Deposits, rent, or other charges made for returnable cartons,
crates, pallets, and containers used to transport mushrooms or mushroom
products from a farm for resale to the consumer or processor.
         (a)   For the refund of certain state and local sales taxes for
manufacturers.
            1.   In order to administer the exemption for sales to a qualified
manufacturer or distributor, there shall be made a sales tax refund for state
and local sales taxes paid by qualified manufacturers or distributors for
tangible personal property purchased to be consumed or incorporated in the
construction of a new manufacturing or distribution facility, or to expand an
existing manufacturing or distribution facility in the state from the account
created by this division (E)(14). Provided, no claim for a refund shall be
filed before July 1, 2006.
            2.   The State Tax Commission shall transfer each month from sales
tax collected the amount which the Commission estimates to be necessary to make
the sales tax refund provided by this division (E)(14) to an account designated
as the Commission determines.
            3.   Any refund shall be paid from the account prescribed by this
division (E)(14) at the time the claim for refund is approved by the Tax
Commission. The amount of the refund shall not exceed the total state and local
sales taxes paid together with accrued interest upon such total. The amount of
interest paid to a qualified manufacturer or distributor upon the principal
amount of any refund made to such manufacturer or distributor for purposes of
administering the exemption shall be determined according to the amount earned
as invested by the State Treasurer’s office. The interest rate shall accrue
upon the amount transferred to the account.
            4.   For purposes of this division (E)(14), state and local sales
taxes paid by a contractor or subcontractor for tangible personal property
purchased by that contractor or subcontractor to be consumed or incorporated in
the construction of a new or expanded manufacturing facility pursuant to a
contract with a qualified manufacturer or distributor shall, upon proper
showing, be refunded to the qualified manufacturer or distributor.
            5.   The qualified manufacturer or distributor shall file with the
Tax Commission the following documentation for any refund claimed:
               a.   Invoices indicating the amount of state and local sales tax
billed;
               b.   Affidavit of each vendor that state and local sales tax
billed has not been audited, rebated, or refunded to the qualified manufacturer
but rather the sales tax charged has been collected by the vendor and remitted
to the Tax Commission; and
               c.   All additional documentation required to be submitted
pursuant to rules promulgated by the Tax Commission.
            6.   In the event that state and local sales tax was paid by a
contractor or subcontractor, the qualified manufacturer or distributor shall
file with the Tax Commission all documentation required in division (E)(14)
(a)5. above, but in lieu of the affidavit of each vendor the qualified
manufacturer or distributor shall file, for any refund claimed, an affidavit
from the contractor or subcontractor stating that the sales tax refund of the
qualified manufacturer or distributor is based on state and local sales tax
paid by the contractor or subcontractor on tangible personal property purchased
to be consumed or incorporated in the construction of a new or expanded
business activity, and that the amount of state and local sales tax claimed was
paid to the vendor and no credit, refund, or rebate has been claimed by the
contractor or subcontractor.
            7.   Only sales of tangible personal property made after June 1,
1988, shall be eligible for the refund established by this division (E)(14).
            8.   The qualified manufacturer or distributor shall file, within
36 months of the date of the first purchase which is exempt from taxation, with
the Tax Commission a certification issued by the Employment Security Commission
in order to qualify for the refund authorized by this division (E)(14).
            9.   Notwithstanding the provisions of any state tax law, the
amount refunded under this division (E)(14) shall be assessed if the number of
full-time-equivalent employees drops below the number, at any time within 36
months of the date certification is issued by the State Employment Security
Commission.
         (b)   For the manufacturer exemption permit, the following shall
apply.
            1.   In order to qualify for the exemption, at the time of sale,
the person to whom the sale is made, provided the purchaser is a resident of
the state, shall be required to furnish the vendor proof of eligibility for the
exemption as required by this division (E)(14). All vendors shall honor the
proof of eligibility for sales tax exemption as authorized under this section,
and sales to a person providing such proof shall be exempt from the tax levied.
            2.   Each resident manufacturer wishing to claim the exemption
shall be required to secure from the State Tax Commission a manufacturer
exemption permit, the size and design of which shall be prescribed by the Tax
Commission. This permit shall constitute proof of eligibility for the
exemption. Each such manufacturer shall file with the Tax Commission an
application for an exemption permit, setting forth such information as the Tax
Commission may require. The application shall be signed by the owner of the
business or representative of the business entity and as a natural person, and,
in the case of a corporation, as a legally constituted officer thereof.
            3.   Each manufacturer exemption permit issued shall be valid for a
period of three years from the date of issuance. If a manufacturer applying for
a manufacturer exemption permit is already the holder of a manufacturer’s sales
tax permit issued at the time of initial application, the manufacturer
exemption permit shall be issued with an expiration date which corresponds with
the expiration date of the manufacturer’s sales tax permit. Thereafter, the Tax
Commission shall issue the exemption permits at the same time of issuance or
renewal of the manufacturer’s sales tax permit issued.
            4.   The Tax Commission shall honor all manufacturer’s limited
exemption certificates issued prior to the effective date of this act. However,
holders of such certificates shall apply for a manufacturer exemption permit
pursuant to the provisions of this section at the same time they apply for
issuance or renewal of a manufacturer’s sales tax permit.
(Prior Code, § 7-211)
   (F)   There are hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied in this
division (F):
      (1)   The transfer of tangible personal property, as follows:
         (a)   From one corporation to another corporation pursuant to a
reorganization. As used in this division (F)(1), the term REORGANIZATION means
a statutory merger or consolidation, or the acquisition by a corporation of
substantially all of the properties of another corporation when the
consideration is solely all or a part of the voting stock of the acquiring
corporation, or of its parent or subsidiary corporation;
         (b)   In connection with the winding up, dissolution, or liquidation
of a corporation only when there is a distribution in kind to the shareholders
of the property of such corporation;
         (c)   To a corporation for the purpose of organization of such
corporation where the former owners of the property transferred are immediately
after the transfer in control of the corporation, and the stock or securities
received by each is substantially in proportion to his interest in the property
prior to the transfer;
         (d)   To a partnership in the organization of such partnership if the
former owners of the property transferred are immediately after the transfer,
members of such partnership and the interest in the partnership, received by
each, is substantially in proportion to his or her interest in the property
prior to the transfer;
         (e)   From a partnership to the members thereof when made in kind in
the dissolution of such partnership;
         (f)   To a limited liability company in the organization of the
limited liability company if the former owners of the property transferred are,
immediately after the transfer, members of the limited liability company and
the interest in the limited liability company received by each is substantially
in proportion to the interest in the property prior to the transfer; and
         (g)   From a limited liability company to the members thereof when
made in kind in the dissolution of the limited liability company.
      (2)   Sale of an interest in tangible personal property to a partner or
other person who, after such sale, owns a joint interest in such tangible
personal property where the State Sales or Use Tax has previously been paid on
such tangible personal property.
(Prior Code, § 7-212) Penalty, see §
37.99
Statutory reference:
   Definitions, see 68 O.S. § 6001
   Exemptions, see 68 O.S. § 6003
   Levy of tax; interest, see 68 O.S. § 6002
   Report on transfer of legal ownership of aircraft; cancellation or
suspension of license, see 68 O.S. § 6004
§ 37.08 TAX DUE AND PAYABLE.
   The tax levied under this subchapter shall be due and payable at the time
and in the manner and form prescribed for payment of the state sales tax under
the sales tax law of the state.
(Prior Code, § 7-213)
§ 37.09 PAYMENT OF TAX; BRACKETS.
   (A)   The tax herein levied shall be paid to the tax collector at the time
and in the form and manner provided for payment of state sales tax under the
sales tax law of the state.
   (B)   The bracket system for the collection of the town sales tax by the tax
collector shall be as the same is hereafter adopted by the agreement of the
town and the tax collector, in the collection of both the town sales tax and
the state sales tax.
(Prior Code, § 7-214)
§ 37.10 TAX CONSTITUTES PRIOR CLAIM.
   Taxes, penalty, and interest due hereunder shall at all times constitute a
prior, superior, and paramount claim as against the claims of unsecured
creditors, and may be collected by suit as any other debt.
(Prior Code, § 7-215)
§ 37.11 VENDOR’S DUTY TO COLLECT TAX.
   (A)   The tax levied hereunder shall be paid by the consumer or user to the
vendor; and each and every vendor shall collect from the consumer or user the
full amount of the tax levied, or an amount equal as nearly as possible or
practicable to the average equivalent thereof.
   (B)   Vendors shall add the tax imposed hereunder, or the average equivalent
thereof, to the sales price or charge; and, when added, such tax shall
constitute a part of such price or charge, shall be a debt from the consumer or
user to the vendor until paid, and shall be recoverable at law in the same
manner as other debts.
   (C)   No vendor shall willfully or intentionally fail, neglect, or refuse to
collect the full amount of the tax levied; or willfully or intentionally fail,
neglect, or refuse to comply with the provisions of this subchapter; or remit
or rebate to a consumer or user, either directly or indirectly, and by
whatsoever means, all or any part of the tax herein levied; or make in any form
of advertising, verbally or otherwise, any statement which infers that he or
she is absorbing the tax, or paying the tax for the consumer or user by an
adjustment of prices or at a price including the tax, or in any manner
whatsoever.
(Prior Code, § 7-216)
Statutory reference:
   Vendor’s duty to collect tax, see 68 O.S. § 1361
§ 37.12 RETURNS AND REMITTANCES; DISCOUNTS.
   Returns and remittances of the tax herein levied and collected shall be made
to the tax collector at the time and in the manner, form, and amount as
prescribed for returns and remittances required by the state sales tax code;
and remittances of tax collected hereunder shall be subject to the same
discount as may be allowed by the code for collection of state sales taxes.
(Prior Code, § 7-217) Penalty, see §
37.99
§ 37.13 INTEREST AND PENALTIES; DELINQUENCY; DISCOUNT FORFEITURE.
   (A)   The statute 68 O.S. § 217 is adopted and made a part of this
subchapter.
   (B)   Interest and penalties at the rates and in amounts specified in the
state statute cited in division (A) above are hereby levied and shall be
applicable in cases of delinquency in reporting and paying the tax levied by
this subchapter.
   (C)   The failure or refusal of any taxpayer to make and transmit the
reports and remittances of tax in the time and manner required by this
subchapter shall cause such tax to be delinquent.
   (D)   If such delinquency continues for a period of five days, the taxpayer
shall forfeit his or her claim to any discount allowed under this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 7-218)
Statutory reference:
   Interest and penalties, see 68 O.S. § 217
§ 37.14 WAIVER OF INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   The interest or penalty, or any portion thereof, accruing by reason of
a taxpayer’s failure to pay the town tax herein levied may be waived or
remitted in the same manner as provided for the waiver or remittance as applied
in administration of the state sales tax provided in 68 O.S. § 220.
   (B)   To accomplish the purposes of this section, the applicable provisions
of 68 O.S. § 220 are adopted by reference and made a part of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 7-219) Penalty, see §
37.99
Statutory reference:
   Waiver or remission of interest or penalties, see 68 O.S. § 220
§ 37.15 ERRONEOUS PAYMENTS; CLAIM FOR REFUND.
   (A)   Refund or erroneous payment of the town sales tax herein levied may be
made to any taxpayer making such erroneous payment in the same manner and
procedure, and under the same limitations of time, as provided for
administration of the state sales tax as set forth in 68 O.S. § 227.
   (B)   To accomplish the purposes of this section, the applicable provisions
of 68 O.S. § 227 are adopted by reference and made a part of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 7-220)
Statutory reference:
   Erroneous payments; claims for refund; demand for hearing, see 68 O.S. § 227
§ 37.16 FAILURE TO FILE; FRAUDULENT RETURNS; PENALTIES.
   (A)   No person shall:
      (1)   Intentionally fail or refuse to make tax reports and remittances as
required under this subchapter; or
      (2)   Intentionally make false and fraudulent tax reports for the purpose
of avoiding or escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof due under this
subchapter.
   (B)   Any person required to collect and remit sales tax pursuant to the
state sales tax code or the town code, and engaging in any of the callings,
trades, avocations, professions, businesses, or occupations for which a license
is required by the town, and applying for such license, must submit proof as a
condition precedent to issuing such license of a valid sales tax permit number
issued by the state.
   (C)   Any license issued by the town to any person engaging in any of the
callings, trades, avocations, businesses, professions, or occupations for which
a license is required by the town code may be suspended or revoked for failure
to maintain a lawful sales tax license or collect and remit sales tax if and as
required by the state sales tax code or the town code.
   (D)   In addition to all civil penalties provided by this subchapter, any
violation of this section shall subject the offending taxpayer to the penalty
set forth in §
10.99. Each day of such violation shall be considered a separate offense and
charged separately.
(Prior Code, § 7-221) Penalty, see §
37.99
§ 37.17 TAX RECORDS CONFIDENTIAL.
   The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning
the administration of the town sales tax is legislatively recognized and
declared; and to protect the same provisions of 68 O.S. § 205 of the state
sales tax code, and all subsections thereof, are hereby adopted by reference
and made fully effective and applicable to administration of the town sales tax
as if here set forth in full.
(Prior Code, § 7-222)
Statutory reference:
   Records and files of Commission confidential and privileged; exceptions;
annual report, see 68 O.S. § 205
§ 37.18 PROVISIONS CUMULATIVE.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall be cumulative and in addition to any
and all other taxing provisions of town ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 7-223)
§ 37.19 AMENDMENTS TO CHAPTER.
   The Board of Trustees, by ordinance duly enacted, is authorized to make such
administrative and technical changes, or additions, in the method and manner of
administration and enforcing this chapter as may be necessary or proper for
efficiency and fairness, except that the rate of the tax herein provided shall
not be changed without approval of the qualified electors of the town as
provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 7-224)
USE TAX
§ 37.30 EXCISE TAX ON STORAGE, USE, OR OTHER CONSUMPTION OF TANGIBLE PROPERTY
LEVIED.
   There is hereby levied and there shall be paid by every person storing,
using, or otherwise consuming within the town tangible, personal property
purchased or brought into the municipality, an excise tax on the storage, use,
or otherwise consuming within the municipality of such property at the rate of
4% of the purchase price of such property. Such tax shall be paid by every
person storing, using, or otherwise consuming, within the municipality,
tangible, personal property purchased or brought into the municipality. The
additional tax levied hereunder shall be paid at the time of importation or
storage of the property within the municipality, and shall be assessed to only
property purchased outside of the state; provided, that the tax levied herein
shall not be levied against tangible, personal property intended solely for use
outside the municipality, but which is stored in the municipality pending
shipment outside the municipality, or which is temporarily retained in the
municipality for the purpose of fabrication, repair, testing, alteration,
maintenance, or other service. Any person liable for payment of the use tax
authorized herein may deduct from such use tax any local or municipal sales tax
previously paid on such goods or services; provided, that the amount deducted
shall not exceed the amount that would have been due if the taxes imposed by
the municipality had been levied on the sale of such goods or services.
(Ord. Chapter 5, 7-501-7-522, passed 10-12-2020)
§ 37.31 EXEMPTIONS.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply:
   (A)   In respect to the use of an article of tangible, personal property
brought into the municipality by a nonresident individual visiting in the
municipality for his or her personal use or enjoyment while within the
municipality;
   (B)   In respect to the use of tangible, personal property purchased for re-
sale before being used;
   (C)   In respect to the use of any article of tangible, personal property on
which a tax equal to, or in excess of, that levied by both the State Use Tax
Code and the town use tax ordinance has been paid by the person using such
tangible, personal property in the municipality, whether such tax was levied
under the laws of the state, or some other state or municipality of the United
States. If any article of tangible, personal property has already been
subjected to a tax by the state, or any other state or municipality in respect
to its sale or use, in an amount less than the tax imposed by both the State
Use Tax Code and the town use tax ordinance, the provisions of this section
shall also apply to it by a rate measured by the difference only between the
rate provided by both the State Use Tax Code and the town use tax ordinance,
and the rate by which the previous tax upon the sale or use was computed;
provided, that no credit shall be given for taxes paid in another state or
municipality, if that state or municipality does not grant like credit for
taxes paid in the state and the municipality;
   (D)   In respect to the use of machinery and equipment purchased and used by
persons establishing new manufacturing or processing plants in the
municipality, and machinery and equipment purchased and used by persons in the
operation of manufacturing plants already established in the machinery and
equipment is incorporated into, and is directly used in, the process of
manufacturing property subject to the taxation under the Sales Tax Code of the
town. The term MANUFACTURING PLANTS shall mean those establishments primarily
engaged in manufacturing or processing operations, and generally recognized as
such;
   (E)   In respect to the use of tangible, personal property now specifically
exempted from taxation under the sales tax code of the town;
   (F)   In respect to the use of any article of tangible, personal property
brought into the municipality by an individual with the intent to become a
resident of the municipality where such personal property is for such
individual’s personal use or enjoyment;
   (G)   In respect to the use of any article of tangible personal property
used, or to be used, by commercial airlines or railroads; or
   (H)   In respect to livestock purchased outside the state and brought into
the municipality for feeding or breeding purposes, and which is later re-sold.
(Ord. Chapter 5, 7-501-7-522, passed 10-12-2020)
§ 37.32 TIME DUE; RETURNS; PAYMENT.
   The tax levied by this subchapter is due and payable at the time and in the
manner and form prescribed for payment of the State Use Tax under the State Use
Tax Code.
(Ord. Chapter 5, 7-501-7-522, passed 10-12-2020)
§ 37.33 TAX CONSTITUTES DEBT.
   Such taxes, penalty, or interest due hereunder shall at all times constitute
a prior, superior, and paramount claim as against the claims of unsecured
creditors, and may be collected by suit as with any other debt.
(Ord. Chapter 5, 7-501-7-522, passed 10-12-2020)
§ 37.34 COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILER OR VENDOR.
   Every retailer or vendor maintaining places of business both within and
without the state, and making sales of tangible, personal property from a place
of business outside the state for use in the town, shall, at the time of making
such sales, collect the use tax levied by this subchapter from the purchaser
and give to the purchaser a receipt therefor in the manner and form prescribed
by the State Tax Commission, if said Tax Commission shall, by regulation,
require such receipt. Each retailer or vendor shall list with said Tax
Commission the name and address of all his or her agents operating in the
municipality and location of any and all distribution or sales houses or
offices, or other places of business in the municipality.
(Ord. Chapter 5, 7-501-7-522, passed 10-12-2020)
§ 37.35 COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILER, VENDOR; NOT MAINTAINING PLACE OF
BUSINESS; PERMITS.
   The State Tax Commission may, at its discretion, upon application, authorize
the collection of the use tax herein levied by any retailer or vendor not
maintaining a place of business within the state, but who makes sales of
tangible personal property for use in the municipality, and by the out-of-state
place of business of any retailer or vendor maintaining places of business both
within and without the state and making sales of tangible, personal property at
such out-of-state place of business for use in the municipality. Such retailer
or vendor may be issued, without charge, a permit to collect such taxes, by
said Tax Commission in such manner and subject to such regulations and
agreements as it shall prescribe. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of
such retailer or vendor to collect the use tax upon all tangible, personal
property sold to his or her knowledge for use within the municipality. Such
authority and permit may be canceled when, at any time, said Tax Commission
considers that such use tax can more effectively be collected from the person
using such property in the municipality; provided, however, that in all
instances where such sales are made or completed by delivery to the purchaser
within the municipality by the retailer or vendor in such retailer’s or
vendor’s vehicle, whether owned or leased (not by common carrier), such sales
or transactions shall continue to be subject to applicable municipal sales tax
at the point of delivery, and the tax shall be collected and reported under the
taxpayer’s sales tax permit number accordingly.
(Ord. Chapter 5, 7-501-7-522, passed 10-12-2020)
§ 37.36 REVOKING PERMITS.
   Whenever any retailer or vendor not maintaining a place of business in the
state, or both within and without the state, authorized to collect the use tax
herein levied, fails to comply with any of the provisions of this subchapter or
the State Use Tax Code, or any order, rules, or regulations of the State Tax
Commission, said Tax Commission may, upon notice and hearing as provided for in
68 O.S. § 1408, by order, revoke the use tax permit, if any, issued to such
retailer or vendor, and if any such retailer or vendor is a corporation
authorized to do business in the state may, after the notice and hearing above
provided, cancel said corporation’s license to do business in the state, and
shall issue a new license only when such corporation has complied with the
obligations under this subchapter, the State Use Tax Code, or any order, rules,
or regulations of the State Tax Commission.
(Ord. Chapter 5, 7-501-7-522, passed 10-12-2020)
§ 37.37 REMUNERATIVE DEDUCTIONS ALLOWED; VENDORS OR RETAILERS OF OTHER STATES.
   Returns and remittances of the use tax herein levied and collected shall be
made to the State Tax Commission at the time and in the manner, form, and
amount prescribed for returns and remittances required by the State Use Tax
Code; remittances of the use taxes collected hereunder shall be subject to the
same discount as may be allowed by said code for the collection of State Use
Taxes.
(Ord. Chapter 5, 7-501-7-522, passed 10-12-2020)
§ 37.38 INTERESTS AND PENALTIES; DELINQUENCY.
   The statute 68 O.S. § 217 is hereby adopted and made a part of this
subchapter, and interest and penalties at the rates and in the amounts as
therein specified are hereby levied and shall be applicable in cases of
delinquency in reporting and paying the use tax levied by this subchapter;
provided, that the failure or refusal of any retailer or vendor to make and
transmit the reports and remittances of the use tax in the time and manner
required by this subchapter shall cause such tax to be delinquent. In addition,
if such delinquency continues for a period of five days, the retailer or vendor
shall forfeit his or her claim to any discount allowed under this subchapter.
(Ord. Chapter 5, 7-501-7-522, passed 10-12-2020)
§ 37.39 WAIVER OF INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
   The interest or penalty, or any portion thereof, accruing by reason of a
retailer’s or vendor’s failure to pay the use tax herein levied may be waived
or remitted in the same manner as provided for said waiver or remittance as
applied in the administration of the State Use Tax provided in 68 O.S. § 220;
to accomplish the purposes of this section, the applicable provisions of said
68 O.S. § 220 are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this
subchapter.
(Ord. Chapter 5, 7-501-7-522, passed 10-12-2020)
§ 37.40 ERRONEOUS PAYMENTS; CLAIM FOR REFUND.
   Refund of erroneous payment of the municipal use tax herein levied may be
made to any taxpayer making such erroneous payment in the same manner and
procedure, and under the same limitations of time provided for administration
of the State Use Tax as set forth in 68 O.S. § 227; to accomplish the purpose
of this section, the applicable provisions of said 68 O.S. § 227 are hereby
adopted by reference and made a part of this subchapter.
(Ord. Chapter 5, 7-501-7-522, passed 10-12-2020)
§ 37.41 RECORDS CONFIDENTIAL.
   The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning
the administration of the municipal use tax is legislatively recognized and
declared, and to protect the same, the provisions of 68 O.S. § 205, of the
State Use Tax Code, being 68 O.S. §§ 1401 et seq., and each section thereof, is
hereby adopted by reference and made fully effective and applicable to
administration of the municipal use tax as if herein set forth in full.
(Ord. Chapter 5, 7-501-7-522, passed 10-12-2020)
§ 37.42 DEFINITIONS.
   The definitions of words, terms, and phrases contained in the State Use Tax
Code, 68 O.S. § 1401, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this
subchapter; in addition thereto, the following words and terms shall be defined
as follows.
   TAX COLLECTOR. The department of the municipality or the official agency of
the state, duly designated according to law or contract authorized by law, to
administer the collection of the use tax herein levied.
   TOWN AND MUNICIPALITY. The Town of Bokchito, Oklahoma.
   TRANSACTION. This term shall mean sale.
(Ord. Chapter 5, 7-501-7-522, passed 10-12-2020)
§ 37.43 CLASSIFICATIONS OF TAXPAYERS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the classification of taxpayers
hereunder shall be as prescribed by state law for purposes of the State Use Tax
Code.
(Ord. Chapter 5, 7-501-7-522, passed 10-12-2020)
§ 37.44 SUBSISTING STATE PERMITS.
   All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the State Tax
Commission pursuant to the State Use Tax Code are, for the purpose of this
subchapter, hereby ratified, confirmed, and adopted in lieu of any requirement
for an additional municipal permit for the same purpose.
(Ord. Chapter 5, 7-501-7-522, passed 10-12-2020)
§ 37.45 PURPOSE OF REVENUES.
   It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this subchapter to provide
revenues for the support of the functions of the municipal government of the
town, and any and all revenues derived hereunder may be expended by the Town
Board of Trustees for any purpose for which funds may be lawfully expended and
authorized.
(Ord. Chapter 5, 7-501-7-522, passed 10-12-2020)
§ 37.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no
specific penalty is prescribed, shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Any person who wrongfully or erroneously certifies that
purchases are for any of what is listed in §
37.07(B) or agencies of the state or who other wise violates this section shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined an
amount equal to double the amount of the sales tax involved or incarcerated for
not more than 60 days or both.
(Prior Code, § 7-208)
      (2)   Any person who wrongfully or erroneously certifies that purchases
are for an agricultural permit holder or who otherwise violates §
37.07(D) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall
be punishable by a fine of an amount equal to double the amount of sales tax
involved, or imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 60 days, or by
both such fine and imprisonment.
      (3)   A purchaser who uses an agricultural exemption permit or provides
proof of eligibility pursuant to §
37.07(D)(5)(e) to purchase, exempt from sales tax, items not authorized for
exemption shall be subject to a penalty in the amount of $500.
(Prior Code, § 7-210)
   (D)   (1)   In addition to all civil penalties provided by §§
37.30 through
37.45, the willful failure or refusal of any taxpayer to make reports and
remittances herein required, or the making of any false and fraudulent report
for the purpose of avoiding or escaping payment of any use tax, or portion
thereof, rightfully due under §§
37.30 through
37.45, shall be an offense, and upon conviction thereof the offending taxpayer
shall be punished by a fine of not more than $200. Each day of noncompliance
with §§
37.30 through
37.45 shall constitute a separate offense.
      (2)   Any violation of §§
37.30 through
37.45 shall be liable for a fine not to exceed $200 per day, or the maximum
legal limit.
(Ord. Chapter 5, 7-501-7-522, passed 10-12-2020)
CHAPTER 38: GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE POLICIES
Section
General Provisions
   
38.01   National Incident Management System
Town Records
   
38.15   Appointment of official custodians
   
38.16   Designation of additional record custodians
   
38.17   Duties of custodians
   
38.18   Request to be directed to custodians
   
38.19   Procedures regarding both inspection and copying
   
38.20   Procedures regarding inspection of open public records
   
38.21   Procedures regarding copies of open public records
   
38.22   Fees
Cross-reference:
   Emergency management, see §§
35.01 through
35.03
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 38.01 NATIONAL INCIDENT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM.
   (A)   The NIMS standardized procedures for managing personnel,
communications, facilities, and resources will improve the town’s ability to
utilize federal funding to enhance local and state agency readiness, maintain
first responder safety, and streamline incident management processes.
   (B)   The Incident Command System components of NIMS are already an integral
part of various incident management activities throughout the town, including
current emergency management training programs.
   (C)   The National Incident Management System (NIMS) is hereby established
as the standard for incident management in the town.
(Res. 208, passed 8-14-2006)
TOWN RECORDS
§ 38.15 APPOINTMENT OF OFFICIAL CUSTODIANS.
   (A)   The following town official is hereby appointed as official custodian
for purposes of the State Open Records Act, being 51 O.S. §§ 24A.1 et seq., and
is charged with responsibility for compliance with the Act with respect to the
following listed public records: Town Clerk/Treasurer.
   (B)   All public records kept and maintained in the Town Clerk/Treasurer’s
office and all other public records not provided for elsewhere in this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 2-301)
Statutory reference:
   Public policy; purpose of act, see 51 O.S. § 24A.2
   Similar provisions, see 51 O.S. § 24A.1
§ 38.16 DESIGNATION OF ADDITIONAL RECORD CUSTODIANS.
   (A)   Each of the official custodians appointed in §
38.15 is hereby authorized to designate any subordinate officers or employees
to serve as record custodian. The record custodians shall have such duties and
powers as are set out in the State Open Records Act, being 51 O.S. §§ 24A.1 et
seq.
   (B)   Whenever an official custodian shall appoint another person as a
record custodian, he or she shall notify the Town Clerk/Treasurer of such
designation, and the Town Clerk/Treasurer shall maintain a register of all such
designations.
(Prior Code, § 2-302)
§ 38.17 DUTIES OF CUSTODIANS.
   All town officials and employees appointed or designated under this
subchapter shall:
   (A)   Protect public records from damage and disorganization;
   (B)   Prevent excessive disruption of the essential functions of the town;
   (C)   Provide assistance and information upon request;
   (D)   Ensure efficient and timely action and response to all applications
for inspection of public records; and
   (E)   Shall carry out the procedures adopted by the town for inspecting and
copying open public records.
(Prior Code, § 2-303)
§ 38.18 REQUEST TO BE DIRECTED TO CUSTODIANS.
   (A)   All members of the public, in seeking access to, or copies of, a
public record in accordance with the provisions of the State Open Records Act,
being 51 O.S. §§ 24A.1 et seq., shall address their requests to the custodian
charged with responsibility for the maintenance of the record sought to be
inspected or copied.
   (B)   Whenever any town official or employee appointed or designated as a
custodian under this subchapter is presented with a request for access to, or
copy of, a public record which record the custodian does not have in his or her
possession and which he or she has not been give responsibility to keep and
maintain, the custodian shall so advise the person requesting the record. The
person making the request shall be informed as to which custodian the request
should be addressed to, if such is known by the custodian receiving the
request.
(Prior Code, § 2-304)
§ 38.19 PROCEDURES REGARDING BOTH INSPECTION AND COPYING.
   The following procedures are hereby adopted and shall be applied by each
official custodian and record custodian.
   (A)   Consistent with the policy, duties, and procedures established by the
State Open Records Act, being 51 O.S. §§ 24A.1 et seq., record custodians shall
provide full access and assistance in a timely and efficient manner to persons
who request access to open public records.
   (B)   Record custodians shall protect the integrity and organization of
public records with respect to the manner in which such records are inspected
and copied.
   (C)   Record custodians may prevent excessive disruptions of essential
functions and provide the record at the earliest possible time.
   (D)   All inspections and copying of open public records shall be performed
by, or under the supervision of, the record custodian responsible for such
records.
   (E)   All persons requesting the inspection of, or a copy of, open public
records shall make such request in writing prior to the request being honored,
except that no form shall be required for requests made for records which have
been reproduced for free public distribution.
   (F)   All record inspection and copying forms are to be completed by the
person requesting the record. The record custodian may demand reasonable
identification of any person requesting a record.
   (G)   Any fees for record inspection or for copies are due at the time the
records, or copies thereof, are provided to the requester, unless the record
custodian has demanded that prepayment of all or part of such fees be made.
Fees are to be paid to the record custodian or Town Clerk/Treasurer.
   (H)   The record custodian or Town Clerk/Treasurer shall demand full or
partial prepayment of fees whenever the estimate for such fees exceeds the
amount set out in §
38.22.
   (I)   No record search or copying fee shall be assessed against officers or
employees of the town who make requests which are reasonably necessary to the
performance of their official duties.
   (J)   Hours for making requests for inspection or copying shall be all
regular working hours for each day the office maintains regular office hours.
   (K)   Removal of open public records from the office where kept and
maintained, for purposes of inspection or the making of copies, shall not be
permitted.
   (L)   The above procedures, as well as any other inspection and copying
procedures, shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the office of the record
custodian.
(Prior Code, § 2-305)
§ 38.20 PROCEDURES REGARDING INSPECTION OF OPEN PUBLIC RECORDS.
   The following procedures are hereby adopted and shall be applied by every
official custodian and record custodian.
   (A)   Record custodians shall handle all inspection requests in accordance
with their duties to protect and preserve public records and to assist persons
requesting inspection of open public records.
   (B)   All request forms must be completed by the party requesting the
record. In all cases the party so requesting must sign his or her individual
name to the form. Written requests shall be made on the form provided by the
record custodian and presented to the record custodian.
   (C)   A written request is sufficient if it reasonably describes the record
sought. In instances where the requester cannot provide sufficient information
to identify a record, the custodian shall assist in making such identification.
   (D)   The record custodian shall, upon making a denial of an inspection
request, forward a copy of the denial to the Town Clerk/Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 2-306)
§ 38.21 PROCEDURES REGARDING COPIES OF OPEN PUBLIC RECORDS.
   The following procedures apply regarding copies of records.
   (A)   Record custodians shall handle all copy requests in accordance with
their duties to protect and preserve public records and to assist persons
requesting copies of open public records.
   (B)   All request forms must be completed by the party requesting the
copies. In all cases the party so requesting must sign his or her individual
name to the form. Written requests shall be made on the form provided by the
record custodian.
   (C)   Mechanical reproduction of a record shall not be undertaken when it is
the judgment of the record custodian that any available means of mechanically
reproducing the subject record is likely to cause damage to such records.
   (D)   No copy fee shall be assessed when multiple copies of the record
requested have been prepared for free public distribution, or when the record
custodian determines that the cost of charging and handling the fee exceeds the
cost of providing a copy without charge.
(Prior Code, § 2-307)
§ 38.22 FEES.
   (A)   Where a request has been made for the inspection of an open public
record, no fee shall be charged.
   (B)   A fee per page, as set by the Board of Trustees by motion or
resolution, shall be charged for photocopying an open public record, such fee
to cover the cost of labor, materials, and equipment.
   (C)   For copying any open public record which cannot be reproduced by
photocopying, such as a computer printout or a blueprint, the requester shall
be charged the actual cost to the town, including the cost of labor, materials,
and equipment.
   (D)   A search fee shall be charged a requester who is using the record
solely for a commercial purpose. Such fee shall be the actual cost to the town
of producing the record, including the cost of labor, materials, and equipment.
   (E)   A record custodian may demand prepayment of a fee whenever the
estimated amount exceeds $20. The prepayment amount shall be an estimate of the
cost of copying, mechanical reproduction, or searching for the record. Any
overage or underage in the prepayment amount shall be settled prior to
producing the requested record or delivering the copy or mechanical
reproduction of the record.
(Prior Code, § 2-308)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   UTILITIES
      
51.   SEWAGE
CHAPTER 50: UTILITIES
Section
   
50.01   Lease of utilities to authority
   
50.02   Authority rules adopted by reference
§ 50.01 LEASE OF UTILITIES TO AUTHORITY.
   The town hereby consents and agrees to the lease of the town’s water,
sanitary sewerage, and refuse systems and facilities, and all future additions
thereto, to the Town Public Utilities Authority as authorized by statute, to be
effective at the time and upon the terms and conditions specified in a certain
lease prepared under the direction of the Town Board of Trustees and filed in
the office of the Town Clerk/Treasurer on this date. The Mayor of the town
hereby is authorized and directed, on behalf of the town, to execute and
deliver the lease of the Town Public Utilities Authority.
(Prior Code, § 17-101)
§ 50.02 AUTHORITY RULES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   Rules, regulations, and policies adopted by the Town Public Utilities
Authority are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference, applicable
as if set out in full herein. A full copy of the regulations is kept in the
office of the Clerk-Treasurer for public use, inspection, and examination. Any
violation of the rules and regulations of the Authority shall be punishable as
provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 17-102)
CHAPTER 51: SEWAGE
Section
Toilet Facilities
   
51.01   Definitions
   
51.02   Toilet facilities required
   
51.03   Procedure cumulative
   
51.04   Violations
 
   
51.99   Penalty
TOILET FACILITIES
§ 51.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   HUMAN EXCREMENT. The bowel and kidney discharge of human beings.
   SANITARY PIT PRIVY. A privy that is built, rebuilt, or constructed so as to
conform with the specifications approved by the State Health Department.
   SANITARY WATER CLOSET. The flush type toilet which is connected with a
sanitary sewer line of such capacity and construction as to carry away the
contents at all times.
(Prior Code, § 8-411)
§ 51.02 TOILET FACILITIES REQUIRED.
   (A)   Every owner of a residence or other building in which humans reside,
are employed, or congregate within the town shall install, equip, and maintain
adequate sanitary facilities for the disposal of human excrement by use of a
sanitary water closet or a sanitary pit privy. The closets and toilets required
shall be of the sanitary water closet type when located within 200 feet of a
sanitary sewer and accessible thereto, and of the sanitary water closet type
notwithstanding a greater distance from a sanitary sewer or the water closet
type emptying into a septic tank system or the pit privy type. A septic tank
system or a pit privy may be used in such cases only if it meets the standard
of, and is approved by, the State Health Department.
   (B)   All human excrement disposed of within the town shall be disposed of
by depositing it in closets and privies of the type provided for in this
section. It is unlawful for any owner of property within the town to permit the
disposal of human excrement thereon in any other manner or for any person the
dispose of human excrement within the town in any other manner.
   (C)   All privies shall be kept clean and sanitary at all times, and the
covers of the seats of privies shall be kept closed at all times when the
privies are not being used. No wash water, kitchen slop, or anything other than
human excrement and toilet paper shall be emptied into a privy. No excrement
form any person suffering from typhoid fever, dysentery, or other serious bowel
disease shall be deposited in any sanitary pit privy or sanitary water closet
until it is disinfected in such a manner as may be prescribed by the Health
Department.
   (D)   All facilities for the disposal of human excrement in a manner
different from that required by this section and all privies and closet so
constructed, situated, or maintained as to endanger the public health are
declared to be public nuisances, and may be dealt with and abated as such. Any
person maintaining any such nuisance is guilty of an offense, and each day upon
which any such nuisance continues is a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 8-411) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.03 PROCEDURE CUMULATIVE.
   The various procedures for abating nuisances prescribed by this subchapter
and by other provision of law and ordinance shall be cumulative on to any other
penalties or procedures authorized.
(Prior Code, § 8-412)
§ 51.04 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   County Health Department designated to enforce state health
ordinances. Anywhere in this subchapter where the word or words HEALTH OFFICER
are used, it shall be construed to mean the Director of the County Health
Department, or his or her duly designated representative. It is the intent and
purpose of the Mayor and Town Board of Trustees to delegate the enforcement of
the health ordinances of the town as set out in this section, and any such
decisions rendered under this section shall be subject to review by the
governing board upon an appeal for an offender.
   (B)   Obstructing the Health Officer. It is unlawful for any person to
willfully obstruct or interfere with any Health Officer or physician charged
with the enforcement of the health laws of the town.
   (C)   Quarantine; violations. It is unlawful for any person to willfully
violate or refuse or omit to comply with any lawful order, direction,
prohibition, rule, or regulation of the Board of Health, or any officer charged
with enforcement of such order, direction, prohibition, rule, or regulation.
(Prior Code, § 8-413) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of §§
51.01 through
51.04 for which a specific penalty is not provided, or any law or code adopted
by reference in §§
51.01 through
51.04, is guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished.
In addition thereto, such person may be enjoined from continuing such
violations.
   (B)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any of the provisions of
§§
51.01 through
51.04, or shall allow the premises occupied to become unsanitary, or who shall
in any manner violate any of the provisions of §§
51.01 through
51.04, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be
fined as provided in this code.
(Prior Code, § 8-414)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
72.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
73.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
      
74.   PEDESTRIANS
      
75.   TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
      
76.   EQUIPMENT
      
77.   ACCIDENTS
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   Citation
   
70.02   Definitions
   
70.03   Security verification form
   
70.04   Vehicle owner, parent not to authorize violation of law
   
70.05   Adoption of state vehicle laws
   
70.06   Jurisdiction
Enforcement
   
70.20   Authority of police and fire officials
   
70.21   Authority to direct traffic
   
70.22   Emergency, experimental regulations
   
70.23   Obedience to police officers required
   
70.24   Applicability to public employees
   
70.25   Authorized emergency vehicles
   
70.26   Persons working on streets exempted
   
70.27   Use of street restricted
   
70.28   Riding animals, animal-drawn vehicles
Impoundment
   
70.40   Purpose and effect
   
70.41   Police granted authority to impound vehicles
   
70.42   Disabled vehicles
   
70.43   Vehicle constitutes traffic hazard
   
70.44   Illegal trespass by vehicle
   
70.45   Vehicles parked in prohibited zone
   
70.46   Vehicles parked in intersection
   
70.47   Stolen vehicles recovery by police
   
70.48   Arrest, detention of driver of vehicle
   
70.49   Unlicensed vehicles
   
70.50   Place of impoundment
   
70.51   Duration of impoundment
Certain Vehicles Prohibited
   
70.65   Vehicles injurious to streets; metal tires prohibited
   
70.66   Obstructive, dangerous vehicles; covering of loads
 
   
70.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 CITATION.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the town’s traffic code.
(Prior Code, § 15-101)
§ 70.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   ALLEY. Any narrow public passageway or street ordinarily located in the
interior portion of platted blocks, having no legal or official name other than
ALLEY, as herein defined, and ordinarily open to traffic and used for service
or delivery purposes to the rear of stores, dwellings, or buildings.
   ARTERIAL STREET. Any U.S. or state numbered route, controlled-access
highway, or other major radial or circumferential street or highway designated
by local authorities within their respective jurisdictions as part of a major
arterial system of streets or highways.
   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE. A vehicle of the Fire Department, Police
Department, or other law enforcement agencies, state and national, ambulances,
and such other emergency vehicle of municipal departments or public service
corporations as are authorized by the Chief of Police, and all of which are
equipped with sirens and with red lights displayed openly on the front when
engaged in emergency runs.
   BICYCLE. Every device propelled by human power upon which any person may
ride, having two tandem wheels.
   BOULEVARD OR THROUGH STREET. Any street or highway or portion thereof
designated by ordinances of the town which require vehicles to come to a full
and complete stop before entering such street or highway from intersecting
streets or highways.
   BUS. Every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than ten passengers and
used for the transportation of persons, and every motor vehicle, other than a
taxicab, designed and used for the transportation of persons for compensation.
   BUS LOADING ZONE. A place adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use
of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers.
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a highway when,
within any 600 feet along such highway, there are buildings in use for business
or industrial purposes, including, but not limited to, hotels, banks, office
buildings, railroad stations, or public buildings which occupy at least 300
feet of frontage on one side or 300 feet collectively on both sides of the
highway.
   COMMERCIAL CHAUFFEUR AND CHAUFFEUR.
      (1)   COMMERCIAL CHAUFFEUR. Every person who operates a motor vehicle
while in use as a common carrier of persons or property.
      (2)   CHAUFFEUR. Every person who is employed by another for the
principal purpose of operating a motor vehicle and every person who operates a
motor vehicle of one ton or more rated capacity that is required by law to have
a commercial tag attached thereto, and every person who operates a school bus
transporting school children to and from school.
   COMMERCIAL VEHICLES. Vehicles designed primarily for the transportation of
persons or property for hire.
   CROSSWALK. The part of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the
roadway measured from the curbs, or in the absence of curbs from the edges of
the traversable roadway. Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or
elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other
markings on the surface.
   CURB LOADING ZONES. A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive
use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers, freight, or
materials.
   CURBS. The edge of a roadway marked or understood as such.
   DAYTIME. One-half hour before sunrise until one-half hour after sunset.
NIGHTTIME means any other time.
   DOUBLE PARK. The standing or stopping of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
on the roadway.
   DRIVER. Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
   EMERGENCY. A condition suddenly created, requiring immediate action for the
preservation of public peace, health, or safety, and among other things
particularly means any fire, unusual storm, death, riot, or unusual traffic
condition.
   EXPLOSIVES. Any chemical compound, mixture, or device, including FIREWORKS,
the primary or common purpose of which is to function by explosion, for
example, with substantially instantaneous release of gas and heat, unless such
compound, mixture, or device is otherwise specifically classified by the
Interstate Commerce Commission. The term EXPLOSIVES CLASSIFIED BY THE
INTERSTATE COMMERCE COMMISSION includes, but is not limited to, dynamite, black
powder, pellet powders, initiating explosives, blasting caps, electric blasting
caps, safety fuses, fuse lighters, fuse igniters, squibs, cordeau detonant
fuses, instantaneous fuses, igniter cords, igniters, and some special
fireworks. COMMERCIAL EXPLOSIVES are those which are intended to be used in
commercial or industrial operations.
   FLAMMABLE LIQUID. Liquid which has a flash point of 70F or less, as
determined by a Tagliabue or equivalent closed-cup test device, and having a
vapor pressure not exceeding 40 psi at 100F.
   INTERSECTION.
      (1)   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curblines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways
of two highways which join one another at, or approximately at, right angles,
or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways joining at
another angle may come in conflict.
      (2)   Where a highway includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then
every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting
highway shall be regarded as a separate INTERSECTION. In the event such
intersecting highway also includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then
every crossing of two roadways of such highways shall be regarded as a separate
INTERSECTION.
   LANED ROADWAY. A roadway which is divided into two or more clearly marked
lanes for vehicular traffic.
   LICENSE TO OPERATE A MOTOR VEHICLE. Any operator’s commercial chauffeur’s
license or any other license or permit to operate a motor vehicle issued under
the laws of the state, including:
      (1)   Any temporary license or instruction permit;
      (2)   The privilege of any person to drive a motor vehicle whether or not
such person holds a valid license; or
      (3)   Any nonresident operating privilege, as described herein.
   METAL TIRE. Every tire the surface of which in contact with the highway is
wholly or partly of metal or other hard, non-resilient material.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled, and every vehicle not
operated upon rails.
   MOTOR VEHICLE ACCIDENT. As defined and classified as in the Manual on
Classification of Motor Vehicle Traffic Accidents prepared by the Committee on
Uniform Traffic Accident Statistics, traffic conference, and distributed by the
National Safety Board of Trustees.
   MOTORCYCLE. Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the
rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the
ground, but excluding a tractor.
   MOTOR-DRIVEN CYCLE. Every motorcycle, including every motor scooter or
bicycle, equipped with a motor which produces not to exceed five brake
horsepower at full throttle without a governor as determined by a dynamometer
test and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the
ground.
   MUFFLER. A device designed for the use on a particular internal-combustion
engine and properly affixed thereto for the purpose of reducing the exhaust
noise of such engine to an unobjectionable level.
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES. All signs, barricades, signals, markings,
and devices not inconsistent with this chapter placed or erected by authority
of a public body or official having jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating,
warning, or guiding traffic which conforms to the latest edition of the Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways, published by the
U.S. Department of Transportation, a copy of which is on file.
   OPERATOR. Every person, other than a commercial chauffeur or chauffeur, who
drives or is in actual physical control of a motor vehicle upon a highway or
who is exercising control over or steering a vehicle being towed by a motor
vehicle.
   OWNER. A person who holds the legal title of a vehicle, or in the event a
vehicle is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease
thereof with a right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in
the agreement, and with an immediate right of possession vested in the
conditional vendee or lessee, or in the event a mortgagor of a vehicle is
entitled to possession, then such conditional vendee or lessee or mortgagor
shall be deemed the OWNER.
   PARK OR PARKING. The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in,
loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.
   PASSENGER. A rider in any vehicle other than the driver.
   PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot.
   POLICE OFFICER. Every officer of the municipal Police Department, or any
officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for
violations of traffic regulations.
   PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY. Every way or place in private ownership and used
for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied
permission from the owner, but not by other persons.
   RAILROAD. A carrier of persons or property upon cars, other than streetcars,
operated upon stationary rails.
   RAILROAD TRAIN. A steam engine, electric, or other motor, with or without
cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails, except streetcars.
   REGISTRATION. The registration certificates and registration plates issued
under the laws of the state pertaining to the registration of vehicles.
   RESIDENCE DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a highway not
comprising a business district when the property on such highway for a distance
of 300 feet or more is in the main district improved with residences or
residences and buildings in use for business.
   REVOCATION OF DRIVER’S LICENSE. The termination by formal action of the
department of a person’s driver’s license or privilege to operate a motor
vehicle on the public highways.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway.
   ROAD TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other
vehicles and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon either
independently, or any part of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn.
   ROADWAY. The portion of a highway improved, designed, or ordinarily used for
vehicular traffic, exclusive of the shoulder. In the event a highway includes
two or more separate roadways, the term ROADWAY, as used herein, refers to any
such roadway separately but not to all such roadways collectively.
   SAFETY ZONE OR ISLAND. An area or space officially set apart within a
roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians, and which is protected at all
times while set apart as a SAFETY ZONE OR ISLAND.
   SCHOOL BUS. Every motor vehicle owned by a public or governmental agency and
operated for the transportation of children to or from school, or privately
owned and operated for compensation for the transportation of children to or
from school. This definition shall not include buses normally used in town
transit which may be used part-time for transportation of school children
within the town during some portion of the day.
   SEMITRAILER. Every vehicle with or without motive power other than a pole
trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a
motor vehicle, and so constructed that some part of its weight and that of its
load rests or is carried by another vehicle.
   SHOULDER. The portion of the roadway contiguous with the traveled way for
accommodation of stopped vehicles, for emergency use, and for lateral support
of base and surface courses.
   SIDEWALK. The portion of the street between the curblines, or the lateral
lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use of
pedestrians.
   SOLID TIRE. Every time of rubber or other resilient material which does not
depend upon compressed air for the support of the load.
   STAND OR STANDING. The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise that temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
receiving or discharging passengers.
   STOP. Complete cessation from movement.
   STOP OR STOPPING. Any halting even momentarily of a vehicle, whether
occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or
in compliance of the directions of a police officer or signal.
   STREET OR HIGHWAY. All streets, highways, avenues, boulevards, parkways,
roads, lanes, viaducts, bridges and the approaches thereto, alleys, courts,
places, squares, curbs, sidewalks, and recreation and park lands used vehicular
traffic, or other parkways or thoroughfares in the town over which it has
jurisdiction, which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public
use, or such other public property so designated in any law of the state.
   SUSPENSION OF DRIVER’S LICENSE. The temporary withdrawal by formal action of
the department of a person’s driver’s license or privilege to operate a motor
vehicle on the public highways.
   TAXICAB. A motor vehicle regularly engaged in the business of carrying
passengers for hire and having a seating capacity of less than six persons, and
not operated on a fixed route.
   THROUGH STREET OR HIGHWAY. Every street or highway, or portion thereof, on
which vehicle traffic is given preferential right-of-way, and at the entrances
to which vehicular traffic from intersecting streets or highways is required by
law to yield the right-of-way to vehicles on such THROUGH STREET OR HIGHWAY in
obedience to either a stop sign or a yield sign, when such signs are erected as
provided in §§
75.01 through
75.10.
   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, and other
conveyances, either single or together, while using any highway for purposes of
travel.
   TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL. Any device, whether manually, electrically, or
mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternatively directed to stop,
proceed, or proceed with caution.
   TRAFFIC LANE. The portion of the traveled way for the movement of a single
line of vehicles.
   TRAILER. Every vehicle with or without motive power, other than a pole
trailer, designed for carrying persons or property, and for being drawn by a
motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the
towing vehicle.
   TRUCK. Every motor vehicle designed, used, or maintained primarily for the
transportation of property.
   U-TURN. Turning a vehicle around so as to proceed in the opposite direction.
   URBAN DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including any street which
is built up with structures devoted to business, industry, or dwelling houses
situated at intervals of less than 100 feet for a distance of a quarter of a
mile or more.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power or
used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
   YIELD. The yielding of the right-of-way to all vehicles or pedestrians
approaching from the right or left intersecting street which are so close as to
constitute an immediate hazard.
(Prior Code, § 15-102)
§ 70.03 SECURITY VERIFICATION FORM.
   (A)   The owner of a motor vehicle registered in the state shall carry in
such vehicle, at all times, a current owner’s security verification form
listing the vehicle, or an equivalent form which has been issued by the
Department of Public Safety, and shall produce such form upon request for
inspection by any law enforcement officer or representative of the Department
of Public Safety, and, in the case of collision, the form shall be shown upon
request to any person affected by such collision.
   (B)   The following shall not be required to carry an owner’s or operator’s
security verification form, or an equivalent form, from the Department of
Public Safety during operation of the vehicle:
      (1)   Any vehicle owned or leased by the federal or state government, or
any agency or political subdivision thereof;
      (2)   Any vehicle bearing the name, symbol, or logo of a business,
corporation, or utility on the exterior, and which is in compliance with
provisions of 47 O.S. §§ 7-600 through 7-607, according to the records of the
State Department of Public Safety which reflect a deposit, bond, self-
insurance, or fleet policy;
      (3)   Any vehicle authorized for operation pursuant to a permit number
issued by the Interstate Commerce Commission or the Corporation Commission;
      (4)   Any licensed taxicab; and
      (5)   Any vehicle owned by a licensed motor vehicle dealer.
   (C)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
      COMPULSORY INSURANCE LAW. The law requiring liability insurance in
conjunction with the operation of a motor vehicle in the state, as found in 47
O.S. § 7-606, Article VI, Chapter 7.
      OPERATOR’S POLICY. An operator’s policy of liability insurance, which
shall ensure the named person against loss from the liability imposed upon him
or her by law for damages arising out of the operation or use by him or her of
any motor vehicle not owned by him or her, subject to the same limits of
liability required in an owner’s policy.
      OWNER’S POLICY. An owner’s policy of liability insurance which:
         (a)   Shall designate by explicit description or by appropriate
reference all vehicles with respect to which coverage is thereby to be granted;
         (b)   Shall ensure the person named therein and ensure any other
person, except as provided in division (c) below, using an insured vehicle with
the express or implied permission of the named insured, against loss from the
liability imposed by law for damages arising out of the ownership, maintenance,
operation, or use of such vehicle;
         (c)   May provide for exclusions from coverage in accordance with
existing laws; and
         (d)   Shall be issued by an authorized carrier providing coverage in
accordance with 47 O.S. § 7-204.
      SECURITY.
         (a)   A policy or bond meeting the requirements of 47 O.S. § 7-204.
         (b)   A deposit of cash or securities having the equivalency of limits
required under 47 O.S. § 7-204 as acceptable limits for a policy or bond.
         (c)   Self-insurance, pursuant to the provisions of 47 O.S. § 7-503,
having the equivalency of limits required under 47 O.S. § 7-204 as acceptable
limits for a policy or bond.
      SECURITY VERIFICATION FORM. A form, approved by the State Board for
Property and Casualty Rates, verifying the existence of security required by
the Compulsory Insurance Law of the state.
   (D)   Every operator of a motor vehicle registered in the state shall, while
operating or using such vehicle within the town’s boundaries, carry either an
operator’s or an owner’s security verification form issued by a carrier,
providing the operator is not excluded from coverage thereon; or an equivalent
form issued by the State Department of Public Safety, reflecting liability
coverage.
   (E)   An owner or operator who fails to produce for inspection a valid and
current security verification form or equivalent form which has been issued by
the Department upon request of any peace officer of the Department shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine and
court costs.
   (F)   A sentence imposed for any violation of this section may be suspended
or deferred in whole or in part by the court.
   (G)   Any person producing proof in court that a current security
verification form or equivalent form, which has been issued by the Department
reflecting the liability coverage for such person was in force at the time of
the alleged offense shall be entitled to dismissal of such charge.
   (H)   Upon conviction, bond forfeiture, or deferral of sentence, the Court
Clerk shall forward an abstract to the State Department of Public Safety within
ten days reflecting the action taken by the court.
(Prior Code, § 15-103) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Certification of existence of security; exemptions, see 47 O.S. § 7-602
   Exemptions, see 47 O.S. § 7-607
   Failure to maintain insurance or security; penalties, see 47 O.S. § 7-606
   Insurance carriers prohibited from canceling, terminating, increasing, or
requiring higher premiums for certain peace officers, firefighters, or
emergency vehicle operators, see 47 O.S. § 7-601.2
   Liability requirements; proof of compliance; nonresidents, see 47 O.S. § 7-
601
   Owner’s and operator’s security verification forms; contents, see 47 O.S. §
7-601.1
   Possession of security verification form while operating or using certain
vehicles, see 47 O.S. § 7-602.1
   Related provisions, see 47 O.S. § 7-600
   Requirements as to policy or bond, see 47 O.S. § 7-204
   Self-insurers, see 47 O.S. § 7-503
   Statement or endorsement to be included in policies; excess or additional
coverage; binders, see 47 O.S. § 7-600.1
   Suspension of driving privilege and registration, see 47 O.S. § 7-605
   Verification of security, see 47 O.S. § 7-603
§ 70.04 VEHICLE OWNER, PARENT NOT TO AUTHORIZE VIOLATION OF LAW.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to authorize or knowingly permit a motor
vehicle owned by him or her, or under his or her control, to be driven upon any
street in the town by any person who is not authorized to drive a motor vehicle
under the laws of the state, or to be driven or to stand or to be parked in
violation of any provision of this traffic code.
(Prior Code, § 15-104)
   (B)   It is unlawful for a parent of a child or the guardian of a ward to
authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any provision
of this traffic code.
(Prior Code, § 15-105) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.05 ADOPTION OF STATE VEHICLE LAWS.
   There is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference the State Motor
Vehicle Code, 47 O.S. §§ 1-101 et seq., and the State Rules of the Road, 47
O.S. §§ 10-101 et seq. and all other misdemeanor traffic and motor vehicle
violations in 47 O.S., as now exist and as may be from time to time amended.
Such state laws as adopted herein by reference shall be fully enforceable by
the town within the town limits as fully as if set out at length herein.
(Prior Code, § 10-106)
§ 70.06 JURISDICTION.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply and be enforced on all roads,
streets, and highways within the town and on all roads, streets and highways
forming the boundary lines of the town.
(Prior Code, § 10-107)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 70.20 AUTHORITY OF POLICE AND FIRE OFFICIALS.
   (A)   It is the duty of all police officers of the Police Department to
enforce the street traffic regulations of the town and the state, to make
arrests for the traffic violations, and to investigate accidents.
   (B)   Officers of the Police Department, or such officers as are assigned by
the Chief of Police, are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand,
mechanical signals, or signs in conformance with the provisions of this traffic
code. In the event of a fire or other emergency as herein defined, or other
unusual traffic conditions, to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians,
officers of the Police Department or Fire Department may direct and take
control of traffic as conditions may require, and as near as practicable,
follow the general provisions of this subchapter.
   (C)   Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene of a fire or other
emergency, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in
the immediate vicinity.
(Prior Code, § 15-1601)
§ 70.21 AUTHORITY TO DIRECT TRAFFIC.
   All traffic in the town shall be controlled by ordinances of the town and
the laws of the state relating thereto. No person shall direct or attempt to
direct traffic except police officers and other officers authorized by the
town.
(Prior Code, § 15-1602) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.22 EMERGENCY, EXPERIMENTAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The town personnel is empowered to make effective the provisions of
the traffic ordinances of the town and to make temporary or experimental
regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions. No such temporary or
experimental regulation shall remain in effect for more than 90 days.
   (B)   The town may have traffic-control devices tested under actual
conditions of traffic.
(Prior Code, § 15-1603)
§ 70.23 OBEDIENCE TO POLICE OFFICERS REQUIRED.
   No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of a police officer.
(Prior Code, § 15-1604) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Obedience to police officers, see 47 O.S. § 11-103
§ 70.24 APPLICABILITY TO PUBLIC EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   This subchapter shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or
used in the service of the United States Government, any state, county, town,
or other governmental unit or agency, as well as to other vehicles. No such
driver shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise
permitted in this subchapter or by state statute.
   (B)   This chapter shall not apply to the military forces of the United
States and organizations of the National Guard when performing any military
duty.
(Prior Code, § 15-1605)
§ 70.25 AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   (A)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an
emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the
law or ordinance, or when responding to, but not upon returning from, a fire
alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to
the conditions herein stated.
   (B)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:
      (1)   Park or stand irrespective of the provisions of this subchapter;
      (2)   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;
      (3)   Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as he or she does not
endanger life or property; or
      (4)   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in
specific directions.
   (C)   The exemptions herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle shall
apply only when the driver of any such vehicle is making use of audible and
visual signals as required by law, except that an authorized emergency vehicle
operated as a police vehicle need not be equipped with or display a red light
visible from in front of the vehicle.
   (D)   The operator of every authorized emergency vehicle, prior to
commencing an emergency run, must report to the Police Department and advise
the Police Department of his or her destination; and if such a hazard exists as
would endanger the public, the Police Department shall have the authority to
prohibit the emergency run.
   (E)   This section shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency
vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons,
nor protect the driver from the consequences of his or her reckless disregard
for the safety of others.
(Prior Code, § 15-1606)
Statutory reference:
   Authorized emergency vehicles, see 47 O.S. § 11-106
   Emergency vehicles; flashing lights, see 47 O.S. § 12-218
§ 70.26 PERSONS WORKING ON STREETS EXEMPTED.
   (A)   Unless specifically made applicable, the provisions of this subchapter
shall not apply to persons, teams, motor vehicles, and other equipment while
actually engaged in work upon the surface of a street, or to persons, motor
vehicles, and other equipment while actually engaged in construction,
maintenance, or repair of public utilities. All highway and public utility
operations shall be protected by adequate warning signs, signals, devices, or
flagmen.
   (B)   This section shall not relieve any driver exempted by this section
from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons, nor from
the consequences of driving while intoxicated.
(Prior Code, § 15-1607)
Statutory reference:
   Persons working on highways; exceptions, see 47 O.S. § 11-105
§ 70.27 USE OF STREET RESTRICTED.
   (A)   Town personnel or contractors, while repairing or improving, or
repairing lines or other utility facilities in the streets, are authorized as
necessary, subject to control of the Chief of the Traffic Division, to close
any street or section thereof to traffic during such repair, maintenance, or
construction. In exercising such authority, such person shall erect or cause to
be erected proper control devices and barricades to warn and notify the public
that the street has been closed to traffic.
   (B)   When any street has been closed to traffic under the provisions of
division (A) above, and traffic-control devices or barricades have been
erected, no person shall drive any vehicle through, under, over, or around such
traffic-control devices or barricades, or otherwise enter the closed area. This
division (B) shall not apply to persons while engaged in such construction,
maintenance, and repair or to persons entering therein for the protection of
lives or property. Persons having their places of residence or places of
business within the closed area may travel, when possible to do so, through the
area at their own risk.
   (C)   Whenever construction, repair, or maintenance of any street or utility
line or facility is being performed under traffic, the town personnel,
contractor, and utility company concerned shall erect, or cause to be erected,
traffic-control devices to warn and guide the public. Every person using such
street shall obey all signs, signals, markings, flagmen, or other traffic-
control devices which are placed to regulate, control, and guide traffic
through the construction or maintenance area.
(Prior Code, § 15-1608)
§ 70.28 RIDING ANIMALS, ANIMAL-DRAWN VEHICLES.
   Every person propelling any pushcart or riding an animal upon a roadway, and
every person driving an animal-drawn vehicle shall be subject to the provisions
of this subchapter applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those
provisions of this subchapter which by their very nature can have no
application.
(Prior Code, § 15-1609)
Statutory reference:
   Persons riding animals or driving animal-drawn vehicles, see 47 O.S. § 11-
104
IMPOUNDMENT
§ 70.40 PURPOSE AND EFFECT.
   The impoundment of vehicles under authority of this subchapter shall be
construed as an enforcement procedure for protection of the public peace,
safety, and welfare, and the safeguarding of property, and shall be used
generally for the prevention and removal of traffic hazards, prevention, and
abatement of public nuisances arising from traffic law violations, protection
of the public rights in the use of town streets and thoroughfares from
obstructions placed and left in derogation of those rights, and for
safeguarding and protecting recovered stolen vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 15-1701)
§ 70.41 POLICE GRANTED AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND VEHICLES.
   Members of the Police Department are hereby authorized within the authority
granted by §
70.40 to impound vehicles under the provisions of this subchapter. No
impoundment shall be valid unless made under order of an authorized police
officer.
(Prior Code, § 15-1702)
§ 70.42 DISABLED VEHICLES.
   A disabled vehicle upon a street or highway may be impounded under the
following circumstances:
   (A)   If left unattended and improperly parked on a street or highway;
   (B)   If left unattended longer than 48 hours on the shoulder of any
highway; or
   (C)   If the person in charge of the vehicle is physically incapacitated to
such extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal.
(Prior Code, § 15-1703)
§ 70.43 VEHICLE CONSTITUTES TRAFFIC HAZARD.
   A vehicle left unattended upon any street, alley, or thoroughfare and so
parked illegally as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the
normal movement of traffic shall be impounded.
(Prior Code, § 15-1704)
§ 70.44 ILLEGAL TRESPASS BY VEHICLE.
   (A)   An unattended vehicle trespassing on property of another may be
impounded when the required complaint has been properly made and filed as
provided in this section.
   (B)   If the owner or legal occupant who complains shall sign a complaint
against the person parking the vehicle on the owner’s or legal occupant’s
property, or if the identity of the person parking the vehicle is unknown, then
the complaint may be filed against the registered owner of the vehicle. The
complaint shall be verified and shall allege that the complaining party is the
owner of legal occupant of the property upon which the vehicle is parked or
standing.
   (C)   Upon filing of the complaint by the property owner or legal occupant,
and if there appears to be proper cause to believe a trespass has occurred, the
property owner or legal occupant of the property may cause the vehicle to be
impounded from the property and placed in storage. The Police Department may
also cause such vehicle to be impounded where the Police Department determines
that the location of the vehicle constitutes a threat to the public health or
safety, or is a public traffic hazard.
(Prior Code, § 15-1705)
§ 70.45 VEHICLES PARKED IN PROHIBITED ZONE.
   Any vehicle illegally parked in such a manner that it blocks a fire escape
ladder, device, or exit, or blocks ready access to a fire hydrant, shall be
impounded.
(Prior Code, § 15-1706)
§ 70.46 VEHICLES PARKED IN INTERSECTION.
   Any unattended vehicle illegally parked in any street intersection shall be
impounded. A disabled vehicle in an intersection with the person in charge of
the vehicle being present shall be moved out of the intersection and to the
nearest available legal parking space at the street curbing.
(Prior Code, § 15-1707)
§ 70.47 STOLEN VEHICLES RECOVERY BY POLICE.
   (A)   Whenever a stolen vehicle is located by police and the registered
owner cannot be found within a reasonable time not exceeding one hour, or
cannot be determined from the registration or other identifying media in the
vehicle or from records or information available from reports of stolen cars,
the vehicle may be removed to the nearest authorized place of impoundment and
the registered owner of the vehicle shall be notified of the location of the
place of impoundment as soon as possible by the Police Department.
   (B)   If the registered owner is identified, located, and notified of the
recovery of the stolen vehicle, the owner shall be given the right to make his
or her own arrangement for the removal of the vehicle within the period of one
hour from the time he or she is actually notified of its recovery, and if the
owner is unable or unwilling to effect the removal within the time specified,
the vehicle may be impounded.
(Prior Code, § 15-1708)
§ 70.48 ARREST, DETENTION OF DRIVER OF VEHICLE.
   Whenever the driver or person in charge of any vehicle is placed under
arrest and taken into custody and detained by police under circumstances which
leaves or will leave a vehicle unattended on any street or highway, the vehicle
may be impounded.
(Prior Code, § 15-1709)
§ 70.49 UNLICENSED VEHICLES.
   Any vehicle on public roads, streets, or other public places which do not
have a current state license tag may be impounded by the police.
(Prior Code, § 15-1710)
§ 70.50 PLACE OF IMPOUNDMENT.
   Every vehicle that is impounded under the provisions of this subchapter
shall be removed to the nearest garage or place of safekeeping designated by
the Chief of Police, and to no other place.
(Prior Code, § 15-1711)
§ 70.51 DURATION OF IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided, any vehicle impounded under the
authority of this subchapter shall be stored and held until an order for its
release is received from an officer of the Traffic Violations Bureau or
municipal court, or other proper police officer.
   (B)   The order of release of an impounded vehicle shall be conditioned upon
the payment of by the person to whom the release is issued of all impoundment
costs and accrued storage charges assessed against the vehicle.
   (C)   No order of release of an impounded vehicle shall be issued until all
fines and costs due the town because of traffic law or other law violations
involving the vehicle have been paid.
(Prior Code, § 15-1712)
Cross-reference:
   Traffic Violations Bureau, see §
32.01
CERTAIN VEHICLES PROHIBITED
§ 70.65 VEHICLES INJURIOUS TO STREETS; METAL TIRES PROHIBITED.
   No vehicle or object, which injures or is likely to injure the surface of a
street shall be driven or moved on any street.
(Prior Code, § 15-401) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.66 OBSTRUCTIVE, DANGEROUS VEHICLES; COVERING OF LOADS.
   (A)   No person shall drive any vehicle in such condition, so constructed,
or so loaded as to cause delay or be likely to cause delay in traffic, or as to
constitute a hazard to persons or property, except by permit issued by the town
and in accordance with the terms of such permit.
   (B)   No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any street unless such vehicle
is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any of its load from dropping,
sifting, leaking, blowing, or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that sand
may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or water or other
substances may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or maintaining such
roadway.
   (C)   No person shall operate on any street any vehicle with any load unless
the load and any covering thereon is securely fastened so as to prevent the
covering or load from becoming loose, detached, or in any manner a hazard to
other users of the highway. Any vehicle loaded with sand, cinders, or other
loose materials susceptible to blowing or escaping by reason of wind shall have
such load covered or dampened so as to prevent the blowing or escaping of the
load from the vehicle.
   (D)   This section shall not apply to trucks loaded with livestock, poultry,
or agricultural products only, except baled agricultural products; however, any
such trucks shall be so constructed or loaded as to prevent such livestock or
poultry from escaping therefrom.
(Prior Code, § 15-402) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   No person shall do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act
required in this traffic code.
   (B)   No parent of a child or the guardian of a ward shall authorize any
child or ward to violate any provisions of this traffic code.
   (C)   No person shall authorize or knowingly permit any vehicle registered
in his or her name to be driven, or to stand, or to be parked in violation of
any provisions of this traffic code.
   (D)   Any person who violates any provision of this traffic code, or
performs any unlawful act as defined in this traffic code, or fails to perform
any act required in this traffic code is guilty of an offense, and upon
conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 15-1801)
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
71.001   Driver’s license
   
71.002   Driving through funeral processions
   
71.003   Use of roller skates, coasters, skate boards on roadways
   
71.004   Play streets
   
71.005   Obstructing intersection or crosswalk
   
71.006   Driving on sidewalk prohibited
   
71.007   Driving in public parks prohibited
   
71.008   Starting stopped or parked vehicles
   
71.009   Backing of vehicle
   
71.010   Opening and closing vehicle doors
   
71.011   Obstructing driver’s view; number in front seat
   
71.012   Clinging to vehicle
   
71.013   Boarding, alighting from moving vehicle
   
71.014   Riding outside vehicle compartment
   
71.015   Driving through safety zone
   
71.016   Child passenger restraint system; seat belts
   
71.017   Railroad crossings
   
71.018   Truck routes, map
Driving, Overtaking, Passing
   
71.030   Driving on right side of roadway; exception
   
71.031   Passing vehicles proceeding in opposite direction
   
71.032   Passing vehicle on left; right
   
71.033   Passing requirements, duty of overtaken vehicle
   
71.034   Passing prohibited
   
71.035   Designation of no-passing zones
   
71.036   School buses; markings; passing regulations
   
71.037   Driving on laned roadways; marking traffic lanes
   
71.038   Driving on divided highways
   
71.039   Following too closely
   
71.040   Restricted-access roadways
   
71.041   Driving through service drives
   
71.042   Reckless driving
   
71.043   Careless or negligent driving
   
71.044   Driving over fire hose
   
71.045   Emergency vehicles
   
71.046   Control of vehicle while intoxicated
   
71.047   Driving under the influence
Speed Regulations
   
71.060   Speed limits
   
71.061   Minimum speed
Right-of-Way
   
71.075   At intersections
   
71.076   Through streets
   
71.077   Stop, yield intersections
   
71.078   School zones, crosswalks
   
71.079   Emerging from alley, driveway
   
71.080   Obstructing intersection, crosswalk
Turning Movements
   
71.095   Method of turning
   
71.096   Authority to place turning markers
   
71.097   Restriction of turning
   
71.098   Limitations on turning; U-turns
   
71.099   Turning, stopping movements; signals required
   
71.100   Signals; method required
   
71.102   Method of giving hand signals
 
   
71.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 71.001 DRIVER’S LICENSE.
   (A)   No person shall drive or operate any motor vehicle on any public
roadway within the town unless such person has a current, not suspended or
revoked, valid driver’s or chauffeur’s license as required by state law.
(Prior Code, § 15-521)
   (B)   (1)   No person shall:
         (a)   Display or cause, or permit to be displayed, or have in his or
her possession any cancelled, revoked, suspended, fictitious, photostatic, or
fraudulently altered operator’s or chauffeur’s license;
         (b)   Lends his or her operator’s or chauffeur’s license to any other
person, or knowingly permit the use thereof by another;
         (c)   Display or represent as his or her own any operator’s or
chauffeur’s license not issued to him or her; or
         (d)   Permit any unlawful use of an operator’s or chauffeur’s license
issued to him or her.
      (2)   No person shall drive a motor vehicle on any public street within
the town at a time when his or her privilege to do so is cancelled, suspended,
or revoked.
(Prior Code, § 15-522)
   (C)   No person shall authorize or knowingly permit a motor vehicle owned by
him or her or under his or her control to be driven upon any street in the town
by any person who is not authorized or licensed to drive a motor vehicle under
the laws of the state, or under the laws of the state of the driver’s residence
of record.
(Prior Code, § 15-523) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.002 DRIVING THROUGH FUNERAL PROCESSIONS.
   (A)   (1)   No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles
comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion
and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in this
subchapter.
      (2)   This section shall not apply at intersections where traffic is
controlled by police officers.
(Prior Code, § 15-524)
   (B)   Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to
the right-hand edge of the roadway as practicable except when otherwise
directed or escorted by a police officer. Each driver shall follow the vehicle
ahead as closely as is practicable and safe, and at a speed as designated by
the escort for the procession.
(Prior Code, § 15-525)
   (C)   A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified by
headlights turned on or by the display upon the outside of each vehicle an
identifying insignia, or by such other method as may be determined and
designated by the Police Department.
(Prior Code, § 15-526) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.003 USE OF ROLLER SKATES, COASTERS, SKATE BOARDS ON ROADWAYS.
   No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster,
skateboard, toy vehicle or similar device, shall go upon any roadway except
while crossing a street in a crosswalk. While so crossing, such person shall be
granted all of the rights and be subject to all of the duties applicable to
pedestrians. This section shall not apply upon any street while set aside as a
play street authorized by ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 15-527) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.004 PLAY STREETS.
   (A)   The town personnel, subject to direction by the Board of Trustees, if
any, shall have authority to declare any street or part thereof a play street,
and have placed appropriate signs or devices in the roadway indicating and
helping to protect the same.
(Prior Code, § 15-528)
   (B)   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part
thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street
or portion thereof, except drivers of vehicles having business or whose
residences are within such closed area, and then such drivers shall exercise
the greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof.
(Prior Code, § 15-529) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.005 OBSTRUCTING INTERSECTION OR CROSSWALK.
   No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is
sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicle he or she is operating without obstructing the passage
of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal
indication to proceed.
(Prior Code, § 15-530) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.006 DRIVING ON SIDEWALK PROHIBITED.
   The driver of a vehicle shall not drive upon a sidewalk or within any
sidewalk area except at a permanent or temporary driveway.
(Prior Code, § 15-531) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Traffic regulations; racing and driving; games and amusements; school zone
speed limits and signs, see 11 O.S. § 22-117
§ 71.007 DRIVING IN PUBLIC PARKS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall drive, operate, or propel a motor vehicle or motor-
driven cycle, including a motor scooter or motor-driven bicycle, in any park,
public property, or right-of-way or easement, within or owned by the town,
except upon established roadways or roadways designed for vehicular traffic. A
vehicle may be driven a reasonable distance from the roadway for the purpose of
going to and from a parking place.
   (B)   No person shall drive, operate, or propel a motor vehicle or motor-
driven cycle past any barrier, sign, or other device indicating that vehicular
traffic is prohibited in, upon, or through any area upon which vehicular
traffic is prohibited.
   (C)   No person shall drive a motor vehicle of any size on any private
property unless the operator has obtained the permission of the owner of the
private property.
   (D)   Emergency vehicles are exempt from the provisions of this section.
(Prior Code, § 15-532) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.008 STARTING STOPPED OR PARKED VEHICLES.
   No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing, or parked unless
and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety.
(Prior Code, § 15-533) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.009 BACKING OF VEHICLE.
   The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement can be
made without interfering with other traffic. When a vehicle is backed more than
30 feet, such movement shall be deemed unsafe.
(Prior Code, § 15-534) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.010 OPENING AND CLOSING VEHICLE DOORS.
   (A)   No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available
to moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so.
   (B)   No person shall leave a door open on the side of a motor vehicle
available to moving traffic to load or unload passengers.
(Prior Code, § 15-535) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.011 OBSTRUCTING DRIVER’S VIEW; NUMBER IN FRONT SEAT.
   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded or when there are
in the front seat such a number of persons, exceeding three, as to obstruct the
view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle, or as to interfere
with the driver’s control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (B)   No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in such position as to interfere
with the driver’s view ahead or to the sides or to interfere with his or her
control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 15-536) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.012 CLINGING TO VEHICLE.
   No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled, or toy
vehicle shall attach the same or himself or herself to any vehicle upon a
roadway.
(Prior Code, § 15-537) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.013 BOARDING, ALIGHTING FROM MOVING VEHICLE.
   No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in
motion.
(Prior Code, § 15-538) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.014 RIDING OUTSIDE VEHICLE COMPARTMENT.
   No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designed or
intended for use of passengers. This section shall not apply to any employee
engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to persons riding within truck
bodies in space intended for merchandise.
(Prior Code, § 15-539) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.015 DRIVING THROUGH SAFETY ZONE.
   No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety zone or
island.
(Prior Code, § 15-540) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.016 CHILD PASSENGER RESTRAINT SYSTEM; SEAT BELTS.
   (A)   Child passenger restraint system.
      (1)   Every driver, when transporting a child under six years of age in a
motor vehicle operated on the roadways, streets, or highways of the state,
shall provide for the protection of said child by properly using a child
passenger restraint system. For purposes of this section and 47 O.S. § 11-1113,
CHILD PASSENGER RESTRAINT SYSTEM means an infant or child passenger restraint
system which meets the federal standards as set by 49 C.F.R. § 571.213.
      (2)   Children at least six years of age but younger than 13 years of age
shall be protected by use of a child passenger restraint system or a seat belt.
      (3)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
         (a)   The driver of a school bus, taxicab, moped, motorcycle, or other
motor vehicle not required to be equipped with safety belts pursuant to state
or federal laws;
         (b)   The driver of an ambulance or emergency vehicle;
         (c)   The driver of a vehicle in which all of the seat belts are in
use;
         (d)   The transportation of children who, for medical reasons are
unable to be placed in such devices; or
         (e)   The transportation of a child who weighs more than 40 pounds and
who is being transported in the back seat of a vehicle while wearing only a lap
safety belt when the back seat of the vehicle is not equipped with combination
lap and shoulder safety belts, or when the combination lap and shoulder safety
belts in the back seat are being used by other children who weigh more than 40
pounds. Provided, however, for purposes of this division (A)(1)(e), BACK SEAT
shall include all seats located behind the front seat of a vehicle operated by
a licensed childcare facility or church. Provided further, there shall be a
rebuttable presumption that a child has met the weight requirements of this
division (A)(1)(e) if, at the request of any law enforcement officer, the
licensed childcare facility or church provides the officer with a written
statement verified by the parent or legal guardian that the child weighs more
than 40 pounds.
      (4)   A law enforcement officer is hereby authorized to stop a vehicle if
it appears that the driver of the vehicle has violated the provisions of this
section, and to give an oral warning to said driver. The warning shall advise
the driver of the possible danger to children resulting from the failure to
install or use a child passenger restraint system or seat belts in the motor
vehicle.
      (5)   A violation of the provisions of this section shall not be
admissible as evidence in any civil action or proceeding for damages.
      (6)   In any action brought by or on behalf of an infant for personal
injuries or wrongful death sustained in a motor vehicle collision, the failure
of any person to have the infant properly restrained in accordance with the
provisions of this section shall not be used in aggravation or mitigation of
damages.
(Prior Code, § 15-541)
   (B)   Seat belts required for front seat passengers.
      (1)   Every operator and front seat passenger of a passenger car operated
in the town shall wear a properly adjusted and fastened safety seat belt
system, required to be installed in the motor vehicle when manufactured
pursuant to Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard, No. 208, being found at 49
CFR § 571.208. For the purposes of this section, PASSENGER CAR shall not
include trucks, truck-tractors, recreational vehicles, motorcycles, motorized
bicycles, or vehicles used primarily for farm use and licensed pursuant to
state law, 47 O.S. § 1134.
      (2)   This section shall not apply to an operator or passenger of a
passenger car in which the operator or passenger possesses a written
verification from a physician licensed in the state that he or she is unable to
wear a safety seat belt system for medical reasons. The issuance of such
verification by a physician, in good faith, shall not give rise to, nor shall
such physician thereby incur, any liability whatsoever in damages or otherwise,
to any person injured by reason of such failure to wear a safety seat belt
system.
      (3)   This section shall not apply to an operator of a motor vehicle who
is a route carrier of the U.S. Postal Service.
      (4)   No law enforcement officer shall make routine stops of motorists
for the purpose of enforcing this section.
(Prior Code, § 15-542) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Farm vehicles; license fees; exemptions, see 47 O.S. § 1134
§ 71.017 RAILROAD CROSSINGS.
   (A)   (1)   Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad
grade crossing under any of the circumstances stated in this section, the
driver of such vehicle shall stop within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from
the nearest rail of such railroad, and shall not proceed until he or she can do
so safely. The foregoing requirements shall apply when:
         (a)   A clearly visible electrical or mechanical signal device gives
warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train;
         (b)   A crossing gate is lowered or when a human flagman gives or
continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad train;
         (c)   A railroad train approaching within approximately 1,500 feet of
the highway crossing emits a signal audible from such distance and such
railroad train, by reason of its speed or nearness to such crossing, is an
immediate hazard; or
         (d)   An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in
hazardous proximity to such crossing.
      (2)   No person shall drive any vehicle through, around, or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while such gate or barrier is
closed or is being opened or closed.
(Prior Code, § 15-543)
   (B)   (1)   The driver of any motor vehicle carrying passengers for hire, or
of any school bus carrying any school child, or of any vehicle carrying
explosive substances or flammable liquids as a cargo or part of a cargo, before
crossing at grade any track or tracks of railroad, shall stop such vehicle
within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of such
railroad, and while so stopped, shall listen and look in both directions along
such track for any approaching train and for signals indicating the approach of
a train, except as hereinafter provided, and shall not proceed until he or she
can do so safely. After stopping as required herein and upon proceeding when it
is safe to do so, the driver of any such vehicle shall cross only in such gear
of the vehicle that there will be no necessity for changing gears while
traversing such crossing, and the driver shall not shift gears while crossing
the track or tracks.
      (2)   No stop need be made at any such crossing where a police officer or
traffic control signal directs traffic to proceed.
(Prior Code, § 15-544) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.018 TRUCK ROUTES, MAP.
   (A)   (1)   The Board of Trustees, by motion or resolution, may prescribe
routes through the town for the use of trucks in general or trucks of
particular kinds, or other vehicles which are not ordinary private passenger
vehicles passing through the town.
      (2)   The town shall see that appropriate and adequate signs are placed
along such routes so that drivers of such vehicles may follow the routes.
   (B)   (1)   When such signs are so erected and in place as provided in
division (A) above, the driver of a truck or other vehicle for which a route
has been prescribed as provided herein, while passing through the town, shall
keep on such route and shall not deviate therefrom except in case of emergency.
      (2)   Drivers of such vehicles shall follow such routes so far as
practicable also when driving within the town and not merely through the town.
   (C)   Town personnel shall keep and maintain accurate maps setting out the
truck routes designated by the town.
(Prior Code, § 15-1001)
Cross-reference:
   Weight limits, see §
76.03
DRIVING, OVERTAKING, PASSING
§ 71.030 DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY; EXCEPTION.
   (A)   Upon roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven upon the
right half of the roadway except as follows:
      (1)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction under the rules governing such movements;
      (2)   When the right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under
construction or repair;
      (3)   Upon a roadway divided into three marked lanes for traffic under
the rules applicable thereon; and
      (4)   Upon a roadway designated and sign-posted for one-way traffic.
   (B)   Upon all roadways, any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal
speed of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then existing
shall be driven in the right-hand lane when available to traffic, or as close
as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway, except when
overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction, or
when preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or
driveway.
(Prior Code, § 15-501)
Statutory reference:
   Drive on right side of roadway; exceptions, see 47 O.S. § 11-301
§ 71.031 PASSING VEHICLES PROCEEDING IN OPPOSITE DIRECTION.
   Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other
to the right. Upon roadways having width for not more than one line of traffic
in each direction, each driver shall give to the other at least one-half of the
traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible.
(Prior Code, § 15-502)
§ 71.032 PASSING VEHICLE ON LEFT; RIGHT.
   (A)   The following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of
vehicles proceeding in the same direction, subject to those limitations,
exceptions, and special rules hereinafter stated:
      (1)   The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in
the same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall
not again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the
overtaken vehicle; and
      (2)   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his or
her vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 15-503)
   (B)   (1)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of
another vehicle only under the following conditions:
         (a)   When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left
turn, and has so properly signaled for a left turn;
         (b)   Upon a street or highway with unobstructed pavement not occupied
by parked vehicles and marked with lines for two or more lanes of traffic in
each direction; and
         (c)   Upon a one-way street or upon any roadway on which traffic is
restricted to one direction of movement, where the roadway is free from
obstructions and of sufficient width for two more lines of moving vehicles.
      (2)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon
the right only under conditions permitting such movement in safety. In no event
shall such movement be made by driving off the pavement or main-traveled
portion of the roadway.
(Prior Code, § 15-504) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.033 PASSING REQUIREMENTS, DUTY OF OVERTAKEN VEHICLE.
   (A)   (1)   No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the
roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming
traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing
to be completely made without interfering with the safe operation of any
vehicle approaching from the opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken.
      (2)   The overtaking vehicle must return to the roadway before coming
within 100 feet of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction.
   (B)   Except as provided elsewhere in this chapter, the driver of a vehicle
overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall pass to the
left thereof at a safe distance, and shall not again drive to the right side of
the roadway until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle.
   (C)   Every driver who intends to pass another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction, which requires movement of his or her vehicle from one lane of
traffic to another, shall first see that such movement can be made with safety
and shall proceed to pass only after giving a proper signal by hand or
mechanical device.
   (D)   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle on audible signal, and shall not increase the speed of his
or her vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 15-505) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.034 PASSING PROHIBITED.
   (A) No vehicle shall at any time be driven to the left side of the roadway
under the following conditions:
      (1)   When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the
highway where the driver’s view is obstructed within such distance as to create
a hazard in the event another vehicle might approach from the opposite
direction;
      (2)   When traversing an intersection or railroad grade crossing; or
      (3)   When the view is obstructed upon approaching within 100 feet of any
bridge, viaduct, or tunnel.
   (B)   It is a violation to pass on the left by going to the left of the
center of the roadway across a doublemarked centerline for the purpose of
passing a vehicle traveling in the same direction.
   (C)   This section shall not apply upon a one-way roadway.
(Prior Code, § 15-506) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.035 DESIGNATION OF NO-PASSING ZONES.
   (A)   (1)   The State Department of Transportation as regards to state and
federal highways, and the town personnel, subject to direction of the Board of
Trustees, as regards to all other streets, are authorized to determine those
portions of a highway where overtaking and passing or driving to the left of
the roadway would be especially hazardous, and shall by appropriate signs or
marking on the roadway have the beginning and end of such zones indicated.
      (2)   When such signs or markings are in place and clearly visible to an
ordinarily observant person, every driver of a vehicle shall obey the
directions thereof.
   (B)   Where signs or markings are in place to define a no-passing zone, no
driver shall at any time drive to the left side of the roadway within such no-
passing zone or on the left side of any pavement stripping designed to mark
such no-passing zone through its length.
(Prior Code, § 15-507) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.036 SCHOOL BUSES; MARKINGS; PASSING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle upon any street or highway in the town upon
meeting or overtaking from either direction any school bus on which the red
loading signals are in operation and which has stopped for the purpose of
receiving or discharging any school children and other occupants shall stop the
vehicle before it reaches the school bus. The driver may then proceed to pass
such school bus after the loading signals are deactivated, at a speed which is
reasonable and prudent and with due caution for the safety of such school
children and other occupants.
   (B)   Every school bus used for the transportation of school children shall
bear upon the front and rear thereof plainly visible signs containing the words
“School Bus” in letters not less than eight inches in height and, in addition,
shall be equipped with visual signs meeting the requirements of state law which
shall be actuated by the driver of the school bus whenever, but only whenever,
such vehicle is stopped on a street or highway for the purpose of receiving or
discharging school children.
   (C)   The driver of a vehicle upon a street or highway with separate
roadways need not stop upon meeting or passing a school bus which is on a
different roadway or when upon a controlled-access highway and the school bus
is stopped in a loading zone which is part of, or adjacent to, such street or
highway, and where pedestrians are not permitted to cross the roadway.
(Prior Code, § 15-508)
Statutory reference:
   Meeting or overtaking stopped school bus; violation and penalty; reporting
violations, see 47 O.S. § 11-705
§ 71.037 DRIVING ON LANED ROADWAYS; MARKING TRAFFIC LANES.
   (A)   The town personnel, subject to direction of the Board of Trustees, is
authorized to have traffic lanes marked upon the roadway or any street where a
regular alignment of traffic is necessary.
   (B)   Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked
lanes for traffic, the following rules in addition to all others consistent
herewith shall apply:
      (1)   A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely within
a single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has first
ascertained that such movement can be made with safety, and has properly
signaled his or her intentions to do so;
      (2)   Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes, a vehicle shall
not be driven in the center lane except when overtaking and passing another
vehicle where the roadway is clearly visible and such center lane is clear of
traffic within a safe distance, or in preparation for a left turn, or where
such center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the
direction the vehicle is proceeding and is sign posted to give notice of such
allocation; and
      (3)   Official signs may be erected directing slow-moving traffic to use
a designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a
particular direction regardless of the center of the roadway, and drivers of
vehicles shall obey the directions of every such sign.
   (C)   Where traffic lanes have been marked, no operator of any vehicle shall
fail or refuse to keep the vehicle within the boundaries of any such lane
except when lawfully passing another vehicle or preparatory to making lawful
turning movement or otherwise authorized by ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 15-509) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.038 DRIVING ON DIVIDED HIGHWAYS.
   Whenever any highway has been divided into two roadways by leaving an
intervening space or by a physical barrier, or clearly indicated divided
section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle shall be
driven only upon the right-hand roadway. No vehicle shall be driven over,
across or within any such dividing space barrier or section, except through an
opening in such physical barrier, dividing section, or space, or at a crossover
or intersection established by public authority.
(Prior Code, § 15-510) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.039 FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY.
   The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely
than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard to the speed of such vehicles
and the traffic upon and the condition of the highway. Such driver following
too closely shall be deemed negligent.
(Prior Code, § 15-511) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.040 RESTRICTED-ACCESS ROADWAYS.
   No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled-access roadway,
except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority.
(Prior Code, § 15-512) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.041 DRIVING THROUGH SERVICE DRIVES.
   No vehicle shall be driven through any service drive or parking area except
for the purpose of attaining service or merchandise, or for the purpose of
parking thereon.
(Prior Code, § 15-513) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.042 RECKLESS DRIVING.
   It shall be deemed reckless driving for any person to drive a motor vehicle
in a careless or wanton manner without regard for the safety of persons or
property.
(Prior Code, § 15-514)
Statutory reference:
   Reckless driving, see 47 O.S. § 11-901
§ 71.043 CARELESS OR NEGLIGENT DRIVING.
   (A)   No person shall drive, use, operate, park, cause to be parked, or stop
any vehicle:
      (1)   In a careless manner;
      (2)   In a negligent manner;
      (3)   In such a manner as to endanger life, limb, person, or property; or
      (4)   In such a manner or condition as to interfere with the lawful
movement of traffic or use of the streets.
   (B)   (1)   Every driver shall remain alert and give full attention to the
safe control and operation of his or her vehicle while it is in motion.
      (2)   Every driver of a motor vehicle shall, upon stopping, or upon
stopping and leaving the vehicle, park the same in a careful and prudent manner
and place so as not to interfere with the operation of other vehicles or with
pedestrians or other traffic.
      (3)   Failure to comply with these requirements shall be deemed careless
driving in violation of this section.
   (C)   Any driver who engages in any activity or does any act while driving
that interferes with the safe operation and control of his or her vehicle, or
who continues to operate his or her vehicle when any other person riding
thereon or therein engages in any activity or does any act which interferes
with his or her operation thereof, is guilty of careless driving.
   (D)   A driver of a motor vehicle who collides with another vehicle or with
any person or property because of driving error or inattention is guilty of
careless driving.
(Prior Code, § 15-515) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.044 DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE.
   Whenever any hose of the Fire Department is laid upon any street, avenue,
alley, bridge, or vacant lot in the town, no person shall drive any automobile,
truck, locomotive, railroad car, or any other vehicle over the same unless the
hose shall be been protected by wooden railings or other device laid along the
side thereof, and then only at the places so protected unless otherwise
directed by a town official.
(Prior Code, § 15-516) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Crossing fire hose, see 47 O.S. § 11-1109
§ 71.045 EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle other than on official business shall not
follow any emergency or fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm
closer than 500 feet, or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where
emergency apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
(Prior Code, § 15-517)
   (B)   (1)   Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle
making use of audible and visual signals meeting the requirements of the laws
of the state, or of a police vehicle properly and lawfully making use of an
audible signal only, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right-
of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as
possible to, the right-hand edge or curb of the roadway clear of any
intersection, and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized
emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police
officer.
      (2)   This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the
safety of all persons using the highway.
(Prior Code, § 15-518) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Operation of vehicles on approach of authorized emergency vehicles, see 47
O.S. § 11-405
§ 71.046 CONTROL OF VEHICLE WHILE INTOXICATED.
   No person who is under the influence of alcoholic beverage, non-intoxicating
beverage, or drug, as described in this code and in this section, shall be in
actual physical control of any motor vehicle within the town.
(Prior Code, § 15-519)
§ 71.047 DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE.
   (A)   No person shall drive or operate a motor vehicle in the town who is:
      (1)   Under the influence of an alcoholic beverage of non-intoxicating
beverage;
      (2)   Under the combined influence of alcohol or any other intoxicating
substance, as provided in division (C) below; or
      (3)   Under the influence of any other intoxicating substance to a degree
which renders such person incapable of safely driving or operating a motor
vehicle.
   (B)   No person shall drive or operate a motor vehicle while his or her
ability to operate the motor vehicle is impaired by the consumption of
alcoholic beverage or non-intoxicating beverage within the town.
   (C)   No person who is an habitual user of, or under the influence of, any
narcotic drug, barbiturate, amphetamine, or marijuana, or who is under the
influence of any other drug to a degree which renders him or her incapable of
safely driving a motor vehicle, shall operate a motor vehicle within the town.
The fact that any person charged with a violation of this division (C) is, or
has been, lawfully entitled to use such narcotic drug, barbiturate,
amphetamine, marijuana, or other drug shall not constitute a defense against
any charge of violating this division (C).
   (D)   As used in this section, OTHER INTOXICATING SUBSTANCE or DRUG means
any controlled dangerous substance as defined in the Uniform Controlled
Dangerous Substances Act, being 63 O.S. §§ 2-101 et seq., and any other
substance, other than alcohol, which is capable of being ingested, inhaled,
injected, or absorbed into the human body and is capable of adversely affecting
the central nervous system, vision, hearing, or other sensory or motor
functions.
   (E)   Upon the trial of any criminal action or proceeding arising out of
acts alleged to have been committed by any person while driving or in actual
physical control of a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol or
intoxicating liquor, or evidence of the amount of alcohol or intoxicating
liquor in the person’s blood as shown by a chemical analysis of his or her
blood or breath is admissible. For the purpose of this section:
      (1)   Evidence that there was five-hundredths of 1%, but less than eight-
hundredths of 1% or less by weight of alcohol in his or her blood is prima
facie evidence that the person was not under the influence of alcohol or
intoxicating liquor;
      (2)   Evidence that there was more than five-hundredths of 1%, but less
than eight-hundredths of 1% by weight of alcohol in the person’s blood is
relevant evidence of operating a motor vehicle while his or her ability to
operate such motor vehicle is impaired by the consumption of alcohol or
intoxicating liquor. No person shall be convicted of the offense of operating a
motor vehicle while his or her ability to operate such vehicle is impaired by
consumption of alcohol or intoxicating liquor solely because there was more
than five-hundredths of 1% by weight of alcohol in the person’s blood in the
absence of additional evidence that such person’s driving was affected by the
consumption of alcohol to the extent that the public health and safety was
threatened, or that the person had violated a state statute or local ordinance
in the operation of a motor vehicle;
      (3)   Evidence that there was eight-hundredths of 1% or more by weight of
alcohol in his or her blood shall be admitted as prima facie evidence that the
person was under the influence of alcohol or intoxicating liquor;
      (4)   Percent by weight of alcohol in the blood shall be based upon grams
of alcohol per 100 milliliters of blood; and
      (5)   To be admissible, such evidence must first be qualified by
establishing that such specimen was obtained from the subject within not more
than two hours of the arrest of the subject.
   (F)   Every person who is convicted of a violation of this section for
operating a motor vehicle under the influence of alcohol or intoxicating liquor
shall be punished as provided in §
10.99 of this code.
(Prior Code, § 15-520) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Admission of evidence shown by tests, see 47 O.S. § 756
   Persons under the influence of alcohol or other substance or combination
thereof; penalty; enhancement, see 47 O.S. § 11-902
SPEED REGULATIONS
§ 71.060 SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   Notwithstanding a maximum speed limit enumerated in this code, no
person shall drive a vehicle upon any alley, highway, roadway, street, or
public parking area at a speed greater than or less than is reasonable or
prudent under the conditions then existing, considering visibility, amount of
traffic, condition of roadway surface, presence of pedestrians, obstruction of
view, and other similar facts.
   (B)   No person shall drive any vehicle upon a street at a speed greater
than will permit him or her to bring it to a stop within the assured clear
distance ahead.
   (C)   Except when a special hazard exists that requires lower speed for
compliance with division (A) above, the limits specified in this subchapter or
established as authorized shall be maximum lawful speeds. No person shall drive
a vehicle on a highway at a speed in excess of such maximum limits as follows:
      (1)   Twenty-five miles per hour on any street unless otherwise provided
herein; and
      (2)   Miles per hour as posted in school zones.
   (D)   Town personnel has authority to post lower speed limits than those
prescribed in this subchapter where special hazards exist.
   (E)   The fact that the speed of a vehicle is lower than the designated
limits shall not relieve the driver from the duty to decrease speed when
approaching and crossing an intersection, when approaching and going around a
curve, when approaching a hill crest, when traveling upon any narrow winding
roadway, or when a special hazard exists with respect to pedestrians or other
traffic, or by reason of weather or highway conditions, and speed shall be
decreased as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person or vehicle or
on entering the roadway in compliance with legal requirement and the duty of
all persons to use due care and precaution.
(Prior Code, § 15-701) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   When local authorities may and shall alter maximum limits, see 47 O.S. § 11-
803
§ 71.061 MINIMUM SPEED.
   It is unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle at such slow speed as
to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when
reduced speed is necessary for safe operation. Police officers are hereby
authorized to enforce this provision by directions to drivers, and in the event
of willful disobedience to this provision or refusal to comply with the
direction of an officer in accordance herewith, the continued slow operation by
a driver shall be unlawful and constitute a blocking of traffic and a violation
of this section.
(Prior Code, § 15-702) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Minimum speed regulation, see 47 O.S. § 11-804
RIGHT-OF-WAY
§ 71.075 AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   The driver of a vehicle on a street which is not a state or
federal highway approaching an intersection with a state or federal highway
shall stop and yield the right-of-way to a vehicle which has entered the
intersection or which is so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard.
      (2)   When two vehicles enter or approach an intersection from different
highways at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left
shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right.
      (3)   The right-of-way rules declared in divisions (A)(1) and (A)(2)
above are modified at through highways and otherwise as stated in this
subchapter.
      (4)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a “T” intersection, traveling
down the base of the “T” intersection approaching a dead end must yield the
right-of-way to all traffic.
(Prior Code, § 15-801)
   (B)   (1)   Where two or more vehicles face stop, slow, warning, or caution
signs or signals on two or more intersecting cross streets, and are approaching
so as to enter the intersection at the same time, where each vehicle is
required to stop, the vehicle coming from the right shall have the right-of-
way. Where each vehicle is required to slow, the vehicle coming from the right
shall have the right-of-way. Where each vehicle is required to take caution,
the vehicle coming from the right shall have the right-of-way.
      (2)   The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection shall yield the
right-of-way to a vehicle which has entered the intersection from a different
highway; provided that the driver of a vehicle on a street which is not a state
or federal highway approaching an intersection with a state or federal highway
shall stop and yield the right-of-way to a vehicle which has entered the
intersection or which is so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard.
      (3)   Where one vehicle is required to stop and the other to slow or take
caution, the one slowing or taking caution shall have the right-of-way. Where
one vehicle is required to slow and the other to take caution, the one required
to take caution shall have the right-of-way.
(Prior Code, § 15-802)
   (C)   The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to
the left shall give a signal and yield the right-of-way to any vehicle
approaching from the opposite direction which is within the intersection or so
close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard. However, the driver, having
so yielded and having given a signal when and as required by this subchapter,
may make such left turn, and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the
intersection from the opposite direction shall yield the right-of-way to the
vehicle making the left turn.
(Prior Code, § 15-803)
Statutory reference:
   Vehicle approaching or entering intersection, see 47 O.S. § 11-401
   Vehicle turning left at intersection, see 47 O.S. § 11-402
§ 71.076 THROUGH STREETS.
   (A)   The town personnel, subject to direction of the Board of Trustees, may
designate any street or part of street as a through street.
(Prior Code, § 15-804)
   (B)   Whenever the town personnel designates and describes a through street,
the town personnel shall have placed and maintained a stop sign, or if deemed
more appropriate at any intersection a yield sign, on each and every street
intersection such through street, and a heavy-traffic street not so designated.
Stop signs shall be erected at the approaches of either of the streets as may
be determined by the personnel if deemed desirable.
(Prior Code, § 15-805)
§ 71.077 STOP, YIELD INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   The town personnel, subject to direction by the Board of
Trustees, is authorized to determine and designate intersections where
particular hazard exists upon other than through streets, and to determine:
         (a)   Whether vehicles shall stop at one or more entrances to any such
intersection, in which event he or she shall cause to be erected a stop sign at
every such place where a stop is required; or
         (b)   Whether vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles on a
different street at such intersection as prescribed in division (B) below, in
which event he or she shall cause to be erected a yield sign at every place
where obedience thereto is required.
      (2)   Every stop sign and every yield sign shall be erected as near as
practicable to the nearest line of the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection or, if there is no crosswalk, then as near as practicable to the
nearest line of the intersecting roadway.
      (3)   Every stop sign shall bear the word “Stop” in letters not less than
eight inches in height. Every yield sign shall bear the word “Yield” in letter
not less than seven inches in height. Every stop sign and every yield sign
shall, at nighttime, be rendered luminous by internal illumination, or by a
floodlight project on the face of the sign, or by efficient reflecting elements
on the face of the sign.
(Prior Code, § 15-806)
   (B)   (1)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall in
obedience to such sign slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing
conditions, or shall stop if necessary and yield the right-of-way to any
pedestrian legally crossing the roadway on which he or she is driving, and to
any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another highway so closely as
to constitute an immediate hazard. If such driver is involved in a collision
with a pedestrian in a crosswalk or a vehicle in the intersection after driving
past a yield sign, such collision shall be deemed prima facie evidence of his
or her failure to yield the right-of-way.
      (2)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign is required for
safety to stop, shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of
the intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, at a clearly marked
stop line, but, if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway
where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersection roadway.
(Prior Code, § 15-807)
§ 71.078 SCHOOL ZONES, CROSSWALKS.
   (A)   The town personnel, subject to direction by the Board of Trustees, is
authorized to erect signs to designate school zones and school zone crosswalks.
   (B)   No person may drive a vehicle past a school sign or through a school
zone at a speed greater than that posted per hour as stated on school days.
Drivers proceeding in a school zone shall stop and yield the right-of-way to
pedestrians in school zone crosswalks when so directed by a school safety
patrol member or when such crosswalk is occupied by pedestrians between the
hours posted on school days.
   (C)   Any driver involved in a school zone crosswalk collision with a
pedestrian after failing to slow and yield the right-of-way to such pedestrian
shall be deemed prima facie in violation of this section.
(Prior Code, § 15-809) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.079 EMERGING FROM ALLEY, DRIVEWAY.
   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway, or building shall
stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the
sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway, and shall yield the
right-of-way to any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision, and upon
entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching
on the roadway.
(Prior Code, § 15-810)
Statutory reference:
   Emerging from alley, driveway, or building, see 47 O.S. § 11-704
§ 71.080 OBSTRUCTING INTERSECTION, CROSSWALK.
   No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is
sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicle he or she is operating without obstructing the passage
of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal
indication to proceed.
(Prior Code, § 15-811) Penalty, see §
71.999
TURNING MOVEMENTS
§ 71.095 METHOD OF TURNING.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do
so as follows:
      (1)   Right turns. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn
shall be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the
roadway;
      (2)   Left turns on two-way roadways. At any intersection where traffic
is permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the
intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the
right half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof, and by passing to the
right of such centerline where it enters the intersection; and after entering
the intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection
to the right of the centerline of the roadway being entered. Whenever
practicable, the left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to
the left of the center of the intersection; and
      (3)   Left turns on other than two-way roadways. At any intersection
where traffic is restricted to one direction on one or more of the roadways,
the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any such intersection shall
approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to
traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle. After entering the
intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as
nearly as practicable, in the left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic
moving in such direction upon the roadway being entered.
   (B)   No person shall turn a vehicle at an intersection unless the vehicle
is in proper position upon the roadway as required by this section, or turn a
vehicle to enter a private road or driveway, or otherwise turn a vehicle from a
direct course or move right or left upon a roadway, unless and until such
movement can be made with reasonable safety.
(Prior Code, § 15-901) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Required position and method of turning at intersections, see 47 O.S. § 11-
601
§ 71.096 AUTHORITY TO PLACE TURNING MARKERS.
   (A)   The town personnel, subject to direction by the Board of Trustees, is
authorized to have placed markers, buttons, or signs within or adjacent to
intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such
intersections. Such course to be traveled shall be indicated.
   (B)   When authorized markers, buttons, or other indications are placed
within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning
thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such
indications.
(Prior Code, § 15-902) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.097 RESTRICTION OF TURNING.
   (A)   Town personnel, subject to direction by the Board of Trustees, may
determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a
right turn, left turn, or U-turn, and shall have placed proper signs at such
intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours
of any day and permitted at other hours.
   (B)   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right turn,
left turn, or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the
directions of any such sign.
(Prior Code, § 15-903) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.098 LIMITATIONS ON TURNING; U-TURNS.
   (A)   Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall operate a vehicle so
as to turn more than 90 degrees on any street or highway.
   (B)   Persons excepted are those who can safely execute that turn if at an
intersection, but it is unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to make such a
turn at any intersection:
      (1)   Where traffic-control signals are installed;
      (2)   Where a police officer is directing traffic, except at the latter’s
direction; or
      (3)   Where an official no U-turn sign has been placed and is maintained.
(Prior Code, § 15-904) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.099 TURNING, STOPPING MOVEMENTS; SIGNALS REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall turn a vehicle at an intersection unless the vehicle
is in proper position upon the roadway as required by ordinance, or turn a
vehicle to enter a private road or driveway, or otherwise turn a vehicle from a
direct course or move right or left upon a roadway, or otherwise turn a vehicle
from a direct course or move right or left upon a roadway unless and until such
movement can be made with reasonable safety. No person shall turn any vehicle
without giving an appropriate signal in the manner hereinafter provided in the
event any other traffic may be affected by such movement.
   (B)   A signal of intention to turn right or left when required shall be
given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by the
vehicle before turning.
   (C)   No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle
without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein to the
driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is opportunity to give
such signal.
(Prior Code, § 15-905) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Turning movements and required signals, see 47 O.S. § 11-604
§ 71.100 SIGNALS; METHOD REQUIRED.
   (A)   Any stop or turn signal, when required herein, shall be given either
by means of the hand and arm or by signal lamps, except as otherwise provided
in division (B) below.
   (B)   Any motor vehicle in use on a highway shall be equipped with, and the
required signal shall be given by, signal lamps when the distance from the
center of the top of the steering post to the left outside limit of the body,
cab, or load of such motor vehicle exceeds 24 inches, or when the distance from
the center of the top of the steering post to the rear limit of the body or
load thereof exceeds 14 feet. The latter measurement shall apply to any single
vehicle and to any combination of vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 15-906)
§ 71.102 METHOD OF GIVING HAND SIGNALS.
   All signals herein required given by hand and arm shall be given from the
left side of the vehicle in the following manner:
   (A)   Left turn: Hand and arm extended horizontally;
   (B)   Right turn: Hand and arm extended upward; and
   (C)   Stop or decrease speed: Hand and arm extended downward.
(Prior Code, § 15-907)
Statutory reference:
   Methods of giving hand-and-arm signals, see 47 O.S. § 11-606
   Signals by hand-and-arm or signal lamps, see 47 O.S. § 11-605
§ 71.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no
specific penalty is prescribed, shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Any person convicted of violating §§
71.016(A)(1) or (A)(2) shall be punished by a fine up to the maximum amount
allowed by state law and shall pay all court costs thereof. Revenue from such
fine shall be apportioned to the Department of Public Safety Revolving Fund and
used by the State Highway Safety Office to promote the use of child passenger
restraint systems as provided in 47 O.S. § 11-1113. This fine shall be
suspended and the court costs limited to a maximum of $15 in the case of the
first offense upon proof of purchase or acquisition by loan of a child
passenger restraint system. Provided, the Department of Public Safety shall not
assess points to the driving record of any person convicted of a violation of §
71.016.
(Prior Code, § 15-541)
      (2)   Any person convicted of violating §
71.016(B) shall be punished by a fine up to the maximum amount allowed by state
law, whichever is greater, and shall pay court costs.
(Prior Code, § 15-542)
CHAPTER 72: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
72.01   Stopping, standings, parking prohibited
   
72.02   Restrictions on parking for persons with disabilities
   
72.03   Parking not to obstruct traffic or signs
   
72.04   Parking for certain purposes prohibited
   
72.05   Parking more than 72 hours
   
72.06   Standing, parking on left side
   
72.07   Parking on private property; impounding of vehicles
   
72.08   Unattended vehicles
   
72.09   Authority to restrict parking time
   
72.10   Parking in private spaces without permission
   
72.11   Prohibiting parking within fire lanes
   
72.12   Limiting parking to authorized emergency vehicles
   
72.13   Presumption in prosecutions for standing, parking violations
   
72.14   Truck parking restricted in residential subdivisions
   
72.15   Citation tags on parked vehicles
Manner of Parking
   
72.30   Distance from curb
   
72.31   Brakes to be set; motor not to be running; securing animals
   
72.32   Angle parking
   
72.33   Parking within marked spaces
   
72.34   Leaving ten feet of roadway
   
72.35   Double parking prohibited
Loading Zones
   
72.50   Designating curb loading zones
   
72.51   Parking, standing in passenger loading zone restricted
   
72.52   Parking, standing in freight loading zones
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 72.01 STOPPING, STANDINGS, PARKING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle, except when necessary
to avoid a conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or ordinance,
or the directions of a police officer or traffic-control device, in any of the
following places:
      (1)   On a sidewalk;
      (2)   In front of a public or private driveway;
      (3)   Within an intersection;
      (4)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant, except in a parking space
officially marked;
      (5)   On a crosswalk;
      (6)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection, except in a
parking space officially marked;
      (7)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign,
or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway;
      (8)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless the
town indicates the different length by signs or markings;
      (9)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
      (10)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station or, on
the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station, within 75 feet
of such entrance when properly signposted;
      (11)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic;
      (12)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
or curb of a street;
      (13)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway underpass;
      (14)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping, standing, or
parking; and
      (15)   At any other place prohibited by this code or law.
   (B)   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his or her control
into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is lawful.
(Prior Code, § 15-601) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Stopping, standing, or parking outside of business or residence district;
penalties, see 47 O.S. § 11-1001
§ 72.02 RESTRICTIONS FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES.
   No person shall be permitted to place or park a motor vehicle in any parking
space that is designated and posted as a reserved area for parking of motor
vehicles of a person with a physical disability unless such vehicle is eligible
for a detachable insignia of a person with a physical disability issued by the
State Department of Public Safety, as provided for in 47 O.S. § 15-112, as
amended, and such insignia is displayed as provided in accordance with state
law or regulations adopted pursuant thereto. The provisions of this section
shall apply to any such designated and posted reserved area on public property
or private property accessible to the public and where the public is invited.
Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished as
provided in §
70.99 of this code, subject to the maximum penalty allowed by state law. In
addition thereto, any person so convicted shall pay any and all reasonable and
necessary charges incurred by the landowner or other person in having any motor
vehicle unlawfully parked hereunder removed from the property and stored.
(Prior Code, § 15-602) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Parking areas for physically disabled persons; violations and penalties, see
47 O.S. § 11-1007
   Power of municipality or political subdivision to enforce act, see 47 O.S. §
15-115
§ 72.03 PARKING NOT TO OBSTRUCT TRAFFIC OR SIGNS.
   (A)   No person shall park a vehicle within a street or alley in such a
manner or under such conditions as to prohibit the free movement of authorized
emergency vehicles or vehicular traffic.
   (B)   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle within a street or
alley in such a position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting
property.
   (C)   No person shall at any time stop, stand, or park a vehicle except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, in compliance with the
directions of a police officer or traffic-control device, or in case of
emergency within any alley except for the purpose of, and while actually
engaged in, loading or unloading merchandise, with the maximum time permitted
for loading or unloading being one hour; however, such vehicle must be headed
in the proper direction in the alley, and it must be parked on the right half
of one-way alleys.
   (D)   Any vehicle parked upon the public streets or right-of-way shall be
parked so as not to obstruct the view of any flashing beacon, stop sign, or
traffic-control signal by oncoming traffic.
(Prior Code, § 15-603) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.04 PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall park his or her vehicle upon any street or highway for the
principal purpose of:
   (A)   Displaying the vehicle for sale;
   (B)   Displaying advertising or displaying merchandise;
   (C)   Washing, greasing, or repairing the vehicle, except repairs
necessitated by an emergency; and
   (D)   Selling merchandise or any other thing from vehicles without an
appropriate permit or license from the town.
(Prior Code, § 15-604) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.05 PARKING MORE THAN 72 HOURS.
   No vehicle may be parked on a town or state road or highway for more than 72
hours. Such vehicles will be given a notice that the vehicle must be removed or
it will be removed by agents of the town as provided in this code.
(Prior Code, § 15-605) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.06 STANDING, PARKING ON LEFT SIDE.
   (A)   Town personnel, subject to direction of the Board of Trustees, may
determine when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of
any one-way roadway, and to have signs or marks placed giving notice thereof.
   (B)   In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways and
traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall
stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless
signs or marks are placed to permit such standing or parking.
(Prior Code, § 15-606)
§ 72.07 PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY; IMPOUNDING OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person shall park a vehicle on the private property of another
without the consent of the owner of the property, or his or her agent or
tenant.
   (B)   Any unoccupied vehicle parked in violation of this section may, upon
complaint of the property owner, or his or her agent or tenant, be removed and
impounded by the police; and the vehicle owner must pay removal, storage, and
impounding fees.
(Prior Code, § 15-607) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.08 UNATTENDED VEHICLES.
   The person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall not permit it to
stand unattended without first stopping the engine and effectively setting the
brake thereon and, when standing upon any grade, turning the front wheels to
the curb or side of the street.
(Prior Code, § 15-608) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Unattended motor vehicle, see 47 O.S. § 11-1101
§ 72.09 AUTHORITY TO RESTRICT PARKING TIME.
   (A)   The Town Board of Trustees, by resolution, may establish parking time
limits, or prohibit parking, on designated streets by having appropriate signs
placed thereon.
   (B)   When such signs are in place, no person shall park a vehicle in
violation thereof.
(Prior Code, § 15-609) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.10 PARKING IN PRIVATE SPACES WITHOUT PERMISSION.
   (A)   The parking, leaving, or keeping of vehicles, either with or without
occupants, upon real property owned or leased for use of hotels or business
establishments as private parking places, without permission of the owner or
lessee, as the case may be, is hereby prohibited.
   (B)   Any vehicle parked or left in violation of division (A) above shall,
upon the complaint of the owner or lessee of the property, be removed from the
premises by the police or on the order of any police officer, at the expense of
the owner of the vehicle. Such removal may be accomplished by the Police
Department or by a Police Department order directing any person operating a
towing service to pull the vehicle to his or her garage or place of business,
where it shall be held in the custody of the Police Department until the towing
charges and the fine and costs, if any, are paid.
(Prior Code, § 15-610) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.11 PROHIBITING PARKING WITHIN FIRE LANES.
   Town personnel, when the public safety shall require, is authorized and
directed to prohibit parking upon private property used for shopping centers,
schools, hospitals, nursing homes, restaurants, and places of public
entertainment within zones to be clearly designated and defined by appropriate
sign, when the same is necessary for the establishment of fire lanes to avoid
obstruction of free passage and access. No person shall stop, stand, or park a
vehicle, except an authorized emergency vehicle, within such prohibited fire
lanes, except on direction and by authority of a police officer.
(Prior Code, § 15-611) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.12 LIMITING PARKING TO AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   Town personnel, subject to any directions which the Town Board of Trustees
may give, is authorized to designate streets, or portions thereof, where
parking is limited to authorized emergency vehicles. When signs are in place
giving notice of such limitation, it shall be unlawful for any person to park
any vehicle, except an authorized emergency vehicle, upon any such street or
portion thereof.
(Prior Code, § 15-612) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.13 PRESUMPTION IN PROSECUTIONS FOR STANDING, PARKING VIOLATIONS.
   In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation governing
the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle
described in the complaint was parked in violation of any such law or
regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was,
at the time of such violation, the registered owner of such vehicle shall
constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of
such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point
where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred.
(Prior Code, § 15-613)
Cross-reference:
   Regulations on impoundment of vehicles, see §§
70.40 through
70.51
Statutory reference:
   Officers authorized to remove illegally stopped vehicles, see 47 O.S. § 11-
1002
§ 72.14 TRUCK PARKING RESTRICTED IN RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
      BUS. Any vehicle designed for carrying more than 18 passengers and used
for the transportation of persons; and every motor vehicle, other than a
taxicab, designed and used for the transportation of persons for compensation
excluding school buses owned and operated by public, or private schools or
school districts and church buses from 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
      TRUCK. Any truck above one ton capacity, or truck-tractor with or without
a semitrailer or poletrailer attached, or any other combination of vehicles.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any truck or bus to be parked or stored on public
or private property within a residential area or within 300 feet of residential
subdivisions, except for purposes of loading and unloading.
   (C)   The following trucks or buses are exempt from the 300-foot restriction
in division (B) above:
      (1)   Those used in businesses lawfully established within the town’s
Commercial or Industrial Zoning Districts;
      (2)   Those used for farming by the owner or occupant in Agricultural
Zoning Districts; or
      (3)   Buses operated by schools and churches within residential zones.
(Prior Code, § 15-1002) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.15 CITATION TAGS ON PARKED VEHICLES.
   In cases where vehicles without drivers are parked or stopped in violation
of this subchapter, police officers and other persons appointed by the Chief of
Police shall affix citation tags to the vehicles. A violator of any provision
of this subchapter who has been given a citation tag fails to appear in
accordance with the instructions of such tag shall be subject to a separate
offense as provided in §
70.99.
(Prior Code, § 15-1802)
MANNER OF PARKING
§ 72.30 DISTANCE FROM CURB.
   Except as otherwise provided in this section, every vehicle stopped or
parked upon a roadway where there are adjacent curbs shall be so stopped or
parked with the right-hand wheels of such vehicle parallel to, and within 18
inches of, the right-hand curb. Every vehicle stopped and parked upon the left-
hand side of a one-way street where there are adjacent curbs shall be parked or
stopped with the left-hand wheels parallel to, and within 18 inches of, the
left-hand curb.
(Prior Code, § 15-620)
§ 72.31 BRAKES TO BE SET; MOTOR NOT TO BE RUNNING; SECURING ANIMALS.
   Adequate brakes shall be set on all parked vehicles. No driver of a motor
vehicle shall leave the vehicle with the motor running while parked. Animals
left or parked on the streets shall be securely hitched.
(Prior Code, § 15-621) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.32 ANGLE PARKING.
   (A)   Town personnel, subject to the direction of the Board of Trustees, may
determine upon what streets and parts of streets angle parking will be
permitted and authority shall continue until changed permitting angle parking
on any such street or part of streets, and the angle parking markings or signs
are amended.
   (B)   On those streets which have been so signed or marked for angle
parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the
curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings.
   (C)   Angle parking is not permitted on any state or federal-aid highway
unless the State Department of Transportation has determined that the roadway
is of sufficient width to permit angle parking without interfering with the
free movement of traffic.
(Prior Code, § 15-622) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.33 PARKING WITHIN MARKED SPACES.
   In an area where parking spaces have been marked off on the surface of the
street, a driver parking a vehicle shall park it within a parking space as thus
marked off and not on or over a line delineating a space.
(Prior Code, § 15-623)
§ 72.34 LEAVING TEN FEET OF ROADWAY.
   No person shall park a vehicle upon a street or alley in such a manner or
under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of
roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic.
(Prior Code, § 15-624) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.35 DOUBLE PARKING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be double-parked on any street within the town limits
except in compliance with the direction of a police officer or traffic control
device, or except when necessary to avoid conflict with another vehicle.
   (B)   (1)   Delivery vehicles, either loading or unloading, may double park
in the right-hand lane while in the process of loading or unloading and making
delivery to local business establishments; provided that the driver of the
delivery vehicle shall keep a lookout for cars and vehicles needing or
attempting to move away from the curb, and shall move his or her delivery
vehicle as soon as possible to permit the parked vehicles to be moved.
      (2)   Such double parking shall be permitted only so long as both traffic
lanes are not blocked.
(Prior Code, § 15-625) Penalty, see §
70.99
LOADING ZONES
§ 72.50 DESIGNATING CURB LOADING ZONES.
   (A)   Town personnel, subject to direction of the Board of Trustees, may
determine the location of passenger and freight curb loading zones, and shall
have placed and maintained appropriate signs indicating the same and stating
the hours during which the provisions of this section are applicable.
(Prior Code, § 15-1101)
   (B)   (1)   Town personnel are authorized to issue special permits to permit
the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading
merchandise or materials subject to the terms and conditions of such permit.
Such permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property or to
the owner of the vehicle, and shall grant to such person the privilege as
therein stated and authorized herein.
      (2)   It is unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of
the special terms or conditions of any permit issued under this section.
(Prior Code, § 15-1104) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.51 PARKING, STANDING IN PASSENGER LOADING ZONE RESTRICTED.
   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of
time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in any
place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when the regulations
applicable to such curb loading zone are effective, and then only for period
not to exceed three minutes.
(Prior Code, § 15-1102) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.52 PARKING, STANDING IN FREIGHT LOADING ZONES.
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose or
length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery, or pickup
and loading, of materials in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone
during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no
case shall the stop for loading or unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes.
   (B)   The driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily at a place
marked as a freight curb loading zone for the purpose of, and while actually
engaged in, loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not
interfere with any motor vehicle used for the transportation of materials which
is waiting to enter, or about to enter, such zone.
(Prior Code, § 15-1103) Penalty, see §
70.99
CHAPTER 73: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
Bicycles
   
73.01   Effects of regulations
   
73.02   Applicability of traffic laws
   
73.03   Obedience to traffic-control devices
   
73.04   Manner of riding bicycle
   
73.05   Riding on roads, bicycle paths
   
73.06   Speed restrictions
   
73.07   Carrying articles
   
73.08   Parking
   
73.09   Riding on sidewalk prohibited
   
73.10   Lights, brakes
   
73.11   Rider not to cling to other vehicle
   
73.12   Signal devices
   
73.13   Emerging from alley, driveway, building
Motorcycles
   
73.25   Operation of motorcycle
   
73.26   Equipment required
   
73.27   Headgear required
   
73.28   License required
Operation of All Terrain, Golf Carts, and Utility Vehicles
   
73.40   Definition
   
73.41   Signs
   
73.42   Registration
   
73.43   Hours of operation
   
73.44   Crossing intersecting highways
   
73.45   Application of traffic laws
   
73.46   Safety equipment required
   
73.47   Proof of insurance
   
73.48   Operation of all terrain, gold carts, and utility vehicles allowed
   
73.49   Monies collected from fines and registration fees
 
   
73.99   Penalty
BICYCLES
§ 73.01 EFFECTS OF REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not
authorize or knowingly permit any child or ward to violate any of the
provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   These regulations applicable to bicycles shall apply whenever a
bicycle is operated upon any highway or upon any path set aside for the
exclusive use of bicycles, subject to the exceptions stated herein.
(Prior Code, § 15-1401) Penalty, see §
73.99
Statutory reference:
   Effect of regulations, see 47 O.S. § 11-1201
§ 73.02 APPLICABILITY OF TRAFFIC LAWS.
   Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the
rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a
vehicle by the laws of this state declaring rules and or road applicable to the
driver of a vehicle, except as to special regulations in this subchapter and
except as to those provisions of laws and ordinances which by their nature can
have no application.
(Prior Code, § 15-1402)
§ 73.03 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official
traffic-control signals, signs, and other control devices applicable to
vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
   (B)   Whenever authorized, signs are erected indicating that no right turn,
left turn, or U-turn is permitted, and no person operating a bicycle shall
disobey the direction of any such sign except where such person dismounts from
the bicycle to make such turn, in which event such person shall then obey the
regulations applicable to pedestrians.
(Prior Code, § 15-1403) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.04 MANNER OF RIDING BICYCLE.
   (A)   A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a
permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
   (B)   No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the
number for which it is design and equipped.
   (C)   A person shall ride a bicycle only in the manner in which it is
designed and equipped to carry the person.
(Prior Code, § 15-1404) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.05 RIDING ON ROADS, BICYCLE PATHS.
   (A)   Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to
the right side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing
a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.
   (B)   Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two
persons abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside exclusively for
the use of bicycles.
   (C)   Wherever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a
roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the roadway.
(Prior Code, § 15-1405)
§ 73.06 SPEED RESTRICTIONS.
   No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and
prudent under the conditions then existing.
(Prior Code, § 15-1406) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.07 CARRYING ARTICLES.
   No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle, or chapter
which prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the handlebars.
(Prior Code, § 15-1407) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.08 PARKING.
   No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway
against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle, or
against a building or at the curb, in such manner as to afford the least
obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
(Prior Code, § 15-1408) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.09 RIDING ON SIDEWALK PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk in the Business
District.
   (B)   Whenever a person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person
shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal
before overtaking and passing the pedestrian.
   (C)   The town personnel may erect signs on any sidewalk or roadway
prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon. When such signs are in place, no
person shall disobey them.
(Prior Code, § 15-1409) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.10 LIGHTS, BRAKES.
   (A)   Every bicycle in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp on the
front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least 500
feet to the front, and with a red reflector on the rear of a type which shall
be visible from all distances from 50 feet to 300 feet to the rear when
directly in front of lawful upper beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle. A
lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may
be used in addition to the red reflector.
   (B)   Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the
operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement.
(Prior Code, § 15-1410)
§ 73.11 RIDER NOT TO CLING TO OTHER VEHICLE.
   No person riding upon any bicycle shall attach the same or himself or
herself to any vehicle upon a roadway.
(Prior Code, § 15-1411) Penalty, see §
73.99
Statutory reference:
   Clinging to vehicles, see 47 O.S. § 11-1204
§ 73.12 SIGNAL DEVICES.
   No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a bell or other
device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least 100 feet,
except that a bicycle shall not be equipped with, nor shall any person use upon
a bicycle, any siren or whistle.
(Prior Code, § 15-1412) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.13 EMERGING FROM ALLEY, DRIVEWAY, BUILDING.
   The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway, or building
shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any
alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on the sidewalk
or sidewalk area, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to
all vehicles approaching on the roadway.
(Prior Code, § 15-1413)
MOTORCYCLES
§ 73.25 OPERATION OF MOTORCYCLE.
   (A)   No person shall operate a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle, including
a motor scooter or motor-driven bicycle, on a street in the town during a time
when state law prohibits the operation of such vehicle.
   (B)   No driver of a three-wheel motor vehicle or motor driven bicycle shall
carry any other person on, upon, or within such vehicle on any street in the
town, except as hereinafter provided. If any two- or three-wheel motor vehicle
with a wheel diameter of 12 inches or greater, or any bicycle shall have either
a double seating device with double foot rests or a side car attachment
providing a separate seat space within such side car attachment for each person
riding therein so that such person shall be seated entirely within the body of
the side car, it shall be permissible for an operator who has attained the age
of 16 or older to carry a passenger. A demonstration ride by a licensed dealer,
or his or her employee, is excepted from the provisions hereof.
   (C)   No motorcycle or motor scooter shall be ridden upon any sidewalk.
   (D)   Handlebars on motorcycles and motor scooters shall not exceed 12
inches in height, measured from the crown or point of attachment.
   (E)   No rider of a motorcycle or motor scooter shall hold to any moving
vehicle for the purpose of being propelled.
   (F)   No driver of a motorcycle, motor scooter, or bicycle shall pass other
vehicles between lanes of traffic traveling in the same direction, authorized
emergency vehicles excepted.
   (G)   No person shall operate any motorcycle or any motor scooter at a speed
greater than the speed limit legally posted. In no event nor at any time may an
operator under the age of 16 years operate a motorcycle or motor scooter at a
speed greater than 35 miles per hour.
   (H)   A person operating a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle shall ride only
on the permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
(Prior Code, § 15-1301) Penalty, see §
73.99
Statutory reference:
   Motorcycles, motor-driven cycles, motorized bicycles, or electric-assisted
bicycle; restrictions on transporting other persons and on operation, see 47
O.S. § 11-1103
   Speed limitation on motorcycles, motor-driven cycles, and motorized
scooters, see 47 O.S. § 11-805
§ 73.26 EQUIPMENT REQUIRED.
   The following equipment shall be required on all motorcycles and all motor
scooters on actual trail rides conducted outside of public streets, roads, and
highways.
   (A)   Rear-view mirrors. All vehicles covered under this subchapter shall be
equipped with two mirrors, containing a reflection surface of not less than
three inches in diameter, mounted one on each side of the vehicle and
positioned so as to enable the operator to clearly view the roadway for a
distance of 200 feet to the rear of his or her vehicle.
   (B)   Windshield. All vehicles covered under this section shall be equipped
with a windshield of sufficient quality, size, and thickness to protect the
operator from foreign objects, except that in lieu of such windshield the
operator shall wear goggles or a face shield of material and design to protect
him or her from foreign objects.
   (C)   Brakes. All vehicles covered under this subchapter shall be equipped
with brakes adequate to control the movement of the same to stop and hold such
vehicles, including two separate means of applying the brakes, one of which is
effective to apply the brakes to the front wheel and one of which is effective
to apply the brakes to the rear wheels. All such vehicles shall be equipped
with a stop lamp on the rear of the vehicle which shall display a red or amber
light, or any shade of color between red and amber, visible from a distance of
not less than 100 feet to the rear in normal sunlight, and which shall be
actuated upon application of the service brake.
   (D)   Speedometer. All vehicles covered under this subchapter shall be
equipped with a properly operating speedometer capable of registering at least
the maximum legal speed limit for the vehicle.
   (E)   Fender. All vehicles covered under this subchapter shall be equipped
with a fender over each wheel. All fenders shall be of the type provided by the
manufacturer.
   (F)   Lights. All vehicles covered under this subchapter shall carry at
least one lighted head lamp capable of showing a white light visible at least
300 feet in the direction in which the same are proceeding, and one tail lamp
mounted in the rear which, when lighted, shall omit a red light plainly visible
from at least 300 feet to the rear; and such lights required by this subchapter
shall be burning whenever such vehicles are in motion during the period from
one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise, and at any other
time when, due to insufficient light or unfavorable atmospheric conditions,
persons and vehicles on the streets are not clearly discernible at a distance
of at least 500 feet ahead.
   (G)   Vehicles. All vehicles covered under this section shall carry on the
rear thereof, either as a part of the tail light or separately, at least one
red reflector which shall be of such size and characteristics as to be visible
at night from all distances within 350 feet to 100 feet from the vehicle when
directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlights on motor vehicles.
   (H)   Muffler. No person shall operate a vehicle covered under this section
with an exhaust system modified so that motor noise is increased greater than
that of the original muffler equipment provided by the manufacturer of the
vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 15-1302) Penalty, see §
73.99
Statutory reference:
   Brake equipment required, see 47 O.S. § 12-301
   Head lamps on motor vehicles, see 47 O.S. § 12-203
   Reflectors, see 47 O.S. § 12-205
   Stop lamps, see 47 O.S. § 12-206
§ 73.27 HEADGEAR REQUIRED.
   No person under 18 years of age shall operate or ride upon any vehicle
covered under this subchapter unless such person is equipped with, and wearing
on the head, a crash helmet of a type and design manufactured for such use. All
crash helmets shall consist of lining, padding, and chin straps, and be of the
type as not to distort the view of the driver.
(Prior Code, § 15-1303) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.28 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   All operators of motorcycles or motor-driven cycles shall have a current,
valid license issued by the state and conform to any specific restriction
contained thereon.
(Prior Code, § 15-1304)
OPERATION OF ALL TERRAIN, GOLF CARTS, AND UTILITY VEHICLES
§ 73.40 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   ALL TERRAIN VEHICLE. A motorized vehicle with low pressure tires that is
limited in engine displacement of not more than 1,000 cubic centimeters. ALL
TERRAIN VEHICLES may be called an ATV, golf cart, or vehicle.
(Ord. 2018-004, passed 6-18-2018)
§ 73.41 SIGNS.
   The town will display a sign that states that all terrain vehicles are
allowed to be operated on town streets. The theft or vandalism of these signs
is in no way a disclaimer by the town that they are responsible for anyone
operating these types of vehicles. The town is not responsible for other
vehicle operators who may not notice these types of vehicles while operating
their own motor vehicle. The town will post the above noted signs at the four
most visible town popular limits. If the town designates a certain spot to
cross a state or U.S. highway, the town will also post signs at those
designated crossings.
(Ord. 2018-004, passed 6-18-2018)
§ 73.42 REGISTRATION.
   (A)   All persons operating an ATV or golf cart in the town limits of the
town must register with the Town Hall, and place said ATV on the list of
authorized vehicles. Owners/operators will provide their name, vehicle
identification number, pay the registration of $25, sign the liability waiver,
and display the registration sicker in a visible place on said vehicle.
   (B)   The registration sticker is valid for as long as the original
registrant owns the vehicle. If said vehicle is transferred/sold/traded/given
and the like, the new owner will need to re-register the vehicle with the Town
Hall at the full cost of registration, if the vehicle is to be operated on the
streets of the town. If a registration sticker becomes damaged, unreadable,
lost, or stolen, the owner will need to purchase a new registration sticker
from Town Hall at a fee of $5.
(Ord. 2018-004, passed 6-18-2018)
§ 73.43 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   ATVs and golf carts are allowed to travel the town streets during daylight
hours only.
(Ord. 2018-004, passed 6-18-2018)
§ 73.44 CROSSING INTERSECTING HIGHWAYS.
   The operator of a motorized golf cart or all terrain vehicle, under permit,
may cross any street or highway intersecting a designated roadway. ATVs, golf
carts, and other types that cross a state or U.S. highway need to make a direct
crossing of the highway, and may only drive down the highway if there is no
other way to cross the highway or railroad after leaving a street or trail to
intersect the other street or trail. In the event the operator must drive down
the highway for the purpose stated herein, the operator must ride down the side
of the highway either on the shoulder or in the grass or ditch area. At no time
is the operator allowed to drive on the main portion of the highway except when
directly crossing it.
(Ord. 2018-004, passed 6-18-2018) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.45 APPLICATION OF TRAFFIC LAWS.
   (A)   Every person operating a motorized golf cart or all terrain vehicle,
under permit, on the designated roadways has all the rights and duties
applicable to the driver of any other vehicle lawfully licensed on the state’s
roads and highways. All operators must follow all of the traffic laws of the
state except where those provisions cannot be reasonably applied to golf carts
and all terrain-type vehicles. All persons operating ATVs and golf carts must
have a valid driver’s license issued by a State Department of Public Safety
allowing them to operate a motorcycle or motor vehicle. Non-U.S. citizens, who
possess their own country’s driver’s license will have to meet the same
requirements as if they were operating an automobile (visa, passport, and the
like).
   (B)   Any modification to the exhaust that causes or makes the engine/motor
to emit or make more noise will not receive a permit from the town, until which
time the modification issue has been resolved.
   (C)   Any violation of the state traffic laws will be punishable by the same
fines and costs as those relating to other motor vehicles.
(Ord. 2018-004, passed 6-18-2018) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.46 SAFETY EQUIPMENT REQUIRED.
   (A)   All persons under the age of 18 shall be required to wear an approved
safety helmet, unless the golf cart or ATV in/on which they are driving,
riding, or as a passenger has some sort of built-in occupant protection device
such as a roll bar, fixed top, or a cage.
   (B)   All permitted golf carts or ATVs shall display a slow moving vehicle
triangle emblem on the rear of the vehicle.
(Ord. 2018-004, passed 6-18-2018)
§ 73.47 PROOF OF INSURANCE.
   Every person operating a permitted motorized golf cart or all terrain
vehicles shall provide proof of current liability insurance.
(Ord. 2018-004, passed 6-18-2018)
§ 73.48 OPERATION OF ALL TERRAIN, GOLD CARTS, AND UTILITY VEHICLES ALLOWED.
   Operation of golf carts and all terrain vehicles may be operated in the
town, with a permit sticker that is properly displayed on the forward left side
of the vehicle in a conspicuous place, and provided that all provisions in
accordance with this subchapter have been met.
(Ord. 2018-004, passed 6-18-2018)
§ 73.49 MONIES COLLECTED FROM FINES AND REGISTRATION FEES.
   Monies that are collected from the fines in regards to this section shall be
deposited in the Town Municipal Court Fund. Monies that are collected in
regards to the registration and re-registration shall be deposited in the Town
General Fund to help off set the expense incurred from implementing and
operating this subchapter.
(Ord. 2018-004, passed 6-18-2018)
§ 73.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no
specific penalty is prescribed, shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of §§
73.01 through
73.13 shall be punished as provided in §
10.99 of this code.
(Prior Code, § 15-1414)
   (C)   (1)   Failure to pay the registration fee, failure to register the ATV
or golf cart with the Town Hall, and/or failure to properly display the
registration sticker on the ATV or golf cart, as stated in §
73.42, will constitute a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punishable
by a fine and costs of which will be assessed by the Municipal Judge. Bond
amount for a violation of §
73.42 will be set at $100.
      (2)    Any ATV or golf cart observed on town streets at any time other
than daylight hours, as stated in §
73.43, will constitute a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punishable
by a fine and costs of which will be assessed by the Municipal Judge. Bond
amount for a violation of this section will be set at $100.
      (3)   A violation of §
73.44 will constitute a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punishable
by a fine and costs of which will be assessed by the Municipal Judge. Bond
amount for a violation of §
73.44 will be set at $100.
      (4)   Any violation of §
73.46 will constitute a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punishable
by a fine and costs of which will be assessed by the Municipal Judge. Bond
amount for a violation of §
73.46 will be set at $25.
      (5)   A violation of §
73.47 will constitute a misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be punishable
by fine and costs of which will be assessed by the Municipal Judge. Bond amount
for a violation of §
73.47 will be set at $100.
(Ord. 2018-004, passed 6-18-2018)
CHAPTER 74: PEDESTRIANS
Section
   
74.01   Subject to traffic-control signals
   
74.02   Right-of-way at crosswalks
   
74.03   Right-half of crosswalks
   
74.04   Crossing at right angles
   
74.05   When pedestrians shall yield
   
74.06   Prohibited crossing
   
74.07   Obedience to railroad signals
   
74.08   Walking along roadway
   
74.09   Hitchhiking; soliciting business
   
74.10   Drivers to exercise care
   
74.11   Playing in streets
§ 74.01 SUBJECT TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNALS.
   Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic-control signals as declared in this
chapter. At all other places, pedestrians shall be granted those rights and be
subject to the restrictions stated in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 15-1501)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to require pedestrians obedience to traffic-control signs, see 47
O.S. § 15-107
   Pedestrians subject to traffic regulations, see 47 O.S. § 11-501
§ 74.02 RIGHT-OF-WAY AT CROSSWALKS.
   (A)   When traffic-control signals are not in place or not in operation, the
driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if
need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk
when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is
traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite
half of the roadway as to be in danger.
   (B)   No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and
walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close that it is impossible
for the driver to yield.
(Prior Code, § 15-1502) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.03 RIGHT-HALF OF CROSSWALKS.
   Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right-half of
crosswalks.
(Prior Code, § 15-1503)
§ 74.04 CROSSING AT RIGHT ANGLES.
   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by route at
right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb, except
in a crosswalk.
(Prior Code, § 15-1504) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 74.05 WHEN PEDESTRIANS SHALL YIELD.
   (A)   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk or within an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all
vehicles upon the roadway.
   (B)   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel
or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way
to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (C)   This section shall not apply under the conditions stated in §
74.06 when pedestrians are prohibited from crossing at certain designated
places.
(Prior Code, § 15-1505)
§ 74.06 PROHIBITED CROSSING.
   Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in
operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a crosswalk.
(Prior Code, § 15-1506) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 74.07 OBEDIENCE TO RAILROAD SIGNALS.
   No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over, or under any crossing gate
or barrier at a railroad grade crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or
is being opened or closed.
(Prior Code, § 15-1507) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.08 WALKING ALONG ROADWAY.
   (A)   Where sidewalks are provided, no pedestrian shall walk along and upon
an adjacent roadway.
   (B)   Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and
upon a highway shall, when practicable, walk only on the left side of the
roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the opposite
direction, and shall yield to approaching vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 15-1508)
Statutory reference:
   Pedestrians on roadways or bridges, see 47 O.S. § 11-506
§ 74.09 HITCHHIKING; SOLICITING BUSINESS.
   (A)   No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a
ride, donation, employment, or business from the occupant of any vehicle.
   (B)   No person shall stand on or in proximity to a street or highway for
the purpose of soliciting the watching or guarding of any vehicle while parked,
or about to be parked, on a street or highway.
(Prior Code, § 15-1509) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 74.10 DRIVERS TO EXERCISE CARE.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, every driver of a vehicle
shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any
roadway, shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary, and shall
exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or
incapacitated person upon a roadway.
(Prior Code, § 15-1510)
§ 74.11 PLAYING IN STREETS.
   (A)   No person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any coaster,
toy vehicle, or similar device shall go upon any roadway except while crossing
a street on a crosswalk. When so crossing, such person shall be granted all of
the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians.
   (B)   This section shall not apply upon any street while set aside as a play
street as authorized by this code.
(Prior Code, § 15-1511) Penalty, see §
70.99
CHAPTER 75: TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
Section
   
75.01   Authority to install
   
75.02   Design, construction of devices; manual specifications
   
75.03   Traffic signs required for enforcement
   
75.04   Obedience to official traffic-control devices
   
75.05   Traffic-control signal legend
   
75.06   Pedestrian-control signals
   
75.07   Flashing signals
   
75.08   Display of unauthorized signs or signals
   
75.09   Defacing or removing traffic-control devices
   
75.10   Designation of crosswalks and safety zones
   
75.11   Closure of streets serving schools
§ 75.01 AUTHORITY TO INSTALL.
   The town personnel, subject to direction of the Board of Trustees, shall
have placed and maintained traffic-control signs, signals, and devices when and
as required under the traffic ordinances of the town to make effective the
provisions of such ordinances, and may have placed and maintained such
additional traffic-control signs, signals, and devices as it may deem necessary
to regulate traffic under the traffic ordinances of the town or under state
law, or to guide or warn traffic. The town personnel may have traffic-control
devices tested under actual conditions of traffic.
(Prior Code, § 15-201)
Statutory reference:
   Obedience to and required traffic-control devices, see 47 O.S. § 11-201
§ 75.02 DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION OF DEVICES; MANUAL SPECIFICATIONS.
   All traffic-control signs, signals, and devices shall conform to the latest
edition of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and
Highways, as published by the State Department of Transportation. All signs and
signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable
be uniform as to type and location throughout the town. All traffic-control
devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or
this chapter shall be official traffic-control devices.
(Prior Code, § 15-202)
Statutory reference:
   Department of highways to sign all state and federal highways, see 47 O.S. §
15-105
   Local traffic-control devices, see 47 O.S. § 15-106
   State Highway Commission to adopt sign manual, see 47 O.S. § 15-104
§ 75.03 TRAFFIC SIGNS REQUIRED FOR ENFORCEMENT.
   No provision of this chapter for which signs are required shall be enforced
against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the alleged violation,
an official sign was not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen
by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state
that signs are required, such section shall be effective even though no signs
are erected or in place.
(Prior Code, § 15-203)
§ 75.04 OBEDIENCE TO OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official
traffic-control device unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject
to the exceptions granted in this chapter to the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 15-204)
§ 75.05 TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND.
   (A)   Green alone or “Go.”
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight through or
turn right or left unless a sign or barricade at such place prohibits either
such turn. Vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left, shall
yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the
intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is exhibited.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within
any marked or unmarked crosswalk.
   (B)   Steady yellow alone.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the red
or “Stop” signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter, and such vehicular
traffic shall not enter or be crossing the intersection when the red or “Stop”
signal is exhibited.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing such signal are thereby advised that there is
sufficient time to cross the roadway, and any pedestrian then starting to cross
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles.
   (C)   Steady red alone or “Stop.”
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the
crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then before
entering the intersection, and shall remain standing until green or “Go” is
shown alone. However, vehicles in the right traffic lane after making a stop as
above required may enter the intersection cautiously and make a right turn
unless “No Turn on Red” signs are posted to prohibit right turns; but such
vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian or other traffic in the
intersection, and such turn shall not be made so as to interfere with traffic
proceeding on a green signal indication on the cross street.
      (2)   No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until the
green or “Go” is shown alone or until authorized so to do by a pedestrian
“Walk” signal.
   (D)   Steady red with green arrow.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing such signal may cautiously enter the
intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, but shall yield
the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk and to other
traffic lawfully using the intersection.
      (2)   No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until the
green or “Go” is shown alone or until authorized so to do by a pedestrian
“Walk” signal.
      (3)   In the event an official traffic-control signal is erected and
maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this
section shall be applicable except as to those provisions, which by their
nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or
marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made. In the absence
of any such sign or marking, the stop shall be made at the signal.
(Prior Code, § 15-205) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Obedience to and required traffic-control devices, see 47 O.S. § 11-201
   Traffic-control signal legend, see 47 O.S. § 11-202
§ 75.06 PEDESTRIAN-CONTROL SIGNALS.
   (A)   Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the term
“Walk,” “Wait,” or “Don’t Walk” are in place, such signals shall indicate as
follows:
      (1)   “Walk.” Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the
roadway in the direction of the signal, and shall be given the right-of-way by
the drivers of all vehicles.
      (2)   “Wait,” or “Don’t Walk.” No pedestrian shall start to cross the
roadway in the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially
completed his or her crossing on the “Walk” signal shall proceed to a sidewalk
or safety island while the “Wait” signal is showing.
(Prior Code, § 15-206) Penalty, see §
70.99
   (B)   Whenever a pedestrian-actuated school-crossing signal is provided, it
requires obedience by vehicular traffic and pedestrians as follows.
      (1)   Flashing yellow.
         (a)   When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent
flashes, drivers or operators of vehicles may proceed through the intersection
or past such signal only with caution.
         (b)   Pedestrians shall not proceed in conflict with traffic, but may
actuate the signal-control switch, and shall wait until steady red alone is
shown before entering the roadway or intersection controlled by the signal.
      (2)   Steady yellow alone.
         (a)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the
red or “Stop” signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter, and such
vehicular traffic shall not enter or be crossing the intersection or past the
signal when the red or “Stop” signal is exhibited.
         (b)   No pedestrian shall enter the roadway or intersection on which
the signal controls vehicular traffic until steady red alone is shown.
      (3)   Steady red.
         (a)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering
the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, if none, then before
passing the signal or entering the intersection, and shall remain standing
until flashing yellow is shown alone.
         (b)   Pedestrians may proceed across the road controlled by the
signal, and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles.
      (4)   Steady red and steady yellow combined.
         (a)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the
flashing yellow signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter, and that such
vehicular traffic shall remain standing until the flashing yellow is shown
alone.
         (b)   Pedestrians are thereby warned that the flashing yellow signal
is about to be shown, and shall not enter the signal-controlled roadway or
intersection, or in a direction which conflicts with the movement of vehicular
traffic; but any pedestrian who has partially completed his or her crossing
shall proceed to the nearest sidewalk or safety island, and shall be given the
right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 15-208) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 75.07 FLASHING SIGNALS.
   (A)   Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in a
traffic sign or signal, it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as
follows:
      (1)   “Walk.” Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the
roadway in the direction of the signal, and shall be given the right-of-way by
the drivers of all vehicles; and
      (2)   “Wait,” or “Don’t Walk.” No pedestrian shall start to cross the
roadway in the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially
completed his or her crossing on the “Walk” signal shall proceed to a sidewalk
or safety island while the “Wait” signal is showing.
   (B)   Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in a
traffic sign or signal, it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as
follows (This division (B) shall not apply at railroad grade crossings):
      (1)   Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated with
rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the
nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked, or, if
none, than before entering the intersection. The right to proceed shall be
subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign; and
      (2)   Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated
with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the
intersection or past such signal only with caution.
(Prior Code, § 15-207) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 75.08 DISPLAY OF UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS OR SIGNALS.
   (A)   No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of any
highway an unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device which purports to be
or is an imitation of, or resembles, an official traffic-control device or
railroad sign or signal, which attempts to direct the movement of traffic which
projects any flashing or revolving beams of light, or which hides from view or
interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic-control device or any
railroad sign or signal.
   (B)   No person shall place or maintain, nor shall any public authority
permit, upon any highway any traffic sign, signal, or device bearing thereon
any commercial or other advertising.
   (C)   This section shall not prohibit the erection upon private property
adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional information, and of a
type that cannot be mistaken for official signs.
   (D)   No sign or advertising shall be placed in a street right-of-way except
official signs or devices placed by authority of this code or state law.
   (E)   Every such prohibited sign, signal, marking, or device is declared to
be unlawful and a public nuisance, and the town is empowered to remove the same
without notice.
(Prior Code, § 15-209) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 75.09 DEFACING OR REMOVING TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter,
deface, injure, knock down, change the position of, or remove any official
traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal, or any inscription,
shield, or insignia thereon, or any other part thereof.
(Prior Code, § 15-210) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 75.10 DESIGNATION OF CROSSWALKS AND SAFETY ZONES.
   The town personnel, subject to direction by the Board of Trustees, is
authorized to:
   (A)   Designate and have maintained by appropriate devices, marks, or lines
upon the surface of the roadway crosswalks at intersections where in his or her
opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at
such other places as he or she may deem necessary; and
   (B)   Establish safety zones or islands of such kind and character, and at
such places as he or she may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians.
(Prior Code, § 15-211)
§ 75.11 CLOSURE OF STREETS SERVING SCHOOLS.
   The town personnel, including without limitation the town's Police
Department, subject to direction by the Board of Trustees, is authorized to
block and close to the traveling public the 300 block of East Norman Street,
located between the intersecting streets of North Noland Street and North
Albright Street, said street which is located adjacent to the Rock Creek
Independent School District, on all days in which said school is in session
during the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 3:30 p.m. Exceptions for emergency vehicles,
school employees, and contractors of the Rock Creek Independent School District
shall be allowed for continued access and travel by motor vehicle operated by
such motorists within and upon the said street during said school hours.
Nothing herein shall be construed to indicate or otherwise reflect any intent
or consent by the Board of Trustees to seek the permanent street closure and
vacation of the said street.
(Ord. 75.11, passed 9-8-2025)
CHAPTER 76: EQUIPMENT
Section
   
76.01   Equipment required; use of equipment
   
76.02   Muffler required; cutouts
   
76.03   Width, height, length, weight, load
   
76.04   Windshields to be unobstructed; wipers required
   
76.05   Inspection of vehicles
   
76.06   Vehicles to be registered; display of tags
§ 76.01 EQUIPMENT REQUIRED; USE OF EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Every vehicle operated upon the streets of the town shall be equipped
as required by 47 O.S. No person shall operate a vehicle upon a street of the
town which is not equipped as required by state law.
   (B)   No person shall fail to use such equipment in the manner required by
the state law, or use it in a manner prohibited by state law.
(Prior Code, § 15-301) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Vehicles without required equipment or in unsafe condition, see 47 O.S. §
13-101
§ 76.02 MUFFLER REQUIRED; CUTOUTS.
   Every motor vehicle shall at all times be equipped with a muffler in good
working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise.
No person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass, or similar device upon a motor
vehicle on a highway. No person shall modify the exhaust system of a motor
vehicle in any manner which will amplify or increase the noise or sound emitted
louder than that emitted by the muffler originally installed on the vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 15-302) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Mufflers or other noise-suppressing systems; prevention of excessive or
unusual noise, see 47 O.S. § 12-402
§ 76.03 WIDTH, HEIGHT, LENGTH, WEIGHT, LOAD.
   No person shall drive or convey through any street or bridge any vehicle the
width, height, length, weight, or load of which exceeds that authorized by
state law, or which vehicle exceeds the width, height, length, weight, or load
limits established by the town, county, or state as indicated by appropriate
signs erected on the street, road, or bridge, unless a permit or approval has
been granted therefor by the state or Town Police Chief.
(Prior Code, § 15-303) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 76.04 WINDSHIELDS TO BE UNOBSTRUCTED; WIPERS REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall drive any motor vehicle with any sign, poster, or
other non-transparent material upon the front windshield, side wings, or side
or rear windows of such vehicle which obstructs the driver’s clear view of the
street or highway, or any intersecting street or highway.
   (B)   The windshield on every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a device
for cleaning rain, snow, or other moisture from the windshield. Such device
shall be so constructed as to be controlled or operated by the driver of the
vehicle. Every windshield wiper upon a motor vehicle shall be maintained in
good working order.
(Prior Code, § 15-304) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 76.05 INSPECTION OF VEHICLES.
   Police officers shall have authority to inspect and test any vehicle upon
the streets of the town at any time to determine whether it is safe, whether it
is properly equipped, or whether its equipment is in proper adjustment and
repair.
(Prior Code, § 15-305)
Statutory reference:
   Officers may inspect a vehicle and its equipment, see 47 O.S. § 13-102
§ 76.06 VEHICLES TO BE REGISTERED; DISPLAY OF TAGS.
   (A)   No person shall operate a vehicle of any kind upon a street of the
town without a state vehicle license or tag as may be required by law.
   (B)   No person shall fail to display the state vehicle license or tag as
required by law or attach any trailer hitch or other device in a manner as to
cover, or partially cover, the vehicle license.
(Prior Code, § 15-306) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 77: ACCIDENTS
Section
   
77.01   Involving death, personal injury
   
77.02   Damage to property
   
77.03   Duty to give information, render aid
   
77.04   Upon striking unattended vehicle
   
77.05   Upon striking fixtures
   
77.06   Immediate notice of accident
   
77.07   When driver unable to report
 
   
77.99   Penalty
§ 77.01 INVOLVING DEATH, PERSONAL INJURY.
   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or
death of any person shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such
accident, or as close thereto as possible, but shall then forthwith return to
and in every event shall remain at the scene of the accident until he or she
has fulfilled the requirements of §
77.03.
(Prior Code, § 15-1201)
§ 77.02 DAMAGE TO PROPERTY.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in
apparent damage to property shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of
such accident, or as close thereto as possible. The driver shall remain at the
scene of such accident until he or she has fulfilled the requirements of §
77.03. Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is
necessary.
   (B)   If the damage resulting from such accident is to the property of the
driver only, with no damage to the person or property of another, the driver
need not stop at the scene of the accident, but shall make report of the damage
resulting.
(Prior Code, § 15-1202)
§ 77.03 DUTY TO GIVE INFORMATION, RENDER AID.
   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or
death of any person or damage to any vehicle which is driven or attended by any
person shall give his or her correct name, address, and registration number of
the vehicle he or she is driving, and shall, upon request, and if available
exhibit his or her operator’s or commercial driver’s license, and his or her
security verification form, as described in this chapter, to the person struck
or the driver or occupant of, or person attending, any vehicle collided with,
and shall render to any person injured in such accident reasonable assistance,
including the carrying, or the making of arrangements for the carrying, of such
person to a physician, surgeon, or hospital for medical or surgical treatment
if it is apparent that such treatment is necessary or if such carrying is
requested by the injured person.
(Prior Code, § 15-1203)
Statutory reference:
   Duty to give information and render aid; drug and alcohol testing, see 47
O.S. § 10-104
§ 77.04 UPON STRIKING UNATTENDED VEHICLE.
   The driver of any vehicle which collides with any vehicle which is
unattended shall immediately stop and shall, then and there, either locate and
notify the operator or owner of such vehicle of the correct name and address of
the driver and owner of the vehicle striking the unattended vehicle, and
provide the operator or owner with information from his or her security
verification form, as described in this chapter, or shall leave in a
conspicuous place in the vehicle struck a written notice giving the name and
address of the driver and of the owner of the vehicle doing the striking, and
providing information from his or her security verification form, as described
by this chapter, and a statement of the circumstances thereof.
(Prior Code, § 15-1204)
§ 77.05 UPON STRIKING FIXTURES.
   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in damage
to fixtures or other property legally upon or adjacent to a highway shall take
reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or person in charge of such
property of such fact, and of his or her name and address and of the
registration number of the vehicle he or she is driving, and shall, upon
request and if available, exhibit his or her operator’s or commercial driver’s
license and his or her security verification form, as described in this
chapter, and shall make report of such accident when and as required in §
77.07.
(Prior Code, § 15-1205)
§ 77.06 IMMEDIATE NOTICE OF ACCIDENT.
   The driver of a vehicle involved in any accident shall immediately notify
property authorities by the quickest means. A report shall be made on forms
provided by the Department. Where personal injury or death occurs, the driver
or drivers of the vehicles shall remain at the scene of the accident until
police officers arrive, except in cases of personal injury requiring immediate
attention.
(Prior Code, § 15-1206)
§ 77.07 WHEN DRIVER UNABLE TO REPORT.
   (A)   An accident report is not required under this chapter from any person
who is physically incapable of making report during the period of such
incapacity.
   (B)   Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of giving an
immediate notice of an accident, as required in §
77.06, and there was another occupant in the vehicle at the time of the
accident capable of doing so, such occupant shall make or cause to be given the
notice not given by the driver.
(Prior Code, § 15-1207)
§ 77.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no
specific penalty is prescribed, shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person failing to stop or comply with the requirements of §
77.02 under such circumstances shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 15-1202)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
      
91.   ANIMALS
      
92.   FAIR HOUSING
      
93.   FIRE PREVENTION
CHAPTER 90: HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
Section
Nuisances
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Persons responsible
   
90.03   Time does not legalize
   
90.04   Remedies
   
90.05   Town authority
   
90.06   Certain public nuisances described
   
90.07   Abatement of nuisances
   
90.08   Nuisance unlawful
Dilapidated Buildings
   
90.20   Definitions
   
90.21   Report to be made
   
90.22   Abatement
   
90.23   Clearing up of premises
   
90.24   Designation of Administrative Officer
Weeds and Trash
   
90.35   Definitions
   
90.36   Trash, weeds unlawful
   
90.37   Report to be made; abatement
   
90.38   Consent by owner
   
90.39   Failure of owner to abate
   
90.40   Cost, statement of cost
   
90.41   Unlawful to deposit rubbish
   
90.42   Burning refuse
   
90.43   Removal of dead animals
   
90.44   Unlawful to litter
   
90.45   Litter not to accumulate on property
   
90.46   Designation of Administrative Officer
 
   
90.99   Penalty
NUISANCES
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   NUISANCE. Unlawfully doing an act, or omitting to perform a duty, which act
or omission either:
      (1)   Annoys, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, or
safety of others;
      (2)   Offends decency;
      (3)   Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct, or
renders dangerous for passage, any lake or navigable river, stream, canal, or
basin, or any public park, square, street, or highway, or other public
property; or
      (4)   In any way renders other persons insecure in life, or in the use of
property, provided, this definition shall not apply to preexisting agricultural
activities.
   PUBLIC NUISANCE.
      (1)   One which affects at the same time an entire community or
neighborhood or any considerable number of persons, although the extent of the
annoyance of damage inflicted upon the individuals any be unequal. (See 50 O.S.
§§ 1, 2, and 3.)
      (2)   Every nuisance not included in this definition is a PRIVATE
NUISANCE.
(Prior Code, § 8-401)
Statutory reference:
   Agricultural activities as nuisance, see 50 O.S. § 1.1
   Nuisance defined, see 50 O.S. § 1
   Private nuisance, see 50 O.S. § 3
   Public nuisance, see 50 O.S. § 2
§ 90.02 PERSONS RESPONSIBLE.
   Every successive owner of property who neglects to abate a continuing
nuisance upon, or in the use of, such property created by a former owner is
liable therefor in the same manner as the one who first created it.
(Prior Code, § 8-402)
Statutory reference:
   Persons liable, see 50 O.S. § 5
§ 90.03 TIME DOES NOT LEGALIZE.
   No lapse of time can legalize a public nuisance, amounting to an actual
obstruction of public right.
(Prior Code, § 8-403)
Statutory reference:
   Time does not legalize, see 50 O.S. § 7
§ 90.04 REMEDIES.
   (A)   The remedies against a public nuisance are:
      (1)   Prosecution on information or indictment before another appropriate
court;
      (2)   Civil action;
      (3)   Abatement by:
         (a)   Any person may abate a public nuisance which is specially
injurious to him or her, by removing or, if necessary, destroying the thing
which constitutes the same, without committing a breach of the peace or doing
unnecessary injury; or
         (b)   The town in accordance with law or ordinance.
      (4)   Prosecution on complaint before the municipal court.
   (B)   The remedies against a private nuisances are:
      (1)   Civil action; or
      (2)   Abatement by:
         (a)   A person injured by a private nuisance may abate it by removing,
or, if necessary, destroying the thing which constitutes the nuisance, without
committing a breach of the peace or doing unnecessary injury;
         (b)   Where a private nuisance results from a mere omission of the
wrongdoer, and cannot be abated without entering upon his or her land,
reasonable notice must be given to him or her before entering to abate it; or
         (c)   The town in accordance with law or ordinance
(Prior Code, § 8-404)
Statutory reference:
   Abatement by person injured, see 50 O.S. § 12
   Abatement of private nuisance, see 50 O.S. § 14
   Notice, when required, see 50 O.S. § 15
   Remedies against private nuisance, see 50 O.S. § 13
§ 90.05 TOWN AUTHORITY.
   The town in the state shall have the right and power to determine what is
and what shall constitute a nuisance within their respective corporate limits,
and for the protection of the public health, the public parks, and the public
water supply, shall have such power outside of the corporate limits; and
wherever it is practical so to do, said cities and towns shall have the power
summarily to abate any such nuisance after notice to the owner, and an
opportunity for him or her to be heard, if this can be given.
(Prior Code, § 8-405)
Statutory reference:
   Cities and towns; power to define and summarily abate nuisances, see 50 O.S.
§ 16
§ 90.06 CERTAIN PUBLIC NUISANCES DESCRIBED.
   (A)   In addition to other public nuisances declared by other sections of
this code or law, the following are hereby declared to be public nuisances:
      (1)   The exposure, display, sale, or distribution of obscene pictures,
books, pamphlets, magazines, papers, documents, or objects; or the keeping of a
place whether such are exposed, displayed, sold, or distributed;
      (2)   The keeping of a place where prostitution, illicit sexual
intercourse, or other immoral acts are practiced;
      (3)   The keeping of a place where activities in violation of state law
or town ordinance are practiced or carried on;
      (4)   The repeated use of any real property or structure thereon to
commit a felony violation of the State Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances
Act, being 63 O.S. §§ 2-101;
      (5)   The public exposure of a person having a contagious disease, when
such public exposure puts another person or persons in immediate danger of
contracting the disease;
      (6)   The continued making of loud or unusual noises that annoy persons
of ordinary sensibilities; or the keeping of an animal, which makes such
noises;
      (7)   The operation or use of any electrical apparatus or machine that
materially or unduly interferes with radio or television reception by others;
      (8)   Any use of a street or sidewalk or a place adjacent thereto which
causes crowds of people to gather so as to obstruct traffic on such street or
sidewalk, or which otherwise obstructs traffic thereon, except as may be
authorized by law or ordinance;
      (9)   Permitting waste or other liquid to flow or fall, or ice or snow to
fall, from any building or structure upon any street or sidewalk;
      (10)   All wells, pools, cisterns, bodies, or containers of water in
which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed, or which are so constructed,
formed, conditioned, or situated as to endanger the public safety;
      (11)   Rank weeds or grass, carcasses, accumulations of manure, refuse,
or other things, which are, or are likely to be, breeding places for flies,
mosquitoes, vermin, or disease germs; and the premises on which such exist;
      (12)   Any building or structure that is dangerous to the public health
or safety because of damage, decay, or other condition;
      (13)   Any pit, hole, or other thing that is so constructed, formed,
conditioned, or situated as to endanger the public safety;
      (14)   Any fire or explosion hazard which endangers the public safety;
      (15)   Any occupation or activity that endangers the public peace,
health, morals, safety, or welfare;
      (16)   Any motor vehicle, whether in operating condition or not, or any
trailer without a current vehicle plate as required by state law for vehicles
used on the public highways, when stored or kept in a residence district at an
unfenced location and in front of the building line on the lot in question;
      (17)   The storage, disposal, or abandonment of any unused freezer,
refrigerator, or similar device or appliance or container in such condition as
to have the potential for trapping one or more persons in one or more of its
interior compartments;
      (18)   The operation or use of any electric fence controller:
         (a)   Which has not been approved by Underwriters Laboratories;
         (b)   Which has nonfunctioning safety features within the electric
fence controller; or
         (c)   Which is operated or used on property, which has not been posted
so as to notify those persons entering the controlled area that the electric
fence charger is used, and present.
      (19)   The construction of, or maintenance of, any fence, wall, or
similar barrier which, alone or by trapping debris, reduces the carrying
capacity of any floodplain or drainage course; provided this division (A)(19)
shall not prevent the erection of dams by landowners which form ponds,
detention areas, or retention areas, where the water is impounded or retained
solely within the land owners’ property;
      (20)   The accumulation of trash, garbage, rubbish, or other debris
including the accumulation of dead trees and shrubs in such quantities and at
such locations as to reduce the carrying capacity of any drainage course to
such an extent as to create a threat of inundation by the ten-year flood to the
persons or property of another at a location off the tract where the
accumulation is located. As used herein, the TEN-YEAR FLOOD is defined to mean
a flood event at an applicable location having a 10% chance or greater of
occurring in any given year, based upon projected full urbanization conditions;
      (21)   The accumulation of trash or the growth of weeds upon any property
within the town to the extent that vegetation exceeds 12 inches in height in
yard. Provided that the prohibition against the growth of weeds shall not apply
to property, which is both zoned for and actually used for agricultural
purposes. Provided further that the prohibition shall not apply to healthy
trees, shrubs, or produce for human consumption grown in a tended and
cultivated garden unless such trees and shrubbery, by their density or
location, constitute a detriment to the health, benefit, and welfare of the
public and community, or a hazard to traffic or create a fire hazard to the
property or otherwise interfere with the mowing of said weeds;
      (22)   GRAFFITI, which is defined as the defacing of improvements to real
property belonging to another through painting or carving of words, designs, or
symbols without the written permission of the owner or the tenant of the
improvement. It is the policy of the town to eliminate graffiti on publicly
owned properties, and to reduce, if not eliminate, graffiti on private
properties, which may be viewed form the public rights-of-way or from town
parks;
      (23)   Permitting bagworms to be upon any trees or other plants within
the town;
      (24)   Permitting foul, noxious or offensive odors to escape from
premises; or unusual quantities of dust or other deleterious substances to
escape or emanate across the property line upon which the same originates;
      (25)   Any stable or other place where animals are kept that may become
obnoxious or annoying to any resident of the town, by reason of any noise or
noises made by the animal therein, or by reason of lack of sanitation;
      (26)   The keeping in violation of §§
91.001 et seq. of any dog kennels within the town for the breeding and raising
of dogs that shall become offensive or annoying to the public by reason of the
barking and noise made by the animals therein contained;
      (27)   Any vault, cesspool, or sink used to receive human excrement,
slops, garbage, refuse, or other filthy substance;
      (28)   Any pond, slop, trash, refuse, manure, or decayed or decaying
vegetable matter left, kept, or maintained in such condition as to endanger the
public health;
      (29)   The keeping of any hog pen within the limits of the town in
violation of this code;
      (30)   Every privy or water closet which shall be in an overflowing,
leaking, or filthy condition, or in a condition dangerous, injurious, or
annoying to the comfort, health, and welfare of any resident of the town;
      (31)   Any green or unsalted hides of any animal kept in any exposed or
open place within the limits of the town;
      (32)   Any unclean, foul, leaking, and broken or defective ditch, drain,
gutter, slop, garbage, or manure barrel, box, or other receptacle in the town;
      (33)   The sale or offering for sale of unwholesome food or drink; or the
keeping of a place where such sales or offerings are made;
      (34)   The sale, offering for sale, or furnishing, of intoxicating liquor
in violation of the state law or ordinances of the town; or the keeping of a
place where intoxicating liquor is sold, offered for sale, or furnished in
violation of the state law or ordinances of the town;
      (35)   Every building or other structure that shall become unsafe and
dangerous from fire, decay, or other cause, or shall become hazardous from
fire, by reason of age, decay or construction, location or other cause, or
shall be detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of the town or its
inhabitants from any cause; and
      (36)   The keeping of a place where persons gamble, whether by cards,
slot machines, punchboards, or otherwise.
   (B)   The above enumeration of certain public nuisances shall be cumulative
and not limit other provisions of law or ordinances defining nuisances, either
in more general or more specific terms.
(Prior Code, § 8-406) Penalty, see §
90.99
Statutory reference:
   Real property used for felony drug offenses, see 50 O.S. § 21
§ 90.07 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES.
   (A)   (1)   Some nuisances are of such nature as to constitute a grave and
immediate danger to the peace, health, safety, morals, or welfare of one or
more persons or of the public generally. It is recognized that circumstances
may be such as to justify, and even to require, the Town Board of Trustees or
other appropriate officer or agency of the town government to take immediate
and proper action to summarily abate such nuisances or to reduce or suspend the
danger until more deliberate action can be taken toward such abatement.
      (2)   An officer subordinate to the Town Board of Trustees may submit to
the Town Board of Trustees a statement as to the existence of a nuisance, as
defined by the ordinances of the town or law, and a request or recommendation
that it be abated. Any Board member or any resident or residents of the town
may submit such a statement and request a recommendation to the Town Board of
Trustees.
      (3)   The Town Board of Trustees, or its designee, shall determine
whether or not the alleged nuisance is a nuisance in fact. Before proceeding to
abate the nuisance or have it abated, the Board shall give notice of a hearing
on the proposed abatement to the owner of any property concerned and to any
other person alleged or deemed responsible for, or to be causing, the nuisance
and an adequate opportunity to be heard, if such notice and opportunity for a
hearing can be given. The notice to the owner and other persons concerned shall
be given in writing by mail or by service by a police officer if their names
and addresses are known; but, if the names or addresses are not known, and the
peace, health, safety, morals, or welfare of the person or persons, or public,
adversely affected would not be unduly jeopardized by the necessary delay, a
notice of the hearing shall be published in a paper of general circulation
within the town.
      (4)   If the Board finds that a nuisance does in fact exist, it shall
direct the owner or other persons responsible for, or causing, the nuisance to
abate it within a specified time if the peace, health, safety, morals, or
welfare of the person or persons, or public, adversely affected would not be
unduly jeopardized by the consequent delay. If such peace, health, safety,
morals, or welfare would be unduly jeopardized by the consequent delay, or if
the owner or other persons responsible for, or causing, the nuisance do not
abate it within the specified time, the Board shall designate a person to abate
the nuisance or to have it abated, if summary abatement is practical, as
authorized by 50 O.S. § 16. The Town Clerk/Treasurer shall send a statement of
the cost of such summary abatement to the owner or other persons responsible
for, or causing, the nuisance, as may be just under the circumstances, if their
names and addresses are known. Until paid, such cost shall constitute a debt to
the town collectible as other debts of the town may be collected.
      (5)   The determination of the existence of a nuisance and order to abate
it, as made by the Town Board of Trustees, may be appealed by the occupant or
owner or person causing the nuisance by filing a request for hearing in writing
with the Town Clerk/Treasurer within the period of time specified in the notice
for abatement of the nuisance. The Town Clerk/Treasurer shall cause the matter
to be placed on the agenda of the Town Board of Trustees for final
determination with appropriate notice of the hearing provided to the person
requesting the appeal.
(Prior Code, § 8-407)
   (B)   In cases where it is deemed impractical summarily to abate any such
nuisance such town may bring suit in the district court of the county in which
such nuisance is located, and it is hereby made the duty of the governing body
of any such town, by the adoption of a resolution to direct the bringing of
suit in the proper court for the purpose of abating any such nuisance. The
district court of the county in which any such nuisance exists or is maintained
shall have jurisdiction of any such case and power to adjudge and determine any
action brought under the provisions hereof, and where it is adjudged that any
such nuisance exists or is maintained and should be abated, such court shall
have the power and authority either by, and through, a commissioner appointed
by such court, or otherwise, to cause such nuisance to be abated and to assess
all the costs thereof, including the costs of suit, against the property on
which such nuisance existed or is maintained, and to declare such costs a
judgment against said property, and order and direct the sale of said property
for the purpose of satisfying said judgment, and shall cause the same to be
sold and proceeds thereof applied to the payment of the costs of abating any
such nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 8-408)
   (C)   (1)   Pursuant to authority granted by 63 O.S. § 1-1011, the town
shall have the authority to order the owner or occupant of any private premises
in the town to remove from such premises, at his or her own expense, any source
of filth, cause of sickness, condition conducive to the breeding of insects or
rodents that might contribute to the transmission of disease, or any other
condition adversely affecting the public health, within 24 hours, or within
such other time as may be reasonable. Such order shall be in writing and may be
served personally on the owner or occupant of the premises, or authorized agent
thereof, by the town or by a police officer, or a copy thereof may be left at
the last usual place of abode of the owner, occupant, or agent, if known and
within the state. If the premises are unoccupied and the residence of the
owner, occupant, or agent is unknown or is outside the state, the order may be
served by posting a copy thereof on the premises or by publication in at least
one issue of a newspaper having a general circulation in the town.
      (2)   If the order is not complied with, the town may cause the order to
be executed and complied with, and the cost thereof shall be certified and the
cost of removing or abating such nuisance shall be added to the water bill or
other town utility bill of the owner or occupant if he or she is a user of
water from the town water system, or such other utility service. The cost shall
be treated as a part of such utility bill to which it is added, and shall
become due and payable and be subject to the same regulations relating to
delinquency in payment as the utility bill itself. If such owner or occupant is
not a user of the town utility service, such cost, after certification to the
county for the ad valor tax rolls, may be collected in any manner in which any
other lien or debt is collected, or may be pursued as any debt due the town may
be collected.
      (3)   The Town Board of Trustees, or its designee, may cause property
within the town limits to be cleared of trash or weeds, and grass to be cut or
mowed in accordance with the following procedures: At least ten days’ notice
shall be given to the property owner, by mail, at the address shown by the
current year’s tax rolls in the County Treasurer’s office, before the Town
Board of Trustees, or its designee, holds a hearing or takes action. The notice
shall order the property owner to clean the property of trash, or to cut or mow
the weeds or grass on the property, as appropriate, and said notice shall
further state that unless such work is performed within ten days of the date of
the notice, the work shall be done by the town, and a notice of lien shall be
filed with the County Clerk against the property for the costs due and owing
the town. At the time of mailing of notice to the property owner, the town
shall obtain a receipt of mailing from the postal service, which receipt shall
indicate the date of mailing and the name and address of the mail-lee. If the
property owner cannot be located within ten days of the date of mailing, notice
may be given by posting a copy of the notice on the property and by
publication, as defined in 11 O.S. § 1-102, one time not less than ten days
prior to any hearing or action by the town. If the town anticipates summary
abatement of a nuisance in accordance with this subchapter or applicable state
law, the notice, whether by certified mail, or posting and publication, shall
state that any accumulations of trash, or excessive weed or grass growth on the
owner’s property occurring within six months after the removal of trash or
cutting or mowing of weeds or grass on the property pursuant to such notice may
be summarily abated by the town.
(Prior Code, § 8-410)
Statutory reference:
   Cities and towns; power to define and summarily abate nuisances, see 50 O.S.
§ 16
   Definitions, see 11 O.S. § 1-102
   Health nuisances; removal; collection of cost of removal, see 63 O.S. § 1-
1011
   Real property used for felony drug offenses, see 50 O.S. § 21
§ 90.08 NUISANCE UNLAWFUL.
   It is unlawful for any person, including but not limited to any owner,
lessee, or other person, to create or maintain a nuisance within the town or to
permit a nuisance to remain on premises under his or her control within the
town.
(Prior Code, § 8-409) Penalty, see §
90.99
DILAPIDATED BUILDINGS
§ 90.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   BOARDING AND SECURING OR BOARDED AND SECURED. The closing, boarding, or
locking of any or all exterior openings so as to prevent entry into the
structure.
   CLEANING OR CLEANED. The removal or trash or weeds from the premises.
   DILAPIDATED BUILDING. The neglect of necessary repairs to a building or
allowing it to fall into a state of decay, or allowing it to fall into partial
ruin to such an extent that the building is a hazard to the health, safety, or
welfare of the general public.
   OWNER. The owner of record as shown by the most current tax rolls of the
County Treasurer.
   UNSECURED BUILDING. A structure which, through neglect or injury, lacks
necessary repairs or otherwise is in a state of decay or partial ruin to such
an extent that the structure is a hazard to the health, safety, or welfare of
the general public.
(Prior Code, § 8-201)
Statutory reference:
   Condemnation; procedures; administrative officer or body; definitions;
nuisance; damage loss or property; agricultural property, see 11 O.S. § 22-112
§ 90.21 REPORT TO BE MADE.
   Any officer or employee of the town who discovers or receives a report of a
dilapidated building which has become detrimental to the health, benefit, and
welfare of the public and the community or creates a fire hazard to the danger
of property, shall report such conditions to the Town Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 8-202)
§ 90.22 ABATEMENT.
   In addition to procedures outlined in this code, the Town Board of Trustees
may cause dilapidated buildings within the town limits to be torn down and
removed, or boarded or secured, in accordance with the following procedure.
   (A)   At least ten days’ notice shall be given to the owner of the property
before the town takes action or holds a hearing as provided herein. A copy of
the notice shall be posted on the property to be affected. In addition, a copy
of the notice shall be sent by mail to the property owner at the address shown
by the current year’s tax rolls in the office of the County Treasurer, written
notice shall also be mailed to any mortgage holder as shown by the records in
the office of the County Clerk to the last-known address of the mortgage. At
the time of mailing of notice to any property owner or mortgage holder, the
town shall obtain a receipt of mailing from the postal service, which receipt
shall indicate the date of mailing and the name and address of the mail-lee.
However, if neither the property owner nor mortgage holder can be located,
notice may be given by posting a copy of the notice on the property, or by
PUBLICATION, as defined by 11 O.S. § 1-102. The notice may be published once
not less than ten days prior to any hearing or action to be taken pursuant to
this section.
   (B)   The owner of the property may give his or her written consent to the
town authorizing the removal, tearing down, dismantling, or the boarding and
securing of a building and to the payment of any costs incurred thereby. By
giving the written consent, the owner waives his or her right to a hearing by
the Town Board of Trustees.
   (C)   If the property owner does not give his or her written consent to such
actions, a hearing shall be held by the Board to determine whether the property
is dilapidated and has thereby become detrimental to the health, benefit, and
welfare of the public and the community or creates a fire hazard to the danger
of property or needs to be boarded and secured.
   (D)   Pursuant to a finding that the condition of the property constitutes a
detriment or a hazard and that the property would be benefitted by the removal
of such conditions or by its boarding and securing, the Board may cause the
dilapidated building to be torn down and removed, or boarded and secured, and
shall fix reasonable dates for the commencement and completion of the work. The
Town Clerk/Treasurer shall immediately file a notice of dilapidation or
unsecured building and lien with the County Clerk describing the property, the
findings of the town at the hearing, and stating that the town claims a lien on
the property for the destruction and removal, boarding, and securing costs and
that such costs are the personal obligation of the property owner from and
after the date of filing of the notice, the hearing may be held in conjunction
with a hearing on the accumulation of trash or the growth of weeds or grass on
the premises of the building held pursuant to this subchapter. In making a
determination to board and secure a building, the Board may order the boarding
and securing when the boarding and securing would make such building less
available for transient occupation, decrease a fire hazard created by such
building, or decrease the hazard that such building would constitute an
attractive nuisance to children. The agents of the town are granted the right
of entry on the property for the performance of the necessary duties as a
governmental function of the town if the work is not performed by the property
owner within dates fixed by the Board.
   (E)   The Board shall determine the actual cost of the dismantling and
removal of dilapidated buildings, or the boarding and securing, and any other
expenses as may be necessary in conjunction therewith, including the sort of
notice and mailing. The Town Clerk/Treasurer shall forward a statement of such
actual sort attributable to the dismantling and removal, or boarding and
securing, and a demand for payment by mail to the property owner at the address
specified in this section. In addition, a copy of the statement shall be mailed
to any mortgage holder at the address specified in this section. At the time of
mailing of the statement of costs to any property owner or mortgage holder, the
town shall obtain a receipt of mailing from the postal service, which receipt
shall indicate the date of mailing and the name and address of the mail-lee. If
the town dismantles or removes any dilapidated buildings, or boards or secures
a building, the cost to the property owner shall not exceed the actual cost of
the labor, maintenance and equipment required for the dismantling and removal
of the dilapidated buildings. If dismantling and removal of the dilapidated
buildings, or boarding and securing, is done on a private contract basis, the
contract shall be awarded to the lowest and best bidder.
   (F)   When payment is made to the town for costs incurred, the town shall
file a release of lien or part thereof. But if payment is not made within six
months from the date of the mailing of the statement, the Town Clerk/Treasurer
shall forward a certified statement of the amount of the cost to the County
Treasurer of the county in which the property is located. Upon receiving
payment, the Town Clerk/Treasurer shall forward to the County Treasurer a
notice of such payment, and shall direct discharge of the lien or part thereof.
   (G)   The town may designate an Administrative Officer or administrative
body to carry out the duties of the Board specified in this section. The
property owner shall have a right of appeal to the Board from any order of the
Administrative Officer or administrative body. The appeal shall be filed in
writing with the Town Clerk/Treasurer within ten days after the administrative
order is rendered.
   (H)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any property zoned
and used for agricultural purposes.
   (I)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the town form otherwise abating
a dilapidated building as a nuisance or otherwise exercising its police power
to protect the public health, safety, or welfare.
   (J)   The officers, employees, or agents of the town shall not be liable for
any damages or loss of property due to the removal of dilapidated buildings
performed pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter, or as otherwise
prescribed by law.
   (K)   If the Town Board of Trustees anticipates the need to board and secure
a building, as provided in this section, the notice shall state that any
subsequent need for boarding and securing the building within a six-month
period after the initial boarding and securing of the building, pursuant to
such notice, may be summarily boarded and secured by the town, and that the
costs of such boarding and securing shall be assessed against the owner, and
that a lien may be imposed on the property to secure such payment, all without
further prior notice to the property owner or mortgage holder.
   (L)   If a Town Broad of Trustees causes a structure within the town limits
to be boarded and secured, any subsequent need for boarding and securing within
a six-month period constitutes a public nuisance and may be summarily boarded
and secured without further prior notice to the property owner or mortgage
holder. At the time of each such summary boarding and securing, the town shall
notify the property owner and mortgage holder of the boarding and securing and
the costs thereof. The notice shall state that the property owner may request
an appeal with the Town Clerk/Treasurer within two days after the mailing of
the notice. The notice and hearing shall be as provided for in this section.
Unless otherwise determined at the hearing, the cost of such boarding and
securing shall be determined and collected as provided for in this section.
   (M)   The Town Board of Trustees may determine that a building is unsecured
and order that such building be boarded and secured in the manner provided for
in this section, even though such building has not been declared by the Board
to be dilapidated.
(Prior Code, § 8-203)
Statutory reference:
   Compensation of elective officers, see 11 O.S. § 11-112
   Definitions, see 11 O.S. § 1-102
§ 90.23 CLEARING UP OF PREMISES.
   (A)   In all cases in which the owner or owners of the lot or lots, and the
person, firm, or corporation who tore down the house or building shall
immediately comply with the provisions of this subchapter by having all of the
following things done:
      (1)   A house or building has been removed before the taking of effect of
this subchapter;
      (2)   A house or building is torn down or demolished pursuant to order of
the State Fire Marshal, or one of his or her assistants, or the Sheriff of the
county or the Chief of the Fire Department, as provided by state law or as
provided in this subchapter.
   (B)   In which any of the following conditions exist:
      (1)   The premises have not been cleaned up;
      (2)   The premises are cleaned up and all lumber, brick, concrete,
cement, plaster, nails, wire, and other material have not been removed;
      (3)   The materials removed but the cellar space and excavations have not
been filled;
      (4)   A cistern or well has not been filled or safely and securely
closed, and all openings to the sanitary sewer have not been plugged to meet
the requirements of the Town Plumbing Inspector and securely closed; and
      (5)   The lot or lots have not been leveled and left entirely free from
trash, or the same be not immediately done.
(Prior Code, § 8-204)
§ 90.24 DESIGNATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER.
   The Public Works Director, also known as the Public Utilities Director,
shall be designated as the Administrative Officer to carry out the duties of
the governing body as specified in this subchapter, and as set forth pursuant
to 11 O.S. § 22-112(B).
(Ord. 8-205, passed 6-20-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 11 O.S. § 22-112(B)
WEEDS AND TRASH
§ 90.35 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   CLEANING. The removal of trash from property.
   OWNER. The owner of record as shown by the most current tax rolls of the
County Treasurer.
   TRASH. Any refuse, litter, ashes, leaves, debris, paper, combustible
materials, rubbish, waste, or matter of any kind or form, which is uncared for,
discarded, or abandoned.
   WEEDS.
      (1)   Includes, but is not limited to, poison ivy, poison oak, or poison
sumac and all vegetation at any stage of maturity which:
         (a)   Exceeds 12 inches in height, except healthy trees, shrubs, or
produce for human consumption or grown in a tended and cultivated garden,
unless such trees and shrubbery, by their density or location, constitute a
detriment to the health, benefit, and welfare of the public and community or a
hazard to traffic, or create a fire hazard to the property or otherwise
interfere with the mowing of the WEEDS;
         (b)   Regardless of height, harbors, conceals, or invites deposits or
accumulation of refuse or trash;
         (c)   Harbors rodents or vermin;
         (d)   Gives off unpleasant or noxious odors;
         (e)   Constitutes a fire or traffic hazard; or
         (f)   Is dead or diseased.
      (2)   The term WEED does not include tended crops on land zoned for
agricultural use which are planted more than 150 feet from a parcel zoned for
other than agricultural use.
(Prior Code, § 8-301)
Statutory reference:
   Cleaning and mowing of property; notice; consent; hearing; right of entry;
costs; lien; ordinances; summary abatement; definitions, see 11 O.S. § 22-111
§ 90.36 TRASH, WEEDS UNLAWFUL.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any owner or occupant of any lot, tract, or parcel
of land situated wholly or in part within the corporate limits of the town to
allow trash or weeds to grow, stand, or accumulate upon such premises. It is
the duty of such owner or occupant to remove or destroy any such trash or
weeds.
   (B)   No owner or occupant of land or lots shall:
      (1)   Knowingly permit the throwing or dumping upon his or her premises
of any refuse, rubbish, or trash; or
      (2)   Permit such materials to remain on his or her premises for more
than ten days after being notified to remove them by the town or the County
Health Department, whether or not the owner or occupant knew of or permitted
such throwing or depositing.
   (C)   If the Town Board of Trustees anticipates summary abatement of a
nuisance in accordance with the provisions as herein provided, the notice,
whether by mail or publication, shall state that any accumulations of trash, or
excessive weeds or grass growth, on the owner’s property occurring within six
months after the removal of trash, or cutting or mowing of weeds or grass, on
the costs of such abatement shall be assessed against the owner, and that a
lien shall be imposed on the property to secure such payment, all without
further notice to the property owner.
(Prior Code, § 8-302) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.37 REPORT TO BE MADE; ABATEMENT.
   (A)   Any officer or employee of the town who discovers an accumulation of
trash or the growth of grass and weeds, or both of these conditions, upon any
premises within the limits of the town shall report the condition to the Town
Board of Trustees.
   (B)   The Town Board of Trustees may cause property within the town to be
cleaned of trash and weeds, or grass to be cut or mowed, and the nuisance to be
abated in accordance with the following procedure.
      (1)   At least ten days notice shall be given to the owner of the
property by mail at the address shown by the current year’s tax rolls in the
County Treasurer’s office before the hearing provided for herein, or before
action may be taken. The notice shall order the property owner to clean the
property of trash, or to cut or mow the weeds or grass on the property, as
appropriate, and the notice shall state that unless the work is performed
within ten days of the date of the notice, the work shall be done by the town
and a notice of lien shall be filed with the County Clerk against the property
for the cost due and owing the town.
      (2)   At the time of the mailing of notice to the property owner, the
town shall obtain a receipt of mailing from the postal service, which receipt
shall indicate the date of mailing and the name and address of the mail-lee.
However, if the property owner cannot be located within ten days from the date
of mailing the same, notice may be given by posting a copy of the notice on the
property or by publication, as provided by 11 O.S § 1-102, one time not less
than ten days prior to any hearing or action.
      (3)   If the Town Board of Trustees anticipates summary abatement of a
nuisance in accordance with the provisions as herein provided, the notice,
whether by mail or publication, shall state that: any accumulations of trash,
or excessive weeds or grass growth, on the owner’s property occurring within
six months after the removal of trash, or cutting or mowing of weeds or grass,
on the property pursuant to the notice may be summarily abated by the town,
that the cost of such abatement shall be assessed against the owner, and that a
lien shall be imposed on the property to secure such payment, all without
further notice to the property owner.
      (4)   The owner of the property may give his or her written consent to
the town authorizing the removal of the trash, or the mowing of the weeds or
grass. By giving his or her written consent, the owner waives his or her right
to a hearing by the town.
      (5)   A hearing may be held by the Town Board of Trustees to determine
whether the accumulation of trash, or the growth of weeds or grass, has caused
the property to become detrimental to the health, benefit, or welfare of the
public and the community, or a hazard to traffic, or creates a fire hazard to
the danger of property.
      (6)   Upon a finding that the condition of the property constitutes a
detriment or hazard and that the property would be benefitted by the removal of
such conditions, the agents of the town are granted the right of entry on the
property for the removal of trash, mowing of weeds or grass, cleaning, and
performance of necessary duties as a governmental function of the town.
Immediately following the cleaning or mowing of the property, the Town Clerk/
Treasurer shall file a notice of lien with the County Clerk describing the
property and the work performed by the town, and stating that the town claims a
lien on the property for the cleaning and mowing cost.
      (7)   The Town Board of Trustees shall determine the actual cost of such
cleaning and any other expenses as may be necessary in connection therewith,
including the cost of the notice and mailing. The Town Clerk/Treasurer shall
forward by mail to the property owner specified in this section a statement of
the actual cost and demanding payment. If the cleaning and mowing are done by
the town, the cost to the property owner for the cleaning and mowing shall not
exceed the actual cost of the labor, maintenance, and equipment required. If
the cleaning and mowing are done on a private contract basis, the contract
shall be awarded to the lowest and best bidder.
      (8)   If payment is not made within 30 days from the date of the mailing
of the statement, the Town Clerk/Treasurer shall forward a certified statement
of the amount of the cost to the County Treasurer of the county in which the
property is located, and the same shall be levied on the property and collected
by the County Treasurer as other taxes authorized by law. The cost and the
interest thereon shall be a lien against the property from the date the cost is
certified to the County Treasurer and shall continue until the cost shall be
fully paid. Upon receiving payment, if any, the Town Clerk/Treasurer shall
forward to the County Treasurer a notice of such payment and directing
discharge of the lien or part thereof.
      (9)   The town may designate an Administrative Officer or administrative
body to carry out the duties of the Town Board of Trustees. The property owner
shall have a right of appeal to the Town Board of Trustees from any order of
the Administrative Officer or administrative body. The appeal shall be taken by
filing written notice of appeal with the Town Clerk/Treasurer within ten days
after the administrative order is rendered.
      (10)   If the Town Board of Trustees causes property within the town
limits to be cleaned of trash and weeds, or grass to be cut or mowed, in
accordance with the procedures provided for in this section, any subsequent
accumulations of trash, or excessive weed or grass growth, on the property
occurring within a six-month period may be declared to be a nuisance and may be
summarily abated without further prior notice to the property owner. At the
time of each summary, abatement the town shall notify the property owner of the
abatement and costs thereof. The notice shall state that the property owner may
request a hearing within ten days after the date of mailing the notice. Unless
otherwise determined at the hearing, the cost of such abatement shall be
determined and collected as provided in this section. However, these summary
abatement procedures shall not apply if the records of the County Clerk show
that the property was transferred after the notice was given pursuant to this
section.
   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any property used
for agricultural purposes.
(Prior Code, § 8-303)
Statutory reference:
   Definitions, see 11 O.S. § 1-102
§ 90.38 CONSENT BY OWNER.
   The owner of property shall:
   (A)   Cut, remove, or destroy the trash or weeds in accordance with the
notice;
   (B)   Give written consent authorizing the town to abate the trash or weeds,
thereby waiving his or her right to a hearing; or
   (C)   Request in writing to the Board a hearing as hereafter provided and,
if within three days after an order of abatement is rendered at the hearing,
the owner abates the trash or weeds.
(Prior Code, § 8-304)
§ 90.39 FAILURE OF OWNER TO ABATE.
   In the event that the owner has not abated the trash or weeds within ten
days of receipt of notice, or within three days of any order of abatement, or
upon written consent from the owner, the town shall cause the trash or weeds to
be cut, removed, or destroyed. The abatement may be done by the town directly
or may be let by contract, as other contracts of the town are let, for a period
not to exceed one year.
(Prior Code, § 8-305)
§ 90.40 COST, STATEMENT OF COST.
   The town shall determine the actual cost of abatement by resolution or
motion, per hour and cost of notices and mailing and minimum charges.
(Prior Code, § 8-306)
§ 90.41 UNLAWFUL TO DEPOSIT RUBBISH.
   It is unlawful for any person to throw, place, or deposit any rubbish,
trash, slop, garbage, filthy substance, grass, weeds, trees, brush, or any
other refuse or waste matter in any street, alley, or in any ditch or
watercourse, upon the premises of another or upon any public ground in the
town.
(Prior Code, § 8-307) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.42 BURNING REFUSE.
   (A)   It is unlawful to willfully burn, in the open, any refuse of any type
material within the town, with the sole exceptions being those authorized by
the fire code.
   (B)   In land clearing operations, if large tree limbs and stumps need to be
disposed of they may be burned upon the granting of permission by the State
Department of Environmental Quantity and by the Town Fire Department if
adequate fire safety precautions are utilized.
   (C)   In any case of burning, a minimum safety requirement is that constant
surveillance must be provided during the time the fire is burning.
(Prior Code, § 8-308) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.43 REMOVAL OF DEAD ANIMALS.
   The owner, or any person having charge, of any animal dying in the town
shall, within 24 hours after the death of such animal, remove its carcass, and
failure so to do shall constitute a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 8-309) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.44 UNLAWFUL TO LITTER.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   LITTERING is defined as throwing any trash, refuse, waste paper,
tin can, bottles, or any other object or substance whatever upon the public
streets, alleys, roadways, and sidewalks of the town, or upon any real property
owned or occupied by another.
      (B)   It is unlawful for any person to litter.
   (B)   Automobiles. It is unlawful for any person to throw from any
automobile or motor vehicle being operated and driven upon and over the
streets, alleys, and roadways of the town any litter, trash, waste paper, tin
cans, or any other substance or refuse whatsoever.
(Prior Code, § 8-310) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.45 LITTER NOT TO ACCUMULATE ON PROPERTY.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation occupying any real
property, either as tenant or owner, to allow trash, waste paper, litter,
objects, bottles, tin cans, or any other used or disposed of objects to
accumulate upon such real property or premises being so occupied or rented to
such an extent as to constitute a littering nuisance.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation occupying any real
property, either as tenant or owner, to allow accumulated trash, waste paper,
litter objects, bottles, tin cans, or any other used or disposed of objects to
be carried from the occupied premises, either by the wind, elements, or
otherwise, to any adjoining or other real estate not so owned or occupied by
the offender.
(Prior Code, § 8-311) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.46 DESIGNATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER.
   The Public Works Director, also known as the Public Utilities Director,
shall be designated as the Administrative Officer to carry out the duties fo
the governing body as specified in this subchapter, and as set forth pursuant
to 11 O.S. § 22-111(A)(7).
(Ord. 8-312, passed 6-20-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 11 O.S. § 22-112(A)(7)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no
specific penalty is prescribed, shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person who shall tear down, or begin the tearing down, of any
house or building within the town limits without having first procured permit
therefor, as provided in §§
90.20 through
90.24, shall be guilty of an offense against the town and upon conviction
thereof shall be subject to §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 8-205)
CHAPTER 91: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
91.001   Definitions
   
91.002   Running at large; owners cited
   
91.003   Control of animals required
   
91.004   Buildings, structures for animals
   
91.005   Nuisance animals
   
91.006   Pasturing in public areas
   
91.007   Kennels
   
91.008   Zoning ordinance to prevail
   
91.009   Investigations for violation of chapter
   
91.010   Records
   
91.011   Prohibited animals
Licensing and Vaccination
   
91.025   Rabies vaccination required; certificate of vaccination; tags
   
91.026   Licenses required
Impoundment
   
91.040   Impoundment, disposition of animals
   
91.041   Breaking pound, interfering with officers
   
91.042   Redemption, adoption of animals
Cruelty to Animals
   
91.055   Cruelty to animals
   
91.056   Poisoning animals
   
91.057   Encouraging animals to fight
Rabies and Animal Bites
   
91.070   Animal bites; rabies examination
   
91.071   Rabies diagnoses; quarantine of town; time limit
   
91.072   Killing, removing rabid animals prohibited
   
91.073   Reports on bite cases; veterinarian
 
   
91.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.001 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
      ANIMAL. Any horse, mule, donkey, pony, cow, sheep, goat, hog, dog, cat,
rabbit, turkey, or other animal or fowl.
      AT LARGE.
         (a)   Not securely confined by a fence or other means on premises
under the control of, or occupied by, the owner; or
         (b)   Not under the control of the owner, a member of his or her
immediate family over 12 years of age or an agent of the owner, by leash, not
more than six feet in length if off the premises of the owner.
      FOWL. Chickens, guineas, geese, ducks, and pigeons.
      KENNEL. Keeping of more than four adult dogs on the same premises in any
manner.
      OWNER OR KEEPER. Any person, group of persons, or corporation owning,
keeping, maintaining, or harboring, or having care or custody of, an animal or
animals, or fowl or birds.
      PROVOKE OR PROVOCATION. With respect to an attack by an animal, that the
animal was hit, kicked, or struck by a person with an object or part of a
person’s body or that any part of the animal’s body is pulled, pinched, or
squeezed by a person.
      VICIOUS ANIMAL. An animal which has bitten, or attempted to bite, any
person without undue provocation, or which attacks, or barks or growls at, and
acts as if it intends to attack or bite, or bites a person or persons when not
unduly provoked, and includes a PIT BULL.
      WITHOUT PROVOCATION. An animal was not teased, tormented, or abused; and
also means where the animal was not protecting its owner or owner’s property
from criminal activity by a perpetrator of a crime.
   (B)   All other words or phrases used herein shall be defined and
interpreted according to their common usage.
(Prior Code, § 4-101) (Ord. 4-101, passed 7-9-2007)
Statutory reference:
   Animals running at large; regulation and taxation, see 11 O.S. § 22-115
§ 91.002 RUNNING AT LARGE; OWNERS CITED.
   (A)   No owner shall permit any animal, including fowl, owned, harbored, or
kept by him or her, to be at large within the town. It is unlawful for any
animal to be at large within the town.
   (B)   Any animal running at large in the town may be taken up and impounded
at the animal shelter. Any police officer or animal control officer may, at his
or her discretion, cite the owner of such animal to appear in municipal court
to answer charges of violation of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 4-102) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.003 CONTROL OF ANIMALS REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any owner or person to:
   (A)   Fail to prevent any animal from running at large within the town;
   (B)   Perform, do, or carry out any inhumane treatment against any animal;
   (C)   Keep, possess, own, control, maintain, use, or otherwise exercise
dominion over any animal or animals which by reason of noise, odor, or sanitary
conditions become offensive to a reasonable and prudent person of ordinary
tastes and sensibilities, or which constitute or becomes a health hazard as
determined by the Health Officer or Animal Control Officer;
   (D)   Turn any animal at large or release an animal, which is restrained or
confined in an enclosure as required by this chapter;
   (E)   No animal, even though it is being controlled or restrained by chain,
rope, or other similar device, shall be left or secured in such a position that
said animal is able to reach the edge of any roadway, alleyway, or restrict
access to any utility meters; and
   (F)   Any animal that is being restrained by a chain, rope, or similar
device, that repeatedly exhibits vicious actions or tendencies towards
pedestrians, shall be required to be enclosed within the boundaries of the
property by being in a pen, cage, or fence that is capable of containing the
animal.
(Prior Code, § 4-103) (Ord. 4-103, passed 11-13-2006) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.004 BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES FOR ANIMALS.
   (A)   Every building or place where any animal or fowl is kept shall be
constructed of such material and in such manner that it can be kept clean and
sanitary at all times.
   (B)   No place where an animal is kept shall be kept closer than 40 feet to
the premises of an apartment, hotel, restaurant, boarding house, food store,
building used for educational, religious, or hospital purposes, or dwelling
other than that occupied by the owner or occupant of the premises upon which
the animal is kept.
   (C)   Every building where any animal is kept, if located within 200 feet of
any apartment, hotel, restaurant, boarding house, food store, building used for
educational, religious, or hospital purposes, or any dwelling other than that
occupied by the owner or occupant of the premises upon which the animal is
kept, shall be provided with a watertight and flytight receptacle for manure,
of such size as to hold all accumulation of manure. The receptacle shall be
emptied sufficiently often and in such manner as to prevent it from being or
becoming a nuisance, and shall be kept covered at all times except when open
during the deposit or removal of manure or refuse. No manure shall be allowed
to accumulate on such premises except in the receptacle.
   (D)   Any police officer, Animal Control Officer, or Health Officer shall
inspect any structure or place where an animal is kept on his or her own
initiative or upon complaint. He or she may issue any such reasonable order as
he or she may deem necessary to the owner of such animal to cause the animal to
be kept as required in this chapter, or in a manner so as not to constitute a
nuisance. He or she may make a complaint before the town court against any
person for violation of any provision of this chapter, or of any such
reasonable order.
   (E)   The location of any kennel shall be subject to any planning or zoning
guidelines, or decisions of the Town Board of Trustees. In any case, no kennel
may be kept within 500 feet of a residence or any building open to the public.
(Prior Code, § 4-104) (Ord. 4-104, passed 7-9-2007) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.005 NUISANCE ANIMALS.
   (A)   No person shall keep any animal which causes frequent or long-
continued noise, or otherwise so as to disturb the comfort or repose of any
person in the vicinity. Any violation of this section is declared to be a
nuisance and as such may be abated.
   (B)   No person shall keep any animal which is a nuisance or is VICIOUS, as
defined in §
91.001.
(Prior Code, § 4-105) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.006 PASTURING IN PUBLIC AREAS.
   It is unlawful for any person to pasture any animal on any public property
or private property without the consent of the person owning or controlling the
property.
(Prior Code, § 4-106) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.007 KENNELS.
   (A)   Purpose. The intent of this section is to prevent and reduce the
transmission of diseases from animals, particularly dogs and cats, to preserve
the peace, and to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of
the town by establishing rules and regulations over all kennel and private
animal shelter operations within the town.
   (B)   Licensing requirements; exemptions. It shall be unlawful for any
person to operate an animal shelter or a kennel without first procuring a
license for such operation from the licensing officer of the town.
Additionally, such person(s) must further provide proof of compliance with
licensure requirements as applicable under the laws of the state, pursuant to 4
O.S. § 30.4, and as may be subsequently amended by the legislature of the
state. All veterinary hospitals and nonprofit benevolent organizations
dedicated to the care and protection of animals for humanitarian purposes shall
be exempt from the payment of the animal shelter or kennel license fees unless
the particular veterinary hospital or nonprofit benevolent organization
maintains stud animals, or maintains five or more animals for breeding
purposes. Additionally, all federal, state, and municipal facilities shall be
exempt from the provisions of this section.
   (C)   Revocation and suspension of license; penalties. In addition to any
other penalties prescribed by ordinance, including, but not limited to, §
10.99, the town may revoke or suspend an animal shelter or kennel license for
any violation of these regulations.
   (D)   Licensing fees. A person required to procure a license under this
section shall pay a license fee to the town. A schedule of fees is hereby
levied for the licensing of animal shelters and kennels in the amounts
established by the Board of Trustees by resolution.
   (E)   Submission and contents of plans and specifications; fee. In addition
to any other requirements of this section, detailed plans and specifications
shall be submitted to the town to construct or remodel any animal shelter or
kennel. Written approval of plans and specifications must be obtained from the
town prior to any construction or remodeling. Any plans and specifications for
animal shelters or kennels shall comply with this section and must include
descriptions of the proposed ventilation system, plumbing equipment, and
finishes of floors, walls, and ceilings. The person submitting plans and
specifications for review shall pay to the town an amount established by the
Board of Trustees by resolution.
   (F)   Physical facilities of animal shelters and kennels.
      (1)   Separation of certain areas. Animal housing areas must be
physically separated from areas in which food and/or drink for human
consumption is prepared, served, or stored, and from any living and/or sleeping
areas of animal shelter or kennel personnel.
      (2)   Interior building surfaces. Interior building surfaces shall be
constructed and maintained so that they are impervious to moisture and may be
readily cleaned.
      (3)   Electric power. Reliable and adequate electric power shall be
provided at all times. Electrical wiring must meet all nationally and federally
recognized electrical safety requirements.
      (4)   Water. Adequate potable water shall be provided. Back flow
preventers shall be installed on any threaded faucets.
      (5)   Heating. Indoor housing for domestic animals shall be sufficiently
heated when necessary to protect pet animals from cold, and to provide for
their health and comfort. The ambient temperature shall be made consistent with
the requirements of the particular species.
      (6)   Ventilation. Indoor housing of animals shall be adequately
ventilated with fresh air to minimize odors and moisture, and to provide for
the health and comfort of the animals at all times. Auxiliary ventilation, such
as exhaust fans and vents or air conditioning, shall be provided when the
ambient temperature is 85°F or higher.
      (7)   Lighting. Adequate lighting must be provided a minimum of eight
hours per day. Such lighting shall provide a minimum of 25 foot candles of
illumination for 30 inches above floor level and must be uniformly distributed.
Enclosures must be positioned to protect animals from excessive illumination.
      (8)   Drainage. A suitable method shall be provided to rapidly eliminate
excess water from animal housing facilities. If drains are used, they shall be
properly constructed and kept in good repair. If closed drainage systems are
used, wastewater shall be disposed of by connection to a sanitary sewer or any
approved sewage disposal system.
   (G)   Primary enclosure standards.
      (1)   Generally. All enclosures shall be structurally sound and
maintained in good repair to protect the animals from injury, to contain them,
and to prevent vermin from entering. They shall be constructed and maintained
to enable the animals to remain dry and clean, and to provide convenient access
to clean food and water.
      (2)   Flooring. The floors of the enclosures shall be constructed to
prevent injury to animals’ feet and legs. Enclosures for dogs and cats may have
wire flooring; provided, however, that:
         (a)   The wire is of adequate gauge to prevent sagging under the
weight of the animals; and
         (b)   The wire mesh is small enough to prevent their feet from falling
through the mesh.
      (3)   Space requirements. Enclosures must be constructed to provide
sufficient space to allow each animal to exercise normal postural movements.
      (4)   Additional requirement for cats. A receptacle containing sufficient
clean litter shall be provided to contain organic wastes.
      (5)   Exercise areas. One run must be provided for every eight primary
enclosures. The run must be of sufficient size to allow an animal to break into
a run. At least two exercise periods per day of 20 minutes each shall be
provided.
   (H)   Sanitation.
      (1)   Cleaning of animal enclosures. Animal waste shall be removed from
enclosures daily and/or as often as may be necessary to prevent contamination
of the animals, and to reduce disease hazards and odors. Cages shall be cleaned
as often as may be necessary to maintain sanitary conditions by washing all
surfaces with a detergent solution followed by a safe and effective sanitizer.
Animals must be removed from the enclosures during the cleaning process, and
precautions taken to avoid cross contamination.
      (2)   Equipment cleaning. Water and food containers, and all other
utensils, shall be cleaned and sanitized using generally acceptable methods,
such as the use of heat or chemical sanitizing solution. These containers shall
be cleaned and sanitized as often as necessary to maintain sanitary conditions.
      (3)   Waste disposal. Animal and food wastes, bedding, dead animals,
debris, and other organic wastes shall be disposed of in a manner that ensures
that vermin infestation, odors, disease hazards, and nuisances are minimized.
      (4)   Property, generally. The kennel property shall be kept clean, in
good repair, and free of trash.
      (5)   Pest control. An effective program for the control of insects,
ectoparasites, and avian and mammalian pests shall be maintained.
      (6)   Storage of food and supplies. Supplies of food and bedding shall be
stored:
         (a)   Off the floor; or
         (b)   In waterproof, closed containers, and adequately protected
against infestation or contamination by vermin.
      (7)   Dead animals. Animals that die at the facility shall be stored and
disposed of in a manner that will not cause a disease hazard or nuisance.
   (I)   Food and water.
      (1)   Generally. All animals shall be fed at least once a day, and shall
be provided potable water at all times except when under special veterinary
care. The food and water shall be free from contamination, palatable, and of
sufficient quality and nutritive value to meet the normal daily requirements
for the condition and size of the animal. Refrigeration shall be provided for
perishable food.
      (2)   Containers. Food and water containers shall be accessible to the
animal and located to minimize contamination by excreta. These containers shall
be cleaned daily. Self-feeders and self-waterers may be used if cleaned daily.
   (J)   Inspections of facilities; fee.
      (1)   Inspections, generally; fee. All kennels or animal shelters must be
inspected by the town in compliance with applicable law prior to the issuance
of a license under this section. The town, or its designated representatives,
may make periodic inspections of all facilities licensed under this section,
and may make re-inspections as necessary to achieve or maintain compliance with
the requirements of this section. An inspection or re-inspection fee shall be
paid to the town, and the amount of such fee shall be as established by the
Board of Trustees by resolution.
      (2)   Exemptions. Federal, state, and municipal facilities shall be
exempt from the provisions of this section.
   (K)   Classification and separation of animals; restrictions. Animals housed
in the same enclosure shall be maintained in compatible groups, with the
following additional restrictions:
      (1)   Females. Females in heat shall not be housed in the same primary
enclosure with males, except for breeding purposes;
      (2)   Aggressive animals. Any aggressive animal shall be housed
individually in an enclosure;
      (3)   Puppies or kittens. Puppies or kittens shall not be housed in the
same primary enclosure with adult dogs or cats other than their dams, except
when permanently maintained in breeding colonies;
      (4)   Dogs and cats. Dogs shall not be housed in the same primary
enclosure with cats, nor shall dogs or cats be housed in the same primary
enclosure with any other species of animals; and
      (5)   Boarded animals. Boarded animals shall not be housed in the same
primary enclosure with those from another household, unless the owners have
been informed of and consented in writing to that arrangement.
   (L)   Disposal of animals by animal shelters. All animal dispositions and
euthanizations must be conducted in accordance with state law and in a humane
manner.
   (M)   Vaccinations. Dogs and cats kept in animal shelters or kennels shall
be vaccinated against rabies.
   (N)   Diseased animals.
      (1)   Quarantine. Animals under quarantine or treatment for a
communicable disease shall be physically separated from other susceptible
animals to minimize dissemination of disease. Such quarantine area should have
a separate ventilation system. In breeding kennels, the town may require
laboratory testing of a suitable number of animals or specimens to determine if
such animals are disease free. The costs of the laboratory tests shall be the
responsibility of the licensee. Quarantine will be lifted only through written
release by the Health Department when it is determined a health risk no longer
exists.
      (2)   Observation and separation. Animals shall be observed daily for
signs of disease. An animal suspected of having an infectious disease shall be
physically separated from other animals until the condition is determined to be
noninfectious.
      (3)   Humane care. Sick or injured animals shall be provided with access
to veterinary care.
      (4)   Disposal in a humane manner. Animals with untreatable diseases or
injuries, or of an aggressive nature shall be disposed of in a humane manner.
(Ord. 4-107, passed 3-14-2022) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.008 ZONING ORDINANCE TO PREVAIL.
   In case of any conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the
zoning ordinance, the zoning ordinance shall prevail.
(Prior Code, § 4-151)
§ 91.009 INVESTIGATIONS FOR VIOLATION OF CHAPTER.
   (A)   For the purpose of discharging the duties imposed by this chapter and
to enforce its provisions, the Animal Control Officer or Health Officer are
empowered to call upon the residents of any premises upon which a dog or cat,
or small animal, is kept or harbored, and to demand the exhibition by the owner
of such dog or cat, or small animal.
   (B)   The Animal Control Officer or Health Officer, in the manner authorized
by law, may enter the premises where any animal is kept in a reportedly cruel
or inhumane manner and demand to examine such animal, and to take possession of
such animal when, in his or her opinion, it requires humane treatment. The
Officer may demand, at the front door of any residence, exhibition by the owner
of current animal licenses at any time.
(Prior Code, § 4-165)
§ 91.010 RECORDS.
   The Animal Control Officer shall keep or cause to be kept:
   (A)   An accurate and detailed record of the licensing, impounding, and
disposition of all animals coming into his or her custody; and
   (B)   An accurate and detailed record of all bite cases reported to the
town, with a complete report of the investigation of each case.
(Prior Code, § 4-166)
§ 91.011 PROHIBITED ANIMALS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to keep swine or cattle, or any similar
animal within the town limits of the town.
   (B)   The keeping of swine or cattle, or any similar animal connected with
school-sponsored activities is permitted when such animals are kept in the
school's agriculture barn.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to keep any livestock within the town
limits of the town unless the livestock is kept within an enclosure or fence,
and the enclosure or fenced area has at least 5,000 square feet for each animal
kept in the enclosure or fenced area, and the enclosure or fenced area is
located so that no part shall be any closer than 100 feet to the dwelling
quarters of any person other than the owner or custodian of such animal.
   (D)   Any person keeping livestock within the town limits of the town in
violation of this section shall be deemed guilty of an offense. Each violation
or omission of requisite act and day of continued violation shall be deemed a
separate offense.
   (E)   This section shall apply to all existing and future activities. All
property located within the town limits of the town shall comply with this
section effective immediately, regardless of any previous practice and activity
occurring thereupon. All businesses operating within the town limits of the
town shall comply with this section effective immediately, regardless of the
date of establishment.
(Ord. 91.011, passed 11-12-2024) Penalty, see §
91.999
LICENSING AND VACCINATION
§ 91.025 RABIES VACCINATION REQUIRED; CERTIFICATE OF VACCINATION; TAGS.
   (A)   No person shall own, keep, or harbor any dog or cat within the town
limits unless such dog or cat, four months of age or older, is vaccinated for
rabies every three years.
   (B)   Unless the owner of any dog or cat furnishes written proof that the
dog or cat has been vaccinated for rabies by a licensed veterinarian in the
past 36 months, the owner shall be guilty of an offense.
   (C)   When a veterinarian vaccinates a dog or cat against rabies, he or she
shall issue to the owner of such dog or cat a metal tag or check evidencing
such vaccination and the year of vaccination.
   (D)   It shall be the duty of the owner of the dog or cat to attach the tag
or check issued to him or her, pursuant to division (C) above, to the dog or
cat, and it shall be unlawful for any person to remove such tag or check
without the owner’s consent.
(Prior Code, § 4-121) Penalty, see §
91.999
Statutory reference:
   Animals running at large; regulation and taxation, see 11 O.S. § 22-115
   Generally, see O.A.C. §§ 310:599-3-8 and 310:599-3-9.1
§ 91.026 LICENSES REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall own, keep, harbor, or have custody of any animal over
three months of age without first obtaining a license from the Town Clerk/
Treasurer and paying the required fee.
   (B)   The annual license fee for animals shall be set by the Town Board by
motion or resolution.
   (C)   This section shall not apply to the keeping of small caged birds and
not to aquatic and amphibian animals kept solely as pets. This section shall
not apply to the keeping of animals temporarily brought or kept within the
town, and not to “seeing eye” dogs when such dog is actually used to aid a
blind person.
(Prior Code, § 4-122)
IMPOUNDMENT
§ 91.040 IMPOUNDMENT, DISPOSITION OF ANIMALS.
   (A)   The town may operate, on its own or contract with an outside agency,
to serve as the town’s animal shelter or pound to provide for the impoundment
of animals pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   Any animal found running at large shall be picked up and immediately
impounded in the animal shelter and there confined in a humane manner. Fees for
impoundment shall be as provided by the shelter or the Town Board. In computing
the fee, a fraction of a day during which an animal has been fed shall be
deemed a full day.
(Prior Code, § 4-131)
§ 91.041 BREAKING POUND, INTERFERING WITH OFFICERS.
   (A)   If any person breaks open, or in any manner directly or indirectly
aids in, or counsels or advises the breaking open of any town pound or contract
pound, or hinders, delays, or obstructs any person duly authorized in taking up
or taking to the town pound any animal liable to be impounded, he or she shall
be guilty of an offense.
   (B)   No person shall interfere with, or hinder, or molest any agent of the
town in the performance of any duty of such agent, or seek to release any
animal in the custody of the town or its agents, except as provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 4-132) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.042 REDEMPTION, ADOPTION OF ANIMALS.
   (A)   An owner of an impounded animal, or his or her agent, may redeem the
animal prior to its sale or destruction as provided for herein by paying the
required fees against the animal, and meeting any other requirements which may
be prescribed in this chapter. If the owner, or his or her agent, has not
redeemed the animal with the first five days after the impoundment of the
animal, the animal may be otherwise disposed of as provided for herein.
   (B)   A person desiring to adopt an animal from impoundment shall pay an
adoption fee, costs of any necessary vaccinations, and a deposit as prescribed
by the Town Board to guarantee the neutering or spaying of the dog or cat, and
shall sign an agreement with the town ensuring that the dog or cat will be
spayed or neutered.
(Prior Code, § 4-133)
CRUELTY TO ANIMALS
§ 91.055 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.
   It is unlawful for any person, willfully and maliciously, to pour on, or
apply to, any animal any drug or other thing which inflicts pain on the animal;
or to knowingly treat an animal in a cruel or inhumane manner; or to knowingly
neglect an animal belonging to him or her, or in his or her custody, in a cruel
or inhumane manner.
(Prior Code, § 4-141) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.056 POISONING ANIMALS.
   It is unlawful for a person willfully to poison any dog or other animal
except a noxious, non-domesticated animal, or to knowingly expose poison so
that the same may be taken by an animal.
(Prior Code, § 4-142) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.057 ENCOURAGING ANIMALS TO FIGHT.
   It is unlawful for any person to instigate or encourage a fight between
animals, or to encourage one animal to attack, pursue, or annoy another animal
except a noxious, non-domesticated animal, or to keep a house, pit, or other
place used for fights between animals.
(Prior Code, § 4-143) Penalty, see §
91.999
RABIES AND ANIMAL BITES
§ 91.070 ANIMAL BITES; RABIES EXAMINATION.
   (A)   Every animal that bites or scratches a person shall be reported within
four hours to the Police Department or Animal Control Officer, and shall
thereupon be securely quarantined at a veterinarian hospital for a period of
ten days from the date the person was bitten, and shall not be released from
such quarantine except by permission of the Police Chief or the Animal Control
Officer of the town and the veterinarian in charge of the quarantined animal.
Such quarantine may be at any veterinarian hospital chosen by the owner,
provided it be located in the county. Failure of the owner or keeper to
quarantine his or her animal within the four-hour period herein will make him
or her guilty of an offense.
   (B)   The owner, upon demand by any town officer or Animal Control Officer,
shall surrender any animal that has bitten or scratched a human, or which is
suspected as having been exposed to rabies, for supervised quarantine testing
or euthanasia, the expense for which shall be borne by the owner; and the
animal may be reclaimed by the owner if adjudged free of rabies.
(Prior Code, § 4-161) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.071 RABIES DIAGNOSES; QUARANTINE OF TOWN; TIME LIMIT.
   (A)   When an animal under quarantine has been diagnosed as being rabid, or
suspected by a licensed veterinarian as being rabid, and dies while under such
observation, the Animal Control Officer or veterinarian shall immediately send
the head of such animal to the State Health Department for pathological
examination, and shall notify the proper public Health Officer of reports of
human contacts and diagnosis made of the suspected animal.
   (B)   When one or both reports give a positive diagnosis of rabies, the
Police Chief or Animal Control Officer of the town may recommend a town-wide
quarantine for a period of six months; and upon the invoking of such
quarantine, no animal shall be taken into the streets or permitted to be in the
streets during such period of quarantine. During such quarantine, no animal
shall be taken or shipped from the town without written permission of the
Police Chief or the Animal Control Officer of the town.
   (C)   During such period of rabies quarantine as herein designated, every
animal bitten by an animal adjudged to be rabid shall be treated for such
rabies infection by a licensed veterinarian, or held under six month’s
quarantine by the owner in the same manner as other animals are quarantined.
   (D)   In the event there are additional positive cases of rabies occurring
during the period of quarantine, such period of quarantine may be extended for
an additional six months.
(Prior Code, § 4-162)
Statutory reference:
   Animals; quarantine, see 63 O.S. § 1-508
§ 91.072 KILLING, REMOVING RABID ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall kill or cause to be killed any rabid animal, any
animal suspected of having been exposed to rabies, or any animal biting or
scratching a human, except as herein provided, nor to remove the animal from
the town limits without written permission from the Health Officer of the town,
or the Animal Control Officer.
   (B)   The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies shall, upon demand,
be surrendered to the Animal Control Officer.
   (C)   The Animal Control Officer shall direct the disposition of any animal
found to be infected with rabies.
   (D)   No person shall fail or refuse to surrender any animal for quarantine
or destruction, as required herein, when demand is made therefor by an employee
empowered to enforce this chapter. Such refusal shall be deemed an offense.
(Prior Code, § 4-163) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.073 REPORTS ON BITE CASES; VETERINARIAN.
   (A)   It is the duty of every physician, veterinarian, or other practitioner
to report to the Animal Control Officer the names and addresses of persons
treated for bites inflicted by animals, together with such other information as
will be helpful in rabies control.
   (B)   It is the duty of every licensed veterinarian to report to the Animal
Control Officer his or her diagnosis of any animal observed by him or her to be
a rabid suspect.
(Prior Code, § 4-164)
§ 91.999 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished as provided in §
10.99 of this code.
(Prior Code, § 4-171)
CHAPTER 92: FAIR HOUSING
Section
   
92.01   Purpose, construction
   
92.02   Housing discrimination acts prohibited
   
92.03   Exemptions
   
92.04   Fair Housing Board
   
92.05   Procedure for complaints
   
92.06   Notices
   
92.07   Relief in courts
 
   
92.99   Penalty
§ 92.01 PURPOSE, CONSTRUCTION.
   The general purpose of this chapter is:
   (A)   To secure for all people equal access to housing in all neighborhoods;
and
   (B)   To preserve the public safety, health, and welfare
(Prior Code, § 5-901)
§ 92.02 HOUSING DISCRIMINATION ACTS PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person, real estate broker, real estate salesperson,
or corporation;
   (A)   To refuse to sell, lease, rent, assign, or otherwise transfer the
title or other interest in any housing or real property, upon which residential
housing is to be constructed, to any person or to discriminate in the terms of
conditions of the sale, rental, or leasing of any residential housing unit
because of race, sex, religion, disability, familial status, sexual
orientation, gender identity, national origin, or any other characteristic
protected by federal law;
   (B)   To refuse to negotiate with any person for the sale, rental, or
leasing of any residential property, or to represent that such property is not
available for inspection, sale, rental, or lease when in fact it is so
available because of a person’s race, sex, religion, disability, familial
status, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin or any other
characteristic protected by federal law;
   (C)   To solicit or induce, or attempt to solicit or induce, any person
owning any interest in any residential housing to sell, rent, or lease, or not
to sell, rent, or lease such housing to any person on the ground of loss of
value due to the present or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person
or persons of another race, sex, religion, disability, familial status, sexual
orientation, gender identity, national origin or any other characteristic
protected by federal law, either by direct solicitation or inducement, or by
the purchase of other property in the neighborhood for the purpose of such
inducement, or to distribute, or cause to be distributed, material or making
statements designed to induce a residential property owner to sell or lease his
or her property due to such change in neighborhood; or
   (D)   To file a complaint alleging a violation of this section with
knowledge that such complaint is false in any material respect, or to file such
complaint for the sole purpose of harassment.
(Prior Code, § 5-902) (Ord. 92.02, passed 2-12-2024)  Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.03 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Nothing herein shall apply to any religious organization, association,
society, or private club, or a religious nonprofit organization operated,
supervised, or controlled by, or in conjunction with, a religious organization,
association, or society from limiting the sale or rental of dwelling units
owned and operated for other than a commercial purpose.
   (B)   Nothing herein shall apply to:
      (1)   Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner, provided that
such private individual owner does not own more than three such single-family
houses and was not the most recent resident of such house prior to such sale,
with the exception granted to one such sale within a 24-month period; provided
further, that such owner does not own or retain, in his or her behalf, title to
a portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three such
single-family house at any one time; provided further, that such sale or rental
of such single-family house shall be excepted if such house is sold or rented
without the use in any manner of a sale or rental facilities, or employee
thereof; or
      (2)   Any dwelling containing living quarters occupied, or intended to be
occupied, by no more than four families living independent of each other, and
the owner actually occupies one such living quarter as his or her residence.
(Prior Code, § 5-903)
§ 92.04 FAIR HOUSING BOARD.
   (A)   Created. There is created a Fair Housing Board of the town,
hereinafter referred to as the Board, composed of the members of the Town Board
of Trustees of the town.
   (B)   Duties. It shall be the duty of the Fair Housing Board to:
      (1)   Initiate, receive, and investigate complaints charging unlawful
housing practices;
      (2)   Seek conciliation of such complaints, hold hearings, make findings
of fact and publish its findings of fact; and
      (3)   Adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary within the
limits of this chapter, and carry out the purposes and provisions of this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5-904)
§ 92.05 PROCEDURE FOR COMPLAINTS.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by discriminatory practice prohibited by this
chapter may file with the Fair Housing Board a complaint in writing under oath.
The complaint shall be signed by the person claiming to be aggrieved, and shall
state the name and address of the person alleged to have violated the
provisions, and may include such other information as may be required by the
Board. Complaints filed under this section must be filled within 30 days after
the alleged violation, and failure to file within the time shall be considered
a waiver of the application of this chapter. The Board may issue a complaint on
its own initiative at any time it is within the knowledge of the Board that a
person has violated any of the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   The Board shall investigate each complaint filed with the Board, and
shall attempt an adjustment of the complaint by means of conference and
conciliation. Sixty days shall be allowed for the purpose of investigation,
conference, and conciliation. Upon determination that a complaint is not well
founded, the Board shall dismiss the complaint and notify the complainant and
respondent in writing of the dismissal. If the Board takes no action within 90
days of the filing of the complaint, it shall be considered as dismissed.
   (C)   If conference or conciliation does not result in compliance with this
chapter, the Board shall cause to be issued and served in the name of the town
a written notice, together with a copy of the complaint, requiring the person
named in the complaint, hereinafter referred to as the respondent, to answer
charges of the complaint at a hearing before the Board at a time and place to
be specified in the notice.
   (D)   At the hearing provided for in division (C) above, the complaint shall
be heard by the Board. At the hearing, the complainant or person aggrieved may
appear in person or by counsel, and the respondent may file a written answer to
the complaint, and may appear in person or by legal counsel. The Board, when
conducting any hearing pursuant to this section, may permit amendments to any
complaint or answer, and the testimony taken at the hearing shall be under
oath, and shall be transcribed at the request of either party or at the
direction of the Board. If the Board finds at the hearing that the respondent
has engaged in any discriminatory practice or practices prohibited by this
chapter, it shall state its findings of fact and shall so certify the matter to
the Town Attorney for appropriate action. No prosecution shall be brought under
this chapter, except upon such certification. If the Board, upon hearing, finds
that the respondent has not engaged in any discriminatory practice, it shall
state its findings of fact and shall issue and file an order dismissing the
complaint. The Board shall establish rules and regulations to govern and
expedite, and effectuate, the foregoing procedure, and shall maintain the files
provided for herein.
(Prior Code, § 5-905)
§ 92.06 NOTICES.
   Any and all notices required under the provisions of this chapter to be
served upon any person may be served personally on such person, or by mailing a
copy thereof by certified or registered mail with return receipt requested to
the most current business or residence address of such person.
(Prior Code, § 5-906)
§ 92.07 RELIEF IN COURTS.
   No penalty imposed by, and pursuant to, this chapter shall interfere with
the right of the town also to apply to the proper courts of the state for
mandamus an injunction, or other appropriate action, against such person.
(Prior Code, § 5-912)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   It is unlawful and constitutes an offense for any person to violate
any of the provisions of this chapter. Any person found guilty of violating any
provisions shall be deemed guilty of an offense and is subject, upon
conviction, to punishment as provided in §
10.99 of this code, plus costs.
(Prior Code, § 5-907)
   (B)   Any person who engages in any business, trade, or vocation for which a
license, permit, certificate, or registration is required by this chapter,
without first having a valid license, permit, certificate, or registration as
required, or who shall fail to do anything required by this chapter or by any
code adopted by this chapter, or who shall otherwise violate any provision of
this part, or of any code adopted by this chapter, or who shall violate any
lawful regulation or order made by any of the officers provided in this
chapter, shall be guilty of an offense, punishable as provided in §
10.99 of this code. Each day upon which a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 5-911)
CHAPTER 93: FIRE PREVENTION
Section
   
93.01   Fireworks restrictions
§ 93.01 FIREWORKS RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   The word FIREWORKS as used in this section shall be as defined in 68
O.S. § 1622.
   (B)   The sale of fireworks is permitted in the town limits, with the
following restrictions.
      (1)   The sale of fireworks will be lawful only upon the issuance of a
valid and current town permit.
      (2)   The sale of fireworks shall only occur between the dates of June 15
through July 4 and December 15 through January 2 of each year.
      (3)   No person under the age of 14 shall be authorized to sell
fireworks.
      (4)   The permit issued by the town shall restrict the location of sales,
pursuant to state law and shall further provide that any temporary structure
used for the sale of fireworks shall be removed no later than July 18 and by
January 18.
      (5)   All applications for permits must be submitted to the town no later
than June 25 and November 25.
      (6)   The permit holder will be subject to collect sales tax on all sales
and to report those amounts collected for sales tax to the Oklahoma Tax
Commission.
   (C)   It is unlawful to discharge, fire, explode, or ignite fireworks at any
time, and on any day except July 3 and July 4 only between the hours of 10:00
a.m. and 12:00 midnight and December 31 and January 1 between the hours of 11:
30 p.m. and 12:30 a.m.
(Prior Code, § 10-106) Penalty, see §
10.99
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
111.   FOOD REGULATIONS
      
112.   MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS
      
113.   TRANSIENT MERCHANTS, PEDDLERS
      
114.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
CHAPTER 110: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
110.01   License required
   
110.02   Issuance
   
110.03   License period
   
110.04   Payment of fees; proration
   
110.05   Transfer
   
110.06   License display
   
110.07   Revocation, suspension of license
   
110.08   Exemptions
   
110.09   License fee schedule
§ 110.01 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation, either as principal,
officer, agent, servant, or employee, to engage in any of the callings, trades,
professions, or occupations for which a license is required, without first
paying to the town the fee or tax required, and procuring from the town a
license.
(Prior Code, § 9-101) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Cable television systems; terms of overlapping certificates; provisions
inconsistent with state or federal law, see 11 O.S. § 22-107.1
   Licenses and fees regulation by ordinance; expiration; issuance; seal;
exchange of information for collecting of state and local taxes, see 11 O.S. §
22-107
   License tax on occupations; authority to levy and collect; penalties, see 11
O.S. § 22-106
   Sellers of cable television service; assessment of late fee, see 11 O.S. §
22-107.2
§ 110.02 ISSUANCE.
   All licenses shall be issued by the Town Clerk/Treasurer. No license shall
be issued until all conditions prescribed by this chapter have been complied
with, and a certificate of examination or inspection filed with the Town Clerk/
Treasurer, in those cases where examination or inspection is required by
ordinance. Any applicant for a license shall make application upon such forms
as may be prescribed by ordinance or may be prescribed by the Town Clerk/
Treasurer.   
(Prior Code, § 9-102)
§ 110.03 LICENSE PERIOD.
   All licenses shall be issued for the current fiscal year and shall expire on
June 30 of the year for which they are issued, unless a different date of
expiration is provided by the ordinance providing for the particular license.
Taxes are due annually on July 1.
(Prior Code, § 9-103)
§ 110.04 PAYMENT OF FEES; PRORATION.
   All license fees shall be paid in advance for the license period for which
issued. The license fee may be pro-rated for a new business in proportion to
the amount of the year remaining during which time it will operate. However, at
the direction of the Town Board, the Town Clerk/Treasurer may issue licenses to
licensees, sending them statements for fees due, and if the same is not paid
within 60 days from the due date, the license shall thereupon become null and
void.
(Prior Code, § 9-104)
§ 110.05 TRANSFER.
   No license shall be sold or otherwise transferred.
(Prior Code, § 9-105) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.06 LICENSE DISPLAY.
   It is the duty of any person, having obtained a license for any authorized
purpose, to have the same placed or posted in a secure manner in some public
place on the premises occupied and used for such business, and where the
license may be readily seen at any time by any person entering the place of
business. Any licensee who does not occupy any certain premises for the conduct
of such licensed business shall carry his or her license on his or her person,
and shall display the same whenever requested.
(Prior Code, § 9-106)
§ 110.07 REVOCATION, SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.
   All licenses issued by the town shall be subject to revocation by the duly
authorized officer of the Town Board upon any breach of any condition
prescribed by ordinance for the regulation of such licensed occupation, or in
the event such licensee operates such licensed occupation or business in
violation of the laws of the town or the state, or in violation of any law or
regulation of the United States Government. The DULY AUTHORIZED OFFICER shall
mean the Town Clerk/Treasurer in all instances except when some other person or
board is given the authority by ordinance to revoke or suspend the particular
license. The duly authorized officer shall either give written notice by
personal service, or by mail to the licensee, of the revocation of his or her
license, or the suspension of the same, which notice, if mailed, shall be
mailed to the address given on the application or license. The license shall
stand revoked or suspended from the time of the giving of such notice. Any
licensee, however, may appeal to the Town Board from such decision within ten
days after the aforesaid notice by filing a written request with the Town
Clerk/Treasurer for a hearing. The hearing shall be held by the Town Board at
the next regular meeting following the filing of the appeal, but may be
continued from day to day. The appealing licensee may be represented by
counsel. The hearing shall be conducted in an informal manner, but no license
shall be revoked or suspended except upon a preponderance of the evidence. The
Board may affirm, modify, or vacate the order of revocation or suspension, and
its decision shall be final.
(Prior Code, § 9-107)
§ 110.08 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter:
   (A)   A farmer selling in town produce actually produced by him or her in
the county;
   (B)   All scientific or literary entertainers or lecturers;
   (C)   All concerts, musicals, or other entertainment given exclusively by
the citizens of the town; and
   (D)   All entertainments, the proceeds from which are to be devoted to
charity or to public uses or improvements.
(Prior Code, § 9-108)
§ 110.09 LICENSE FEE SCHEDULE.
   (A)   There is hereby assessed and levied a tax or license fee, which fee
shall be set by the Town Board by motion or resolution, upon each of the
persons engaging in any of the occupations, trades, or businesses, licensed or
taxed by the town, for which such person shall first procure a license
therefor. Any person who shall engage in more than one business, trade, or
occupation on which any license fee is required by the town ordinances, so long
as such businesses are operated under one roof and one ownership, shall pay
only one license fee.
   (B)   All businesses and occupations in the town are subject to license
herein. Fees for each license are adopted by motion or resolution of the Town
Board.
(Prior Code, § 9-109)
CHAPTER 111: FOOD REGULATIONS
Section
Food Establishments
   
111.01   Food regulations adopted
   
111.02   Permit
FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 111.01 FOOD REGULATIONS ADOPTED.
   (A)   The latest edition of the State Department of Health Rules and
Regulations pertaining to food establishments is adopted and incorporated by
reference in this code. At least one copy of the rules and regulations shall be
on file in the case of conflict with this provision of this chapter, in which
case the more restrictive terms shall prevail.
   (B)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of the section shall be
guilty of misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished. In
addition thereto, any person convicted of violation may be enjoined from
continuing the violation.
(Prior Code, § 8-101) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Definitions, see 63 O.S. § 1-1101
§ 111.02 PERMIT.
   Annual permits are required for operation of food service establishment.
Fees for such permit shall be as set by the Town Board.
(Prior Code, § 8-102)
CHAPTER 112: MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
General Provisions
   
112.01   Definition
   
112.02   Restrictions applicable to all permits
   
112.03   Permit inspections; other requirements
   
112.04   Prohibited acts
   
112.05   Smoking on town property prohibited
   
112.06   Permit fees
Medical Marijuana Retailer Permits
   
112.20   Business license; permit requirements
   
112.21   Location restrictions
   
112.22   Conditions of operation
Commercial Grower Permits
   
112.35   Business license; permit requirements
   
112.36   Location restrictions
   
112.37   Conditions of operation
Marijuana Processor Permits
   
112.50   Business license; permit requirements
   
112.51   Location restrictions
   
112.52   Condition of operation
Marijuana Growing Facilities; Personal Medical Use Permits
   
112.65   Permit requirements
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 112.01 DEFINITION.
   When used in this chapter, words and phrases shall have the meaning as
defined pursuant to the rules adopted by the State Department of Health,
Oklahoma Administrative Code §§ 310:681-1-1 et seq., and as they maybe amended
from time to time.
   RESTRICTIONS ON MARIJUANA. The growing, possession, processing,
transporting, sale, or use of marijuana within the town is limited to that
authorized by this chapter and by state law, 63 O.S. §§ 420 et seq. Any
growing, possession, processing, transporting, sale, or use of marijuana within
the town that is not authorized in, or without having obtained the applicable
permit provided in this chapter, shall constitute an offense and, upon
conviction, shall be punished as authorized in §
133.21.
(Ord. Part 9, Chapter 3, passed 8-12-2019)
§ 112.02 RESTRICTIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL PERMITS.
   All permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be displayed in a
conspicuous place at all times on the permitted premises. No permit holder may
consent to or allow the use or display of the permit by a person other than the
person to whom the permit was issued. No person may use a permit or exercise
any privileges granted by the permit except at the place, address, premises, or
location for which the permit is issued. Permits issued cover only the person
or entity named in the permit, and shall not be refundable or transferable.
(Ord. Part 9, Chapter 3, passed 8-12-2019) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.03 PERMIT INSPECTIONS; OTHER REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All permits outlined in this chapter will be subject to inspection of
the facilities by an authorized municipal inspector prior to issuance.
   (B)   The inspection prior to a permit decision will occur at a time
scheduled and approved by both the applicant and the municipal inspector.
   (C)   The applicant will be required to be present during the inspection.
   (D)   The smell or noxious odor emitted from smoking or consumption of
marijuana by a person possessing a valid state issued medical marijuana license
shall be treated as a public nuisance.
(Ord. Part 9, Chapter 3, passed 8-12-2019)
§ 112.04 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   No commercial marijuana establishment shall allow the consumption of
alcohol, medical marijuana, or medical marijuana products on the premises.
   (B)   No commercial marijuana establishment shall employ any person under
the age of 18.
(Ord. Part 9, Chapter 3, passed 8-12-2019) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.05 SMOKING ON TOWN PROPERTY PROHIBITED.
   Smoking or using marijuana shall be prohibited on all town property,
including, but not limited to, town vehicles, town buildings, town parks, or
other town facilities.
(Ord. Part 9, Chapter 3, passed 8-12-2019)
§ 112.06 PERMIT FEES.
   Permit fees are adopted by motion or resolution of the Town Board.
(Res. 2019-004, passed 8-12-2019)
MEDICAL MARIJUANA RETAILER PERMITS
§ 112.20 BUSINESS LICENSE; PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All retailers of medical marijuana are required to obtain a medical
marijuana retailer permit and a business license from the Town Clerk/Treasurer.
   (B)   The medical marijuana retailer permit fee shall be in an amount as set
by the Town Board of Trustees by motion or resolution. The fee shall be used to
offset municipal expenses covering costs related to licensing, inspection,
administration, and enforcement of retail marijuana establishments.
   (C)   A medical marijuana retailer permit will not be granted to any
applicant where the proposed location is within a restricted area as
hereinafter set forth.
(Ord. Part 9, Chapter 3, passed 8-12-2019)
§ 112.21 LOCATION RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   A medical marijuana retailer permit will not be granted to any
applicant where the proposed location would be situated within 1,000 feet of
any of the following locations:
      (1)   Any private or public preschool, elementary, secondary, vocational,
or trade school, college, or university;
      (2)   Any library or museum;
      (3)   Any public playground;
      (4)   Any childcare center;
      (5)   Any place of worship or religious assembly;
      (6)   Any public park, pool, or recreation facility;
      (7)   Any juvenile or adult halfway house, correctional facility, or
substance abuse rehabilitation or treatment center;
      (8)   Any residentially zoned district; or
      (9)   Another medical marijuana retailer or marijuana establishment.
   (B)   For the distance requirements outlined in this chapter, the distances
described shall be computed by direct measurement in a straight line from the
nearest property line of the parcel of land on which the use described in
division (A) above is located to the nearest property line of the building or
unit in which the proposed medical marijuana retailer establishment would be
located.
(Ord. Part 9, Chapter 3, passed 8-12-2019)
§ 112.22 CONDITIONS OF OPERATION.
   (A)   Buildings where medical marijuana is stored or dispensed must be
equipped with ventilation/air filtration systems so that no odors are
detectable off premises.
   (B)   The medical marijuana retailer establishment must collect the
applicable sales tax on all sales.
   (C)   The hours of operation shall be between the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Monday through Saturday. Operations shall be closed on Sundays as well as
Christmas Day, Thanksgiving Day, July 4, and New Year’s Day.
   (D)   Any violation of this section will result in the revocation of the
medical marijuana retailer permit.
   (E)   It is the intent of the town that nothing in the medical marijuana
retailer ordinances be construed to:
      (1)   Allow persons to engage in conduct that endangers the public or
causes a public nuisance;
      (2)   Allow the use of marijuana for non-medical purposes; or
      (3)   Allow any activity that is otherwise illegal and not permitted by
state law.
(Ord. Part 9, Chapter 3, passed 8-12-2019)
COMMERCIAL GROWER PERMITS
§ 112.35 BUSINESS LICENSE; PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All commercial growers of marijuana are required to obtain a marijuana
commercial grower permit and a business license from the Town Clerk/Treasurer.
   (B)   The marijuana commercial grower permit fee shall be in an amount as
set by the Town Board of Trustees by motion or resolution. The fee shall be
used to offset municipal expenses covering costs related to licensing,
inspection, administration, and enforcement of retail marijuana establishments.
   (C)   A marijuana commercial grower permit will not be granted to any
applicant where the proposed location is within a restricted area as
hereinafter set forth.
(Ord. Part 9, Chapter 3, passed 8-12-2019)
§ 112.36 LOCATION RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   A marijuana commercial grower permit will not be granted to any
applicant where the proposed location would be situated within 1,000 feet of
any of the following locations:
      (1)   Any private or public preschool, elementary, secondary, vocational,
or trade school, college, or university;
      (2)   Any library or museum;
      (3)   Any public playground;
      (4)   Any childcare center;
      (5)   Any place of worship or religious assembly;
      (6)   Any public park, pool, or recreation facility;
      (7)   Any juvenile or adult halfway house, correctional facility, or
substance abuse rehabilitation or treatment center;
      (8)   Any residentially zoned district; or
      (9)   Another medical marijuana retailer or marijuana establishment.
   (B)   For the distance requirements outlined in this chapter, the distances
described shall be computed by direct measurement in a straight line from the
nearest property line of the parcel of land on which the use described in
division (A) above is located to the nearest property line of the building or
unit in which the proposed marijuana commercial grower facility would be
located.
(Ord. Part 9, Chapter 3, passed 8-12-2019)
§ 112.37 CONDITIONS OF OPERATION.
   (A)   A marijuana commercial grower permit will not be granted to any
applicant where the proposed location is within a restricted area as
hereinafter set forth.
   (B)   Growing of marijuana pursuant to a marijuana commercial grower permit
shall be within an enclosed structure. The facility shall have a security fence
of at least ten feet in height and with limited access. The gates to the secure
area must be locked at all times.
   (C)   The marijuana commercial grower facility must be constructed in such a
manner that the growing of marijuana plants cannot be seen by the public from a
public right-of-way.
   (D)   The growing area, including any lighting, plumbing, or electrical
components used, shall comply with town building, fire, and other applicable
town codes.
   (E)   Growing marijuana shall not be conducted in a manner that constitutes
a public nuisance. A public nuisance may be deemed to exist if growing
marijuana produces light, glare, heat, noise, odor, or vibration that is
detrimental to public health, safety, or welfare, or interferes with the
reasonable enjoyment of life and property.
   (F)   It is the intent of the town that nothing in the medical marijuana
retailer ordinances be construed to:
      (1)   Allow persons to engage in conduct that endangers the public or
causes a public nuisance;
      (2)   Allow the use of marijuana for non-medical purposes; or
      (3)   Allow any activity that is otherwise illegal and not permitted by
state law.
(Ord. Part 9, Chapter 3, passed 8-12-2019)
MARIJUANA PROCESSOR PERMITS
§ 112.50 BUSINESS LICENSE; PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All marijuana processors are required to obtain a marijuana processor
permit and a business license from the Town Clerk/Treasurer.
   (B)   The marijuana processor permit fee shall be in an amount as set by the
Town Board of Trustees by motion or resolution. The fee shall be used to offset
municipal expenses covering costs related to licensing, inspection,
administration, and enforcement of marijuana processing facilities.
   (C)   A marijuana processor permit will not be granted to any applicant
where the proposed location is located within a restricted area as hereinafter
set forth.
(Ord. Part 9, Chapter 3, passed 8-12-2019)
§ 112.51 LOCATION RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   A marijuana processor permit will not be granted to any applicant
where the proposed location would be situated within 1,000 feet of any of the
following locations:
      (1)   Any private or public preschool, elementary, secondary, vocational,
or trade school, college, or university;
      (2)   Any library or museum;
      (3)   Any public playground;
      (4)   Any childcare center;
      (5)   Any place of worship or religious assembly;
      (6)   Any public park, pool, or recreation facility;
      (7)   Any juvenile or adult halfway house, correctional facility, or
substance abuse rehabilitation or treatment center;
      (8)   Any residentially zoned district; or
      (9)   Another medical marijuana retailer or marijuana establishment.
   (B)   For the distance requirements outlined in this chapter, the distances
described shall be computed by direct measurement in a straight line from the
nearest property line of the parcel of land on which the use described in
division (A) above is located to the nearest property line of the building or
unit in which the proposed marijuana processing facility would be located.
(Ord. Part 9, Chapter 3, passed 8-12-2019)
§ 112.52 CONDITION OF OPERATION.
   (A)   Buildings where marijuana processing occurs must be equipped with
ventilation/air filtration systems so that no odors are detectable off
premises.
   (B)   The marijuana processor facility must collect the applicable sales tax
on all sales.
   (C)   The hours of operation shall be between the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Monday through Saturday. Operations shall be closed on Sundays as well as
Christmas Day, Thanksgiving Day, July 4, and New Year’s Day.
   (D)   Any violations of this section will result in the revocation of the
marijuana processor permit.
   (E)   It is the intent of the town that nothing in the medical marijuana
retailer ordinances be construed to:
      (1)   Allow persons to engage in conduct that endangers the public or
causes a public nuisance;
      (2)   Allow the use of marijuana for non-medical purposes; or
      (3)   Allow any activity that is otherwise illegal and not permitted by
state law.
   (F)   Processing facilities must remain locked at all times when not in
operation. The facility must have an electronic security system and have an
appropriate security fence that must be at least ten feet tall around the
facility.
(Ord. Part 9, Chapter 3, passed 8-12-2019)
MARIJUANA GROWING FACILITIES; PERSONAL MEDICAL USE PERMITS
§ 112.65 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All owners of marijuana growing facilities for personal medical use
are required to obtain a permit from the Town Clerk/Treasurer.
   (B)   Marijuana growing facilities for personal medical use permit fee shall
be in an amount as set by the Town Board of Trustees by motion or resolution.
The fee shall be used to offset municipal expenses covering costs related to
licensing, inspection, administration, and enforcement of marijuana growing
facilities for personal medical use.
   (C)   All marijuana growing facilities for personal medical use shall be
subject to security provisions as stated herein prior to the granting of a
permit. Failure to comply with security provisions as stated herein will result
in revocation of the permit.
   (D)   Any access or entry point to residential facilities used for marijuana
cultivation for personal medical use must be secured by lock and key or
equivalent at all times except when the residential facility is actively being
supervised in person by the permit holder.
   (E)   Growing marijuana for personal medical use shall be limited to the
interior of a single private residence.
   (F)   Growing marijuana shall not be visible from the public right-of-way.
   (G)   The growing area including any lighting, plumbing, or electrical
components used shall comply with municipal building and fire codes. The
growing area must be properly ventilated so as not to create humidity, mold, or
other related problems. Lighting shall not exceed 1,000 watts per light. The
use of gas products, including carbon dioxide (CO2), butane, and the like, or
carbon dioxide (CO2) and ozone generators in the growing area is prohibited.
   (H)   Growing marijuana shall not be conducted in a manner that constitutes
a public nuisance. A public nuisance may be deemed to exist if growing
marijuana produces light, glare, heat, noise, odor, or vibration that is
detrimental to public health, safety, or welfare, or interferes with the
reasonable enjoyment of life and property.
   (I)   The primary use of the residential property in which marijuana is
grown shall remain at all times a residence, with legal and functioning
cooking, eating, sleeping, and sanitation/bathing facilities with proper
ingress and egress. No room shall be used for growing marijuana where such
cultivation will impair or prevent the primary uses of cooking, eating,
sleeping, or sanitation/bathing.
   (J)   If the residence is rented, written consent of the property owner
shall be obtained prior to any cultivation commencing. This consent must be
evidenced by a signed and notarized statement from the property owner
permitting the growth of marijuana in the residence.
   (K)   Cultivated marijuana must be used exclusively pursuant to a valid
state-issued medical marijuana license. Any other or unapproved usage shall
result in revocation of the license.
(Ord. Part 9, Chapter 3, passed 8-12-2019)
CHAPTER 113: TRANSIENT MERCHANTS, PEDDLERS
Section
   
113.01   Definitions
   
113.02   License requirements; blanket licenses
   
113.03   Fees
   
113.04   Application for license
   
113.05   Standards for issuance
   
113.06   Bond for license
   
113.07   Service of process
   
113.08   Sale of foods
   
113.09   Identification tag or badge; display
   
113.10   Exceptions
 
   
113.99   Penalty
§ 113.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   COMMERCIAL. Soliciting for a business purpose which is intended to be for
profit and is not intended to be charitable, religious, not for profit, or
political.
   ITINERANT. Having no regular place of doing business or soliciting in the
town and includes, but is not limited to, making regular delivery or providing
goods over an established route through the town.
   PEDDLER. A person soliciting commercial orders for goods or services which
are to be provided from stocks or goods carried with the peddler, or which are
services provided by the peddler at the time the order is made.
   SOLICITING. All activities of peddlers, solicitors, and vendors attempting
to obtain business. Such activities may include, but are not limited to,
distribution of handbills or leaflets to the public directly or by placing them
in a mailbox, on a doorknob, or otherwise on any property; coming personally
onto any property for the purposes defined herein; calling the occupants of any
property by telephone for the purposes herein defined; or calling or inviting
any prospective customers to purchase or obtain merchandise, product, or
service.
   SOLICITOR. A person soliciting commercial orders for goods or services which
are to be provided or shipped to the consumer at a later date.
   VENDOR. Any person engaged in a business or occupation selling, or offering
to sell, any merchandise, product, or service, and includes, but is not limited
to, peddlers and solicitors.
(Prior Code, § 9-201)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of county or municipal corporation not affected, see 47 O.S. § 434
§ 113.02 LICENSE REQUIREMENTS; BLANKET LICENSES.
   (A)   Any itinerant vendor, solicitor, or peddler shall obtain a license
from the town prior to any soliciting in the town, unless exempted herein, to
cover each person who will be soliciting and each location or separate place of
business.
   (B)   Owners or lessees of buildings in which itinerant vendors operate or
locate must obtain a blanket license covering all itinerant vendors who will be
established in the building controlled by the owner or lessee. Governmental
agencies owning public buildings may arrange a letter of agreement with the
town in lieu of a license if licensing is contrary to the regulations governing
the governmental agency. In such a case, the letter of agreement will provide
for the same requirements as are shown in this chapter and will provide that
the town receive half the rental fee paid by the itinerant vendor until the
town’s receipts equal the amount required for a blanket license fee.
(Prior Code, § 9-202)
§ 113.03 FEES.
   The fee for licenses herein required shall be as set by the Town Board of
Trustees by motion or resolution. The fees may be waived for educational,
charitable, religious groups qualifying as I.R.C. § 501(3) organizations who
make house to house solicitations.
(Prior Code, § 9-203)
§ 113.04 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   Applicants for licenses shall file during regular business hours a
written application signed by the applicant, if an individual, by all partners
if a partnership, and by a qualified corporate officer, if a corporation, with
the licensing officer, showing:
      (1)   Name and address of person or persons having the management or
supervision of the applicant’s business during the time that it is proposed to
be carried on in the town; the location or address of such person or persons
when engaged in such business; the permanent address or addresses of such
person or persons; the capacity in which such person or persons will act; the
name and address of the person, firm, or corporation for whose account the
business will be carried on, if any, and if a corporation, under the laws of
what state the same is incorporated;
      (2)   The place or places in the town within the proper zoning
classification, where it is proposed to carry on the applicant’s business and
the length of time during which it is proposed that the business be conducted;
      (3)   Place or places, other than permanent place of business of the
applicant, within the six months next preceding the date of the application,
where the applicant has conducted a transient business;
      (4)   The nature of the goods or products being sold, that is whether
they are “seconds,” rejects, or first-line quality, and whether any warranty
applies to the items being sold; if a warranty applies, the period of the
warranty and the name and address of the warrantor and the procedures for
filing for the adjustment of refund shall be specified;
      (5)   A statement that the applicant agrees to the requirement to pay all
state and town sales taxes due on all items which are subject to sales taxes
and recognizes that a copy of all applications will be provided to the local
office of the State Tax Commission;
      (6)   Current state sales tax permit number;
      (7)   Current license or permit, if any, which may be required by state
law or ordinances of the town for the particular activity or business;
      (8)   If a motor vehicle is to be used in the business, a description of
the vehicle together with motor vehicle registration number and the license
number for the vehicle, and:
         (a)   Proof of liability insurance required by state law; and
         (b)   Proof or verification from the insurance carrier that the Town
Clerk/Treasurer will be provided at least ten days’ notice of any cancellation.
      (9)   Proof of I.R.C. § 501(3) tax status if claiming exemption from the
license fees.
   (B)   Applicants for a blanket itinerant vendor license shall file during
regular business hours a written application signed by the applicant, if an
individual, by all partners, if a partnership, and by a corporation officer, if
a corporation, with the license and permits clerk showing:
      (1)   Name and address of person or persons having the management or
supervision of the building in which itinerant vendor shall conduct business;
      (2)   Name and address of the person or persons having the management or
supervision of the applicant’s business during the time that is proposed to be
carried on in the town; the location or address of such person or persons when
engaged in such business; the permanent address or addresses of such person or
persons; the capacity in which the person or persons will act; the name and
address of the person, firm, or corporation for whose account the business will
be carried on, if any, and if a corporation, under the laws of what state the
same is incorporated and licensed to operate in the state;
      (3)   A general description of the products or services that will be sold
by the itinerant vendor;
      (4)   A statement that the applicant shall establish the following
controls over itinerant vendors and shall maintain records concerning each
itinerant vendor for one year after the engagement dates involving the
itinerant vendors:
         (a)   The applicant shall determine the names and addresses of each
salesperson involved locally for an itinerant vendor, and determine the names
and permanent addresses of the parent company, if any, controlling the
itinerant vendor;
         (b)   The applicant shall determine the nature of the merchandise or
product to be sold, determine whether it is a “reject” line or seconds,
determine whether there are warranties of the product, and how any complaint is
to be filed for warranty adjustment. The applicant shall require that the
vendor display a sign prominent enough to disclose to all potential customers
that the product consists of seconds, rejects, or irregulars if such is the
case;
         (c)   The applicant shall inform each vendor of the requirement to pay
state and town sales taxes, and shall forward the name, product involved, and
dates of the vendor’s engagement to the local office of the State Tax
Commission. Further, the applicant will furnish the vendor with one copy of the
state sales tax report form and require him or her to certify that he or she
will submit a sales tax report at the conclusion of his or her engagement in
the town;
         (d)   The applicant shall post proof of liability insurance policy in
effect in the amount prescribed by the Town Board;
         (e)   The applicant shall provide copies of all ordinances,
regulations, tax forms, and the like to the itinerant vendor, and provide the
town with a statement signed by the vendor agreeing to comply with the same;
and
         (f)   The applicant shall post a notice with the town 30 days in
advance, listing each itinerant vendor establishing a business.
(Prior Code, § 9-204)
§ 113.05 STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application, an investigation of the applicant’s
business reputation and moral character shall be made.
   (B)   The application shall be approved unless such investigation discloses
tangible evidence that the conduct of the applicant’s business would pose a
substantial threat to the public health, safety, morals, or general welfare. In
particular, tangible evidence that the applicant:
      (1)   Has been convicted of a crime of moral turpitude;
      (2)   Has made willful misstatements in the application;
      (3)   Has committed prior violations of ordinances pertaining to
itinerant merchants, peddlers, solicitors, and the like;
      (4)   Has committed prior fraudulent acts; or
      (5)   Has a record of continual breaches of solicited contracts.
will constitute valid reasons for disapproval of an application.
§ 113.06 BOND FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   Before any license, as provided by this chapter, shall be issued, such
applicant shall file a bond running to the town. A person engaging in business
as an itinerant vendor shall file a bond in the sum set forth in the bond
schedule, secured by the applicant as principal and two sureties upon whom
service or process may be made in the state.
   (B)   All such bonds shall be approved by the Town Attorney and conditioned
that:
      (1)   Applicant shall comply with all the provisions of the ordinances of
the town and the statutes of the state regulating and concerning the sale of
goods or wares and merchandise; and
      (2)   Will pay all judgments rendered against the applicant for any
violation of the ordinances or statutes, or any of them, together with all
judgments and costs that may be recovered against him or her by any person or
persons for damage growing out of any misrepresentation or deceptive practice
by any person transacting such business with such applicant, whether such
misrepresentation or deception were made or practiced by the owner or by their
service, agents, or employees, either at the time of making the sale or through
any advertisement of any character whatsoever, printed or circulated, with
reference to the goods, wares, and merchandise sold or any part thereof. Any
action on the bond may be brought in the name of the town to the use of the
aggrieved person.
(Prior Code, § 9-206)
§ 113.07 SERVICE OF PROCESS.
   Before any license for an itinerant vendor, as herein provided, shall be
issued, such applicant shall file with the town an instrument nominating and
appointing the Town Clerk/Treasurer his or her true and lawful agent, with full
power and authority to acknowledge service of notice of process for, and on
behalf of, the applicant in respect to any matters connected with, or arising
out of, the business transaction under the license and the bond given as
required by this chapter, or for the performance of the conditions of the bond
or for any breach thereof. The instrument shall also contain recitals to the
effect that the applicant for the license consents and agrees that service of
any notices or process may be made upon the agent, and when so made shall be
taken and held to be as valid as if personally served on the person or persons
applying for the license under this chapter, according to the laws of the state
or any other state and waiving all claims or right of error by reason of such
acknowledgment of service or manner of service. Immediately upon service of
process upon the Town Clerk/Treasurer, as herein provided, the Town Clerk/
Treasurer shall send to the licensee at his or her last-known address, by
certified mail, a copy of the notice.
(Prior Code, § 9-207)
§ 113.08 SALE OF FOODS.
   (A)   All applicants for licenses to sell foods and merchandise for human or
animal consumption shall have their application for license approved in
accordance with the applicable state food establishment requirements before the
licenses are issued.
   (B)   The sale of foods requires an individual license not covered by
blanket licenses.
(Prior Code, § 9-208)
§ 113.09 IDENTIFICATION TAG OR BADGE; DISPLAY.
   (A)   At all times there shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon each a
badge, tag, or card issued by the town as proof of issuance of a license. The
card, tag, or badge shall state the name of the licensee and the date of
expiration of the license.
   (B)   Blanket licenses shall be displayed and readily available for
inspection by the town:
      (1)   Licensee, if an individual;
      (2)   Vehicle or booth used by a licensee; or
      (3)   Building or premises as appropriate for blanket licenses.
(Prior Code, § 9-209)
§ 113.10 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   The following are exempt from the license requirements of this
chapter:
      (1)   Farmers and truck gardeners from lands owned, cultivated, or
controlled by them, who offer for sale or sell, or who solicit and sell from
house to house, vegetables, butter, eggs, and farm products produced and raised
by the farmers and truck gardeners from such land or produced thereon; and
      (2)   Needy ex-service persons holding a certificate duly issued by a
district judge having jurisdiction as provided by law.
   (B)   Any person who desires to be exempt from the license fees levied under
this chapter due to engaging in interstate commerce shall provide sufficient
data on transactions and proof to the town to establish the interstate commerce
nature of his or her business and transactions. If the town refuses to issue an
interstate commerce exemption for the license fees to a commercial business
activity, then the applicant is entitled to a hearing before the town judge.
(Prior Code, § 9-210)
§ 113.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished as provided in §
10.99 of this code.
(Prior Code, § 9-212)
CHAPTER 114: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
Sale of Alcoholic Beverages
   
114.01   Definitions
   
114.02   Amount of tax
   
114.03   Application for license; conditions
   
114.04   Application for certificate of zoning, code compliance
   
114.05   Compliance with state, town law
   
114.06   Transportation of intoxicating beverages in vehicles; exceptions
   
114.07   Misrepresentation of age
   
114.08   Location of retail package store, mixed beverage establishments;
exceptions
   
114.08   Hours of operation
   
114.09   Package store premises to be separated from premises where other
business conducted
   
114.10   General prohibitions
   
114.11   Sales to minors prohibited; minors prohibited from premises
   
114.12   Employment of persons under the age of 21 prohibited
   
114.13   Persons under the age of 21 in possession of intoxicating beverages in
public places
   
114.14   Consumption of intoxicating alcoholic beverages in public places
   
114.15   Sale, delivery prohibited on certain days
Low-Point Beer
   
114.30   Definitions
   
114.31   State licenses
   
114.32   Retail dealer’s license required; license fees
   
114.33   Application for license
   
114.34   Minors on premises prohibited; exceptions
   
114.35   Sale of low-point beer to minors prohibited
   
114.36   Employment of persons under 18 years; exceptions
   
114.37   Sale of low-point beer prohibited during certain hours; exceptions
   
114.38   Transportation of low-point beer in moving vehicle
   
114.39   Minors in possession of low-point beer prohibited while in public
   
114.40   Consumption of low-point beer in public places; exception
   
114.41   Misrepresentation of age by false or altered documentation
   
114.42   Inspections
   
114.43   Location of retail dealers
 
   
114.99   Penalty
SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
§ 114.01 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Definition of terms used in this subchapter shall be in conformity
with those provided in applicable provisions as set forth in 37A O.S.
   (B)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
      ABLE COMMISSION. The Alcoholic Beverage Laws Enforcement Commission of
the state.
      ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Alcohol, spirits, beer, and wine, as those terms are
defined herein, and also includes every liquid or solid, patented or not,
containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and capable of being consumed as a
beverage by human beings, but does not include non-intoxicating beverages, as
that term is defined in §
114.30.
      BOTTLE CLUB. Any establishment in a county which has not authorized the
retail sale of alcoholic beverages by the individual drink, which is required
to be licensed to keep, mix, and serve alcoholic beverages belonging to club
members or club premises; it includes any association, person, firm, or
corporation, key club, locker club, pool club, or any other kind of club or
association, excluding the general public from its premises or place of meeting
or congregating, or operating or exercising control over any other place where
persons are permitted to drink alcoholic beverages other than in a private
home.
(Prior Code, § 3-101)
Statutory reference:
   Definitions, see 37A O.S.
   Exercise of police powers; ordinances, see 37A O.S.
§ 114.02 AMOUNT OF TAX.
   (A)   There is hereby levied and assessed an annual occupation tax on every
business or occupation relating to alcoholic beverages as specifically
enumerated herein, and pursuant to 37A O.S. § 2-101 in the amount as set by the
Town Board of Trustees.
   (B)   The occupation tax for those service organizations which are exempt
under § 501(c)(19) of the Internal Revenue Code for the bottle club licenses
shall be $500. The occupation tax for a brewer and a class “B” wholesaler shall
be reduced by 75% if the brewer of class “B” wholesaler is also the holder of a
license from the state to manufacture or wholesale any non-intoxicating malt
beverages, as provided in applicable provisions as set forth in 37A O.S.
   (C)   The occupation tax levied herein shall be paid in advance annually, on
or before April 1 to the Town Clerk/Treasurer, who shall issue a receipt
therefor. The tax shall be prorated on a monthly basis for the year in which an
occupation begins operations.
   (D)   Upon payment of the occupation tax, the Town Clerk/Treasurer shall
issue a receipt, signed by the Town Clerk/Treasurer, to the state licensee
paying such occupational tax. The Town Clerk/Treasurer shall also record the
name of the licensee and the address where the licensee engages in his or her
occupation. Such record shall be duly filed and kept in the permanent files of
the town for at least five years. Thereafter, upon resolution by the Board of
Trustees, it may be destroyed.
   (E)   Any state licensee shall post his or her tax receipt in a conspicuous
place on the premises wherein he or she carries on his or her occupation.
   (F)   The occupation tax shall cover only the person paying the tax and no
other of a successor thereof, and shall not be refundable.
   (G)   The Town Clerk/Treasurer shall make and transmit to the ABLE
Commission an annual report showing the number and class of licenses subject to
the tax and the amount of money received therefrom.
   (H)   All sums due from any person by reason of occupation taxes imposed by
this subchapter and all penalties accruing from such person by reason of
failure to pay such tax shall be recoverable at the suit of the town, brought
against such person in any court of competent jurisdiction. In any suit, in
addition to the tax and penalties, the plaintiff shall recover interest, at the
rate of 10% per annum, upon all sums due by way of tax and penalty from the
date of accrual thereof, and all costs of collection, judicial or otherwise,
including reasonable attorney’s fees, all to be determined by the court.
Prosecution for an offense against the town, arising out of the failure to pay
a tax levied by this subchapter, regardless of the outcome thereof or its
continued pendency, shall not constitute a defense or bar in any manner to the
collection of the tax and penalties, if any are due, as herein provided.
(Prior Code, § 3-102)
Statutory reference:
   Cities and towns; occupation tax, see 37A O.S.
   Kinds of licenses; fees; term, see 37A O.S.
§ 114.03 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Every person desiring to obtain a license as provided for herein shall
make application to the Town Clerk/Treasurer on forms to be provided setting
forth the location of the business, the names of all persons interested in the
business, together with their addresses; if a corporation, the application
shall include the names of the president and managing officer.
   (B)   No licensee shall be issued a license without satisfactory showing
that the applicant has:
      (1)   Satisfied the conditions of this subchapter;
      (2)   Obtained all applicable state and county permits or licenses; and
      (3)   Paid the tax as required herein.
   (C)   No license shall be issued or valid unless the licensee meets the
requirements of the town’s zoning ordinances and regulations.
(Prior Code, § 3-103)
§ 114.04 APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE OF ZONING, CODE COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   Every applicant for a certificate of compliance with the zoning, fire,
health, and safety codes of the town required by applicable provisions as set
forth in 37A O.S. shall apply at the office of the Town Clerk/Treasurer by:
      (1)   Filing a written application on forms prescribed by that office;
and
      (2)   Paying a verification and certification fee in the amount as set by
the Board of Trustees at the time of filing.
   (B)   Upon receipt of an application for a certificate of compliance, the
Town Clerk/Treasurer shall cause an investigation to be made to determine
whether the premises proposed for licensed operations comply with the
provisions of the zoning ordinance and any health, fire, building, or other
safety codes applicable to it.
   (C)   Upon finding that the premises of an applicant for a certificate is in
compliance with all applicable zoning ordinances, a certificate of zoning shall
be issued to the ABLE Commission.
   (D)   Upon finding that the premises of an applicant of a certificate is in
compliance with all applicable fire, safety, and health codes, a certificate of
compliance shall be issued to the ABLE Commission.
   (E)   The Town Board shall act on such applications within 20 days of
receipt thereof the above certificates of compliance shall be signed by the
Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 3-104)
§ 114.05 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE, TOWN LAW.
   No person shall own, operate, or maintain a retail package store or mixed
beverage establishment, or produce, manufacture, distribute, rectify, bottle,
or sell any beer, spirits, wine, or other alcoholic beverage, without first
obtaining valid licenses issued by the state and the town.
(Prior Code, § 3-105) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.06 TRANSPORTATION OF INTOXICATING BEVERAGES IN VEHICLES; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly transport alcoholic beverages in any vehicle
upon any public highway, street, or alley unless in the original container
which is unopened, the seal unbroken, and original cap in place.
   (B)   Division (A) above shall not apply if the opened container is in the
rear trunk or compartment, or the spare tire compartment, in a vehicle commonly
known as a station wagon or panel truck, or in any outside compartment which is
inaccessible to the driver or any passenger while the vehicle is in motion.
(Prior Code, § 3-107) Penalty, see §
114.99
Statutory reference:
   Enumerated prohibited acts, see 37A O.S.
§ 114.07 MISREPRESENTATION OF AGE.
   No person shall misrepresent his or her age either orally or in writing, or
by presenting false or altered documentation of age for the purpose of inducing
any person to sell him or her alcoholic beverages.
(Prior Code, § 3-110) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.08 LOCATION OF RETAIL PACKAGE STORE, MIXED BEVERAGE ESTABLISHMENTS;
EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall own, operate, maintain, or have any interest in any
retail package store which is located at a place in the town which is forbidden
as a location for such store by state laws or town ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   The location of a retail package store or mixed beverage
establishment is specifically prohibited within 300 feet from any church
property primarily and regularly used for worship services and religious
activities, or public school. If any such church or school shall be established
within 300 feet of any licensed premises after such premises had been licensed,
this shall not be a bar to renewal of such license by Alcoholic Beverage Laws
Enforcement Commission so long as it has been in continuous force and effect.
      (2)   The distance shall be measured from the nearest property line of
such church or school to the nearest public entrance door of the premises of
such package store or mixed beverage establishment along the street right-of-
way line providing the nearest direct route usually traveled by pedestrians
between such points. A retail package store or mixed beverage establishment
shall not be located on any town block where a church or school is located.
(Prior Code, § 3-113) Penalty, see §
114.99
Statutory reference:
   Municipalities and counties; zoning of establishments; municipal court
jurisdiction, see 37A O.S.
§ 114.08 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (A)   No package store licensee shall sell or keep a package store premises
open for the purpose of selling any alcoholic beverages at any hour other than
between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday.
   (B)   (1)   No alcoholic beverages may be sold, dispensed, served, or
consumed on the premises of a bottle club between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
10:00 a.m. No licensee shall permit any person, who has, in his or her
possession, an open container, having as its contents an intoxicating alcoholic
beverage, to remain in a bottle club between the hours of 2:15 a.m. to 10:00
a.m.
      (2)   No person, having in his or her possession, an open container,
having as its contents an intoxicating alcoholic beverage, shall remain in a
mixed beverage establishment between the hours of 2:15 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. For
the purpose of this section, an OPEN CONTAINER shall mean any receptacle
containing a non-intoxicating or intoxicating alcoholic beverage, to include
the original container of the beverage where the original seal has been broken
or opened.
(Prior Code, § 3-114) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.09 PACKAGE STORE PREMISES TO BE SEPARATED FROM PREMISES WHERE OTHER
BUSINESS CONDUCTED.
   No person shall maintain, operate, or assist in any manner in the
maintenance or operation of a package store upon premises which are not
separated from adjoining premises, on which any other goods, wares, or
merchandise are sold or services are rendered, by nontransparent walls, broken
only, if at all, by a passage to which the public is not admitted. No person
shall take any alcoholic beverage through such passageway for the purpose of
selling or reselling such beverage, or for the purpose of delivery thereof in
connection with a sale of such beverage.
(Prior Code, § 3-115) Penalty, see §
114.99
Statutory reference:
   Package store license, see 37A O.S.
§ 114.10 GENERAL PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No person shall:
      (1)   Purchase any alcoholic beverage at retail or wholesale from any
person other than a dealer licensed by the ABLE Commission;
      (2)   Except as otherwise permitted in this subchapter, drink any
alcoholic beverage in public except on the premises of a licensee who is
authorized to sell or serve alcoholic beverages by the individual drink, or be
intoxicated in a public place;
      (3)   Open a container of intoxicating beverages or consume alcoholic
beverages on the premises of a retail package store; or
      (4)   Possess more than one quart of any alcoholic beverage unless the
state tax has been paid thereon, except as may be otherwise provided by law.
   (B)   No licensee shall:
      (1)   Give any alcoholic beverage as a prize, premium, or consideration
for any lottery, game of chance, or skill, or any type of competition; or
      (2)   Advertise or offer happy hours or any other means or inducements to
stimulate the consumption of alcoholic beverages including:
         (a)   Deliver more than two drinks to one person at one time;
         (b)   Sell, or offer to sell, to any person or group of persons any
drinks at a price less than the price regularly charged for such drinks during
the same calendar week, except at private functions not open to the public;
         (c)   Sell, or offer to sell, to any person an unlimited number of
drinks during any set period of time for a fixed price, except at private
functions not open to the public;
         (d)   Sell, or offer to sell, drinks to any person or group of persons
on any one day at prices less than those charged the general public on that
day, except at private functions not open to the public;
         (e)   Increase the volume of alcoholic beverages contained in a drink
without increasing proportionately the price regularly charged for such drink
during the same calendar week; or
         (f)   Encourage or permit, on the licensed premises, any game or
contest which involves drinking or the awarding of drinks as prizes.
   (C)   No licensee shall:
      (1)   Allow any person on the premises where non-intoxicating or
alcoholic beverages are sold or dispensed for consumption on the premises of
the licensee where such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume, or
clothing as to expose to view any portion of the breast below the top of the
areola or any portion of the pubic area, buttocks, or genitalia;
      (2)   Permit any person to perform acts of, or acts which, simulate
sexual acts;
      (3)   Permit any person to use artificial devices or inanimate objects to
depict any lewd activities; or
      (4)   Permit the showing of films, still pictures, electronic
reproduction, or other visual reproduction depicting any of the prohibited acts
in this section.
   (D)   No licensee shall permit any drink solicitation, or request from a
patron to purchase any non-intoxicating or intoxicating alcoholic beverage for
consumption on the premises of the licensee, as that term is described in this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 3-108) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.11 SALES TO MINORS PROHIBITED; MINORS PROHIBITED FROM PREMISES.
   (A)   No person shall sell, deliver, furnish, or give any alcoholic beverage
to any person under the age of 21 years, except that this division (A) shall
not apply to a parent or guardian as regards to his or her child or children.
   (B)   No licensee shall permit any person under 21 years of age to enter,
remain within, or be about the premises of a retail package store or mixed
beverage establishment.
   (C)   No person under 21 years of age shall enter, remain within, or be
about the premises of a retail package store or mixed beverage establishment.
(Prior Code, § 3-106) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.12 EMPLOYMENT OF PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF 21 PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No licensee shall employ, assist, or aid in causing the employment of
any person under the age of 21 years in the selling, manufacture, distribution,
or other handling of alcoholic beverages.
   (B)   However, a mixed beverage caterer, or special event licensee, may
employ servers who are 18 years of age or older, except in designated bar or
lounge areas.
(Prior Code, § 3-111) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.13 PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF 21 IN POSSESSION OF INTOXICATING BEVERAGES IN
PUBLIC PLACES.
   No person under age 21 years of age shall be in possession of any alcoholic
beverage while such person is upon any public street, road, highway, or in any
public place.
(Prior Code, § 3-112) Penalty, see §
114.99  
§ 114.14 CONSUMPTION OF INTOXICATING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   No person within the town shall drink intoxicating liquor in any public
place, unless authorized by the Alcoholic Control Beverage Act, being 37A O.S.
§§ 1-101 et seq., nor shall any person be intoxicated in a public place within
the town.
(Prior Code, § 3-109) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.15 SALE, DELIVERY PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN DAYS.
   (A)   No licensee shall engage in retail sale of alcoholic beverage on such
days and times as prohibited by the state law.
   (B)   No wholesale dealer in alcoholic beverages shall sell or deliver to
any package store, and no package store shall sell any amount of spirits or
wines, on Saturday or Sunday of any week, or on New Year’s Day, Memorial Day,
July 4, Labor Day, Veteran’s Day, Thanksgiving Day, or Christmas Day, or at any
time while the polls are open on the day of any general, primary, runoff
primary, or special election, whether national, state, county, or town.
(Prior Code, § 3-116) Penalty, see §
114.99
LOW-POINT BEER
§ 114.30 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   LOW-POINT BEER. All beverages containing more than 0.5% alcohol by volume,
and not more than 3.2% alcohol by weight.
   MINOR. A person who, in accordance with state law, has not yet attained the
age at which the consumption of low-point beer is permitted.
   RETAIL DEALER. Any and all persons who sell, distribute, or dispense any
low-point beer at retail to the public for consumption or use, whether consumed
on the premises or not.
(Prior Code, § 3-201)
Statutory reference:
   Intoxicating beverages and low-point beer distinguished; application of
statute, see 37A O.S.
§ 114.31 STATE LICENSES.
   No person shall engage in the business of selling, offering for sale, or
distributing any low-point beer at retail for consumption or use, without first
having obtained a state license to do so, and in cases where such beverages are
consumed on the premises, a license as provided by the statutes of the state.
(Prior Code, § 3-202) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.32 RETAIL DEALER’S LICENSE REQUIRED; LICENSE FEES.
   (A)   No person shall sell, distribute, or dispense any low-point beer at
retail to the public without first having obtained a license to do so from the
town, and making payment in advance to the Town Clerk/Treasurer in the amount
as provided herein.
   (B)   The annual fee shall be set by the Town Board by motion or resolution
for a license under this subchapter for retail dealers selling low-point beer
in original packages and not for consumption on the premises. The license shall
expire annually on June 30.
   (C)   No license issued hereunder is transferable.
   (D)   Licenses required by this subchapter shall be issued by the Town
Clerk/Treasurer upon payment of the required fee and compliance by the
applicant with all applicable ordinances of the town, and upon a satisfactory
showing that the applicant has obtained such state and county permits as are
required by law.
(Prior Code, § 3-203) Penalty, see §
114.99
Statutory reference:
   Annual state permits and license taxes, see 37A O.S.
§ 114.33 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   An applicant for a retail dealer’s license or renewal of such license shall
deposit the required fee with the Town Clerk/Treasurer and submit an
application on the form provided containing the information required by the
town.
(Prior Code, § 3-204)
§ 114.34 MINORS ON PREMISES PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person who holds a license to sell and dispense
low-point beer for consumption on the premises, or any agent, servant, or
employee of the license holder, to permit any minor to be admitted to or remain
in a separate or enclosed bar area of the licensed premises which has, as its
main purpose, the selling or serving of low-point beer for consumption on the
premises, unless the minor’s parent or legal guardian is present. The
provisions of this section shall not prohibit minors from being admitted to an
area which has as its main purpose some objective other than the sale or
serving of low-point beer, in which sales or serving of the beverages are
incidental to the main purpose, as long as minors are not sold or served the
beverages; however, the incidental service of food in the bar area shall not
except a licensee, agent, servant, or employee from the provisions of this
section.
   (B)   If the premises of a holder of a license to sell low-point beer
contains a separate or enclosed bar area which has, as its main purpose, the
sale or serving of low-point beer for consumption on the premises, no minor
shall enter, attempt to enter, or remain in the area. The provisions of this
division (B) shall not prohibit minors from entering or remaining in an area
which has, as its main purpose, some objective other than the sale or serving
of low-point beer, in which sales or serving of the beverages are incidental to
the main purpose, if the minors are not sold or served or do not consume low-
point beer anywhere on the premises; however, the incidental service of food in
the bar area shall not exempt minors from the provisions of this division (B).
   (C)   A showing by competent testimony that a minor was found upon premises
of a retail dealer shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of division (B)
above.
(Prior Code, § 3-205) Penalty, see §
114.99
Statutory reference:
   Consumption of low-point beer or entry into bar area by persons under 21
years of age, see 37A O.S.
   Employment of persons under 18 years of age in place where low-point beer is
sold or dispensed, 37A O.S.
   Sale, barter, or gift to person under 21 years of age, see 37A O.S.
§ 114.35 SALE OF LOW-POINT BEER TO MINORS PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person who holds a license to sell and dispense low-
point beer, or any agent, servant, or employee of the license holder to sell,
barter, or give to any minor any low-point beer. This section shall not apply
to a parent in regard to his or her own child or children.
(Prior Code, § 3-206) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.36 EMPLOYMENT OF PERSONS UNDER 18 YEARS; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person under 18 years of age to be employed or
permitted to work, in any capacity whatsoever, in a place where low-point beer
is sold or dispensed for consumption on the premises.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any minor to be employed or permitted to work, in
any capacity whatsoever, in the separate or enclosed bar area of a place where
the main purpose of the area is the sale or consumption of low-point beer. The
provisions of this division (B) shall not apply to any area which, as its main
purpose, some objective other than the sale or serving of low-point beer, in
which sales or serving of the beverages are incidental to the main purpose;
however, the incidental service of food in the bar area shall not exempt a
holder of a license to sell low-point beer for consumption on the premises from
the provisions of this division (B).
   (C)   A parent, in regards to the employment of his or her own child or
children, is excepted from the provisions of this section, provided that such
employment shall in no capacity whatsoever be related to the selling or
dispensing of such beverages.
   (D)   The provisions of division (A) above shall not apply to any business
or establishment where sales of the beverages do not exceed 25% of the gross
sales of the business or establishment.
(Prior Code, § 3-207) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.37 SALE OF LOW-POINT BEER PROHIBITED DURING CERTAIN HOURS; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No retail dealer licensed to sell low-point beer shall sell such
beverages for consumption on the premises on Sundays between the hours of 2:00
a.m. and 2:00 p.m. or between 10:00 p.m. and 12:00 a.m., or between the hours
of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on any other day.
   (B)   No retail dealer of any business selling LOW-POINT BEER, as that term
is defined in this subchapter, for consumption on the premises, nor any
operator, agent, or employee of the retail dealer shall permit any person, who
has in his or her possession an open container having, as its contents, a low-
point beer, to remain in the premises between the hours of 12:15 a.m. and 7:00
a.m. Mondays, or between the hours of 2:15 a.m. to 7:00 a.m. Tuesdays through
Saturdays, or on Sundays between 2:15 a.m. and 2:00 p.m., and between 10:15
p.m. and 12:00 a.m. No person, having in his or her possession an open
container having, as its contents, a low-point beer, shall remain in the
premises between the hours of 12:01 a.m. to 7:00 a.m. Mondays, between 2:15
a.m. to 7:00 a.m. Tuesdays through Saturdays, or on Sundays between the hours
of 2:15 a.m. and 2:00 p.m., or 10:15 p.m. and 12:00 a.m. For the purpose of
this section, an OPEN CONTAINER shall mean any receptacle containing low-point
beer or intoxicating alcoholic beverage, to include the original container of
the beverage where the original seal has been broken or opened.
   (C)   No retail dealer licensed to sell low-point beer shall sell such
beverages for consumption off the premises on any day between 2:00 a.m. and 6:
00 a.m.
(Prior Code, § 3-208) Penalty, see §
114.99
Statutory reference:
   Hours during which sale prohibited; penalties, see 37A O.S.
§ 114.38 TRANSPORTATION OF LOW-POINT BEER IN MOVING VEHICLE.
   No person shall knowingly transport in any moving vehicle upon a public
highway, street, or alley within the town any low-point beer except in the
original container which shall have not been opened and from which the original
cap or seal shall have not been removed, unless the opened container be in the
rear trunk or rear compartment, which shall include the spare tire compartment
in a station wagon or panel truck, or any outside compartment which is not
accessible to the driver or any other person in the vehicle while it is in
motion.
(Prior Code, § 3-209) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.39 MINORS IN POSSESSION OF LOW-POINT BEER PROHIBITED WHILE IN PUBLIC.
   No minor shall be in possession of any low-point beer or beer while such
person is upon any public street, building, or place.
(Prior Code, § 3-210) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.40 CONSUMPTION OF LOW-POINT BEER IN PUBLIC PLACES; EXCEPTION.
   (A)   No minor shall consume or possess with intent to consume low-point
beer in any public place.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply when such persons are
under the direct supervision of their parent or guardian; but in no instance
shall this exception be interpreted to allow such persons to consume such
beverages in any place licensed to dispense beer, as provided for in applicable
provisions as set forth in 37A O.S.
(Prior Code, § 3-211) Penalty, see §
114.99
Statutory reference:
   Retail permits from district court clerk, see 37A O.S.
§ 114.41 MISREPRESENTATION OF AGE BY FALSE OR ALTERED DOCUMENTATION.
   No person shall represent his or her age either orally or in writing, or by
presenting false or altered documentation of age for the purpose of inducing
any person to sell him or her low-point beer.
(Prior Code, § 3-212) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.42 INSPECTIONS.
   Town officers may make inspections of all places of business where low-point
beer are sold, distributed, or dispensed at retail, for the purpose of
enforcing the laws and for ascertaining whether the operators thereof are
complying with the requirements of the law relating to the handling of low-
point beer.
(Prior Code, § 3-213)
§ 114.43 LOCATION OF RETAIL DEALERS.
   No person shall own, operate, maintain, or have any interest in any retail
dealer which is located at a place in the town which is forbidden as a location
for such store by town ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 3-214) Penalty, see §
114.99
Statutory reference:
   Municipalities and counties; zoning of establishments; municipal court
jurisdiction, see 37A O.S.
§ 114.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no
specific penalty is prescribed, shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of §
114.40 shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished
as provided in §
10.99 of this code, or by appropriate community service not to exceed 20 hours.
(Prior Code, § 3-211)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS
      
132.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
      
133.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE; MORALS
      
134.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC AUTHORITY
      
135.   CURFEW FOR MINORS
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
130.01   Attempts to commit an offense
   
130.02   Aiding in an offense
   
130.03   Definitions
   
130.04   Penalty not to excuse offense
   
130.05   Capacity to commit offense
   
130.06   Intoxication; no defense
   
130.07   Witness; self-incrimination
   
130.08   Nuisances
   
130.09   Conspiracy
   
130.10   Limitations of actions
   
130.11   Lawful use of force
   
130.12   Adoption of state criminal laws
§ 130.01 ATTEMPTS TO COMMIT AN OFFENSE.
   Every person who attempts to commit an offense against the ordinances of the
town, and in such attempt does any act toward the commission of such offense,
but rails or is prevented or intercepted in the perpetration thereof, is guilty
of an offense, and shall be punished in the manner prescribed for the attempted
offense itself.
(Prior Code, § 10-101) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.02 AIDING IN AN OFFENSE.
   When no punishment for counseling or aiding in the commission of a
particular offense is expressly prescribed by ordinance, every person who
counsels or aids another in the commission of such is guilty of an offense, or
misdemeanor, and punishable in the same manner as the principal offender.
(Prior Code, § 10-102) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   OFFENSE. Whenever used in this code or in any title, chapter, section, or
ordinance of the town means the unlawful act of doing, or failing to do, some
particular act or thing construed therein to be detrimental to the general
welfare, morals, peace, health, or safety of the inhabitants of the town.
(Prior Code, § 10-103)
   VIOLATION. The doing of any of the acts or things prohibited, or failing to
do any of the acts or things commanded to be done, as more fully specified and
set forth by any provision of this code or any title, chapter, or section
hereof, or future ordinances of the town, is hereby declared to be an offense
against the good order, public peace, morals, health, proper government, and
welfare of the town and unlawful.
(Prior Code, § 10-104)
§ 130.04 PENALTY NOT TO EXCUSE OFFENSE.
   The imposition of one penalty for an offense shall not excuse it or permit
it to continue, nor prevent the imposition of further penalties, should the
offenses be continued or permitted to continue.
(Prior Code, § 10-105)
§ 130.05 CAPACITY TO COMMIT OFFENSE.
   All persons are capable of committing an offense as herein provided, except
those belonging to the classes following:
   (A)   Children under the age of seven years;
   (B)   Children over the age of seven years, but under the age of 14 years,
in the absence of proof that at the time of committing the act or neglect
charged against them, they knew of its wrongfulness;
   (C)   Lunatics, insane persons, and all persons of unsound mind, including
persons temporarily or partially deprived of reason, upon proof that at the
time of committing the act charged against them they were involuntarily
incapable of knowing its wrongfulness;
   (D)   Persons who committed the act, or made the omission charged, under an
ignorance or mistake of fact, which disproves any criminal intent. But
ignorance of the law does not excuse from punishment for its violation;
   (E)   Persons who committed the act charged without being conscious thereof
involuntarily; and
   (F)   Persons who committed the act, or made the omission charged, while
under involuntary subjection to the power of superiors.
(Prior Code, § 10-106)
§ 130.06 INTOXICATION; NO DEFENSE.
   No act committed by any person while in a state of intoxication, whether
from liquor or drugs, shall be deemed less an offense by reason of his or her
being in such condition.
(Prior Code, § 10-107)
§ 130.07 WITNESS; SELF-INCRIMINATION.
   No person otherwise competent as a witness shall be incapacitated, excused,
or disqualified from testifying concerning the offense mentioned in any
section, chapter, or title of this code, or any ordinances hereafter enacted on
the ground that his or her testimony might incriminate him or her, but the
testimony which may be given by such witness shall, in no case, be used against
him or her.
(Prior Code, § 10-108)
§ 130.08 NUISANCES.
   It is unlawful and an offense for any person to permit, maintain, aid, abet,
or sanction a nuisance on or about any premises or premises owned by him or
her, or under his or her control, at any place within the corporate limits of
the town.
(Prior Code, § 10-109) Penalty, see §
10.99
Cross-reference:
   Nuisances, see §§
90.01 through
90.08
§ 130.09 CONSPIRACY.
   Any two or more persons assembled, or who shall assemble, with the intent to
mutually agree to do any unlawful act with force or violence, and shall make
any movement therefor against the property of the town or the person, or
property of another person, shall be guilty of an offense.
(Prior Code, § 10-110) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.10 LIMITATIONS OF ACTIONS.
   The time within which a charge may be filed under the provisions of this
chapter shall be one year from the date of the commission or omission, or in
cases involving fraud, deception or deceit, one year from the discovery of the
fraud, deception, or deceit unless otherwise provided by the statutes of the
state.
(Prior Code, § 10-111)
§ 130.11 LAWFUL USE OF FORCE.
   (A)   To use, or to attempt to offer to use, force upon or toward the person
of another is not unlawful in the town in the following cases:
      (1)   When necessarily committed by a public officer in the performance
of any legal duty, or by any other person assisting him or her, or acting by
his or her direction;
      (2)   When necessarily committed by any person in arresting one who has
committed any felony, and delivering him or her to a public officer competent
to receive him or her in custody;
      (3)   When committed either by the party about to be injured, or by any
other person in his or her aid or defense, in preventing, or attempting to
prevent, an offense against his or her person, or any trespass or other
unlawful interference with real or personal property in his or her lawful
possession; provided, the force used is not more than sufficient to prevent
such offense, and that the same shall be necessary for the self-defense of his
or her person or property;
      (4)   When committed by a parent or authorized agent of any parent, or by
any guardian, master, or teacher, in the exercise of a lawful authority to
restrain or correct his or her child, ward, apprentice, or scholar, provided
restraint or correction has been rendered necessary by the misconduct of such
child, ward, apprentice, or scholar, or by his or her refusal to obey the
lawful command of such parent or authorized agent, or guardian, master, or
teacher, and the force used is reasonable in manner and moderate degree;
      (5)   When committed by a carrier of passengers, or the authorized agents
or servants of such carrier, or by any person assisting them at their request,
in expelling from any carriage, interurban car, vessel, or other vehicle, any
passenger who refuses to obey a lawful and reasonable regulation prescribed for
the conduct of passengers, if such vehicle has first been stopped and the force
used is not more than is sufficient to expel the offending passenger, with a
reasonable regard to his or her personal safety;
      (6)   When committed by any person in preventing an idiot, lunatic,
insane person, or other person of unsound mind, including persons temporarily
or partially deprived of reason, from committing an act dangerous to himself or
herself or to another, or enforcing such restraint as is necessary for the
protection of his or her person, or for his or her restoration to health,
during such period only as shall be necessary to obtain legal authority for the
restraint or custody of such person;
      (7)   In preventing or interrupting an intrusion upon the lawful
possession of property; and
      (8)   To preserve the peace or prevent the commission of an offense.
   (B)   Where force is permitted to affect a lawful purpose, only that degree
of force necessary to effect such purpose shall be used.
(Prior Code, § 10-112)
§ 130.12 ADOPTION OF STATE CRIMINAL LAWS.
   There is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference the State
Criminal Code, also known as the State Penal Code, 21 O.S. §§ 1 et seq., as now
exist and as may be from time to time amended. Such laws as adopted herein by
reference shall be fully enforceable by the town within the town limits as
fully as if set out at length herein.
(Ord. 10-113, passed 7-14-2022)
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS
Section
   
131.01   Definitions
   
131.02   Assault and battery
   
131.03   Reckless conduct
§ 131.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   ASSAULT. Any willful and unlawful attempt or offer with force or violence to
do corporal hurt to another.
(Prior Code, § 10-202)
   BATTERY. Any willful and unlawful use of force or violence upon the person
of another.
(Prior Code, § 10-203)
§ 131.02 ASSAULT AND BATTERY.
   No person shall commit an assault or battery, or both, upon the person of
another.
(Prior Code, § 10-201) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Assault defined, see 21 O.S. § 641
   Riots, assaults, and disturbances; firearms and fireworks, see 11 O.S. § 22-
110
§ 131.03 RECKLESS CONDUCT.
   (A)   Reckless conduct, as used in this section, consists of an act which
creates a situation of unreasonable risk and probability of death or great
bodily harm to another, and which demonstrates a conscious disregard for the
safety of another.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to endanger another’s safety by reckless
conduct in the operation or handling of any weapon or instrument, including a
pistol, revolver, or other firearm.
(Prior Code, § 10-204) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 132: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Section
   
132.01   Petit larceny; embezzlement
   
132.02   Altering keys
   
132.03   Possession of stolen property
   
132.04   Defrauding public accommodations; proof
   
132.05   Concealing unpurchased merchandise; merchant’s authority to detain
   
132.06   Failure to pay fare; public conveyance
   
132.07   False checks
   
132.08   Harmful deception
   
132.09   Defacing buildings; damaging property
   
132.10   Removing, breaking private property
   
132.11   Public works under construction
   
132.12   Damaging, tampering with motor vehicles
   
132.13   Damaging, tampering utilities
   
132.14   Tampering with signs; equipment
   
132.15   Destroying trees, shrubbery
   
132.16   Trespassing prohibited
   
132.17   Congregating, parking on premises after hours
   
132.18   Unlawful intrusion on land
   
132.19   Throwing, shooting at persons, property
   
132.20   Throwing out lighted substances, debris
   
132.21   Littering, deposits unlawful
   
132.22   Posting, advertising matter on property
   
132.23   Interference with radio, television, telephone reception of others
   
132.24   False weights
   
132.25   Electric fences prohibited
   
132.26   Unlawful use of another’s garage, refuse container
§ 132.01 PETIT LARCENY; EMBEZZLEMENT.
   (A)   No person shall steak, take, and carry away by fraud or stealth, with
intent to deprive another thereof, any personal property under the value of
$1,000 or embezzle any money, personal property, or effects of another under
the value of $1,000. This section does not apply to taking property from the
person of another.
(Prior Code, § 10-301)
   (B)   No person shall induce, or attempt to induce any person to give up or
pay over any money or other thing of value, the amount of which money is under
the value of $500, by any false representation or pretense, or in exchange for
any false or bogus coin or check, draft, or other false evidence of value, or
in consideration of refraining from a lawful or unlawful arrest, or in
consideration of refraining from reporting any unlawful act to any public
official.
(Prior Code, § 10-302) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Larceny defined, see 21 O.S. § 1701
§ 132.02 ALTERING KEYS.
   No person shall make or alter, or attempt to make or alter, any key or other
instrument that will open the lock of a building unless requested to do so by
some person having the right and authority to make such request.
(Prior Code, § 10-303) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.03 POSSESSION OF STOLEN PROPERTY.
   No person shall keep in his or her possession, or dispose of, or conceal any
stolen property, or fail promptly to inform some proper official of the
possession thereof, under circumstances indicating that such property had been
stolen or the possession thereof obtained unlawfully.
(Prior Code, § 10-304) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Receiving stolen property; presumption, see 21 O.S. § 1713
§ 132.04 DEFRAUDING PUBLIC ACCOMMODATIONS; PROOF.
   (A)   No person shall obtain food, lodging, or other accommodation in any
hotel, motel, inn, boarding, eating or rooming house or place, or any other
lodging place, with the intent to defraud the owner or keeper.
   (B)   Proof that lodging, food, and other accommodations were obtained by
false pretense or fictitious show of any package or other property, or that the
person gave a check or negotiable paper on which payment was refused, or that
the person left the hotel, motel, inn, boarding, eating or rooming house or
place, or other lodging place, without paying or offering to pay for the food,
lodging, or other accommodation, or that the person surreptitiously removed, or
attempted to remove the package or property, or that the person registered
under a fictitious name shall be prima facie proof of attempt to defraud.
   (C)   No person shall refuse to pay the legal fare of any of the vehicles
mentioned in this section after having hired the same, and no person shall hire
any vehicle with intent to defraud the person from whom it is hired of the
value of such service.
   (D)   This section shall not apply where there has been an agreement in
writing for delay in payment.
(Prior Code, § 10-305) Penalty, see §
10.99
Cross-reference:
   Failure to pay fare, see §
132.06
§ 132.05 CONCEALING UNPURCHASED MERCHANDISE; MERCHANT’S AUTHORITY TO DETAIN.
   Any person concealing unpurchased merchandise of any establishment, either
on the premises or outside the premises of the establishment, shall be presumed
to have so concealed the merchandise with the intention of committing a
wrongful taking of such merchandise. Such concealment or the finding of such
unpurchased merchandise concealed upon the person, or among the belongings of
such person, shall be conclusive evidence of reasonable grounds and probable
cause for the detention in a reasonable manner and for a reasonable length of
time of such person by a merchant, or his or her agent or employee; any such
reasonable detention shall not be deemed to be unlawful nor render any such
merchant, or his or her agent or employee, criminally or civilly liable.
(Prior Code, § 10-306)
§ 132.06 FAILURE TO PAY FARE; PUBLIC CONVEYANCE.
   No person shall use or accept the use and services of any street car,
taxicab, omnibus, automobile, or any other means of public conveyance or
passengers, operating under the code, ordinance, franchise, permit, or license
of the town or state, and refuse or fail to pay to the operator of the
conveyance the usual, customary, regulation, or legal charge, or price as fare
immediately upon the performance of the service.
(Prior Code, § 10-307) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.07 FALSE CHECKS.
   It is unlawful for any person, with intent to cheat and defraud, to obtain,
or attempt to obtain, from any person any money, property, or valuable thing by
means of any false or bogus check, or by any other written or printed, or
engraved, instrument or spurious coin. The term FALSE OR BOGUS CHECK shall
include checks or orders given for money or property which are not honored on
account of insufficient funds of the maker to pay the same, as against the
maker or drawer thereof. The making, drawing, issuing, or delivering of a
check, draft, or order, payment of which is refused by the drawee, shall be
prima facie evidence of intent to defraud and the knowledge of insufficient
funds in, or credit with, such bank or other depository. Such maker or drawer
shall not have paid the drawee the amount due thereon, together with the
protest fees, and the check or order shall be presented for payment within 30
days after the same is delivered and accepted.
(Prior Code, § 10-308) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.08 HARMFUL DECEPTION.
   It is unlawful for any person knowingly to deceive another, whether by
impersonation, misrepresentation, or otherwise, when such deception results in,
or contributes to, the loss, damage, harm, or injury of the person deceived or
of a third party, or results in, or contributes to, the benefit of the
deceiver.
(Prior Code, § 10-309) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.09 DEFACING BUILDINGS; DAMAGING PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall purposely deface or damage any public or private
building or appurtenances thereof, or any fence, street, bridge, sidewalk,
driveway, street, or public work.
   (B)   No person shall:
      (1)   Destroy, injure, deface, damage, or molest any structure, building,
work, or other property, real or personal, belonging to another;
      (2)   Use such property wrongfully to the detriment of the owner or other
person entitled to its use; or
      (3)   Interfere wrongfully with the use of any such property by its
owner, or any other person entitled to its use.
(Prior Code, § 10-310)
Statutory reference:
   Malicious injury or destruction of property generally; punishment; damages,
see 21 O.S. § 1760
§ 132.10 REMOVING, BREAKING PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall willfully, unlawfully, or maliciously take and carry,
or cause to be taken and carried away, any part of a house, barn, fence, gate,
or other structure, or maliciously break, tear down, or destroy any part of a
house, barn, or other structure not his or her own.
(Prior Code, § 10-311)
   (B)   No person shall willfully and wantonly damage or destroy the personal
property of another.
(Prior Code, § 10-312) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.11 PUBLIC WORKS UNDER CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Any person who removes, destroys, disturbs, or in any manner injures
any grade stake, stone, or other mark or monument set by, or under authority
of, the town to designate or mark grades, lines, corners, or bench marks on any
public work in the town prior to the completion and acceptance of the contract
for which such stakes or monuments are set, without lawful authority, is guilty
of an offense.
   (B)   Any contractor or other person constructing any public work in the
town shall protect such work by barriers or obstructions. It is unlawful for
any person to cross the barriers or to remove them until the work has been
completed and opened by authority of the town.
(Prior Code, § 10-313) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.12 DAMAGING, TAMPERING WITH MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person, other than a peace officer in the performance of his or her
official duties, shall, with intent and without right to do so, injure or
tamper with any vehicle, or in any other manner damage any part or portion of
the vehicle or any accessories, appurtenances, or attachments thereto.
   (B)   No person, other than a peace officer in the performance of his or her
official duties, shall, without right to do so and with intent to commit a
crime, climb into or upon a vehicle, whether it is in motion or at rest,
attempt to manipulate any of the levers, starting mechanism, brakes, or other
mechanism or device of the vehicle while the vehicle is at rest and unattended,
or set in motion any vehicle while the vehicle is at rest and unattended.
(Prior Code, § 10-314) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Automobile or motor vehicle, loitering in, injuring, or molesting, see 21
O.S. § 1787
   Penalty, see 21 O.S. § 1788
§ 132.13 DAMAGING, TAMPERING UTILITIES.
   (A)   No person shall alter, remove, tamper with, molest, damage, or injure
any wires, cable, appurtenance, structure, pipes, or equipment of any utility
of the town, or any public utility, or connect or tamper with the wires,
cables, or pipes of any electric, water, sewer, cable television, or gas
utility of the town without the consent of the utility or town having been
first obtained.
   (B)   It is unlawful to open up any manhole or opening to a sewer unless
authorized by the town, or to leave a manhole or other opening so opened
without replacing the fixture or appliances thereto in their proper place and
position.
   (C)   No person, except a member of the Fire Department or a person acting
on lawful order or permit issued by the town, shall open or use water from any
fire hydrant or take off the caps or damage the same. No person may block the
approach or access to a fire hydrant or attach, fasten, stand, or brace
anything against or on the hydrant.
   (D)   No person shall in any manner whatsoever:
      (1)   Cut into, attach to, or intercept the wires, cables, or pipes of
any electric, water, cable television, or gas utility of the town for the
purpose of fraudulently taking therefrom electric current, water,
transmissions, or gas;
      (2)   Cut into, attach to, or intercept the wires, cables, or pipes for
the purpose of conducting around any meter electric current, water, or gas in
order to prevent the current, water, or gas from being measured by the meter,
or in such other manner so as to consume or use the utility or cable service so
as to evade payment therefor, with the unlawful intent to defraud the company
or town out of the value of the service; or
      (3)   By any device or manipulation whatsoever to cause current,
transmissions, water, or gas used upon any premises to be fraudulently conveyed
upon any premises for the purposes of use thereof, and with the intent to
defraud and cheat the utility or town from payment thereof.
   (E)   Each day that any person maintains any such fraudulent connection with
any wires, cables or pipes, or fraudulently takes from any such wires, cables,
or pipes either electric current, transmissions, water, or gas shall constitute
a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 10-315) Penalty, see §
10.99
Cross-reference:
   Utilities, see §§
50.01 and
50.02
§ 132.14 TAMPERING WITH SIGNS; EQUIPMENT.
   It is unlawful for any person to tamper with any signs, signal equipment, or
other device placed, operated, and maintained by the town in connection with
the administration of its code provisions, ordinances, regulations, services,
functions, or performance of duties thereto.
(Prior Code, § 10-617) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.15 DESTROYING TREES, SHRUBBERY.
   (A)   No person shall willfully, maliciously, and without lawful authority
cut down, root up, sever, injure, or destroy any fruit tree, shade, or
ornamental tree, cultivated root or plant, grape or strawberry vine, shrub or
plant whatever standing on, or attached to, the land of another, or pick,
destroy, carry away therefrom, or in any way interfere therewith, any of the
fruit thereof.
   (B)   No person shall willfully or without lawful authority cut down,
destroy, root up, or in any manner injure any fruit, shade, or ornamental tree,
shrub, or vine planted or growing on any street, land, avenue, alley, or other
public ground of the town.
(Prior Code, § 10-316) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.16 TRESPASSING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It is unlawful and an offense for any person to commit a trespass
within the town upon either public or private property.
   (B)   TRESPASS shall include each and every actual entry upon the premises
of an owner or other person in lawful possession of the premises without the
express consent of the owner or other person in lawful possession. TRESPASS
shall also mean remaining upon the premises of an owner or other person in
lawful possession after having been told to leave the premises by the owner, or
the agent, or employee of the owner or other person in lawful possession of the
premises. TRESPASS shall also mean the act of entering upon or remaining on
private property when such is plainly forbidden by signs, markings, or
otherwise, by verbal command of the owner, his or her agent, or employee, of
after having been directed to do so by a police officer, although this sentence
shall not apply to persons including employees whose presence upon the premises
is authorized by the owner or by a person in lawful possession of such
premises. TRESPASS shall also include the act of returning to private property
after having been directed to vacate the premises by the owner, his or her
agent, employee, or police officer under the terms of this section.
   (C)   Any of the following acts by any person shall be deemed a violation of
this section:
      (1)   The doing of an injury or misfeasance to the person of another;
      (2)   The doing of any injury or misfeasance to the property of another
when done with force and violence, either actual or implied;
      (3)   Each and every actual entry upon the premises of another owner or
person in possession of real property, whether the property is public or
private, without the owner’s or occupant’s consent, express or implied;
      (4)   An entry upon the premises, or any part thereof, of another in
violation of a notice exhibited thereon prohibiting entry at specified times;
      (5)   An entry upon the premises, or any part thereof, of another in
violation of any notice, warning, or protest given orally or in writing by any
owner or other lawful occupant thereof;
      (6)   An entry upon any public property, including parks or parking
areas, in violation of a notice exhibited there prohibiting entry at specified
times;
      (7)   An entry upon any public property in violation of any notice,
warning, or protest given orally or in writing by a town official;
      (8)   If on the property of another, or upon public property lawfully, a
failure or refusal to depart in case of being requested to so depart orally or
written, by any owner, lawful occupant, or by a town official;
      (9)   An entry upon any portion of a public park where the entry involves
the use of any vehicle, equipment, or device where such use is specifically
prohibited;
      (10)   An entry of any public building except for the purpose of
dispatching business with the public corporation or consent is obtained from
the Town Board of Trustees, or other public official which is lawfully
authorized to give consent; or
      (11)   Remaining on public or private property at any time other than
during posted hours of business operation after having been directed to vacate
such premises by a police officer. The provisions of this division (C)(11)
shall not apply to persons, including employees, whose presence upon such
premises is authorized by the owner or by a person in lawful possession of such
premises; nor shall the provisions of this division (C)(11) apply unless hours
of business operation are posted upon such premises. Trespass also includes the
act of returning to private property before the posted time of opening for
business operation on the next business day after having been directed to
vacate such premises under the terms of this division (C)(11).
   (D)   For purposes of constituting a violation of this section, the
exhibited notice required under divisions (C)(4), (C)(5), (C)(6), (C)(7), and
(C)(9) above shall meet the following criteria:
      (1)   The notice shall be plainly posted in a place or places conspicuous
to those who would enter the property;
      (2)   The notice shall be legible so as to afford reasonable warning
prior to the commission of a trespass; and
      (3)   If upon property to which the public is invited at least some part
of the day, the notice shall clearly specify the days and times of day entry is
prohibited, and further specify that entry at such times constitutes a
punishable offense under the town code.
(Prior Code, § 10-317) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.17 CONGREGATING, PARKING ON PREMISES AFTER HOURS.
   (A)   No person shall stand, walk, sit, lie, congregate, or otherwise occupy
or remain upon the premises of any place or business within the town after
business hours without consent of the lawful owner, occupant, lessee, or
employee thereof.
   (B)   No person shall stop, stand, park, leave, or place any motor vehicle,
whether occupied or not, upon any public or private property without the
consent of the owner, occupant, lessee, or employee thereof, except where such
property is provided for public parking and the use for such parking is not
restricted by proper notice. In addition to a fine or other punishment for a
violation of this division (B), the vehicle so parked, left, or placed shall be
subject to impoundment upon complaint of the property owner or lawful occupant;
the person violating this division (B) shall be wholly responsible for payment
of towage and storage charges.
   (C)   No person may be charged under this section unless the premises in
question is posted with a conspicuous sign which states, substantially, that
the premises are posted, and that any person congregating, occupying, or
remaining upon the premises or parking or leaving a motor vehicle thereon, is
subject to prosecution pursuant to the town code.
   (D)   When used in this section, the term AFTER BUSINESS HOURS shall mean
that the doors of the business which are open to the public during business
hours are closed and locked, and that the business is no longer admitting
customers. The term applies to places of business which are vacant or
permanently or temporarily closed or otherwise unoccupied. The term PLACE OF
BUSINESS means any private property upon which a building, house, or other
structure is used for commercial or public purposes, for example, without
limitation, restaurants, gas stations, shopping malls or centers, theaters,
convenience stores, grocery stores, drug stores or pharmacies, recreational
facilities, wholesale or retail sales activities, offices, banks or other
financial institutions, manufacturing, or professional services (medical,
legal, accounting, insurance, or consulting).
   (E)   There is a rebuttable presumption that any person or motor vehicle
upon the premises of a place of business that is properly posted pursuant to
this section after such time as the front door or other such door that admits
members of the public is closed and locked is on the premises of such business
unlawfully under this section; however, this presumption shall not be applied
within 30 minutes of any opening or closing times posted by such place of
business. This presumption may only be rebutted by proof beyond a reasonable
doubt that any person held by the Municipal Judge to be subject to this
rebuttal presumption was on the premises in question with permission of the
lawful owner, occupant, lessee, or employee thereof.
   (F)   If a motor vehicle is alleged to be unlawfully parked or left under
this section, it shall be rebuttably presumed that the person in whose name the
motor vehicle was last registered was the person who parked or left the motor
vehicle.
   (G)   The parking or leaving of a motor vehicle, as set forth herein, shall
constitute the offense of unlawful parking or leaving a motor vehicle after
business hours, punishable as provided in §
10.99.
   (H)   If a person violates division (A) above, it shall constitute the
offense of unlawful presence on property after business hours or congregating
after business hours, and is punishable as provided in §
10.99.
   (I)   The provisions of this section are cumulative of other applicable
offenses enacted in this code or state law.
(Prior Code, § 10-318) Penalty, see §
10.99
Cross-reference:
   Vehicular trespass, see §
72.08
§ 132.18 UNLAWFUL INTRUSION ON LAND.
   (A)   No person shall intrude or remain upon any lot or piece of land, or in
any building within the town without license or authority from the owner
thereof, or erect or occupy thereon any structure whatever without such license
or authority.
   (B)   No person shall place, erect, or occupy within the bounds of any
street, alley, or avenue of the town any structure whatever unless such person
is granted a license by the town to do so.
(Prior Code, § 10-319) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.19 THROWING, SHOOTING AT PERSONS, PROPERTY.
   No person shall throw or shoot any object into or across any street or
alley, or in any place where he or she is likely to hit another person
wrongfully or injure property, or to throw any object at any person, vehicle,
structure, or property of another, whether public or private, except where such
is done in defense of oneself or another person or property.
(Prior Code, § 10-320) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.20 THROWING OUT LIGHTED SUBSTANCES, DEBRIS.
   No person shall throw, drop, deposit, or otherwise place in, upon, or with
the limits of any street, avenue, public ground, public waterway, or town-owned
property or waterway any lighted cigarette, cigar, or other flaming or glowing
substances, or any substance or thing which may cause a fire.
(Prior Code, § 10-321) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.21 LITTERING, DEPOSITS UNLAWFUL.
   It is unlawful to throw, deposit, or discharge any item or waste material,
liquid or solid, on any street or public place in the town, or upon the
property of another without express authority to do so.
(Prior Code, § 10-322) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.22 POSTING, ADVERTISING MATTER ON PROPERTY.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall place upon any building any advertising matter
of any kind, nor print or exhibit printing on a building or any part thereof,
in words, signs, or characters, except with the express consent of the owner,
lessee, or authorized agent of the owner of the building.
      (2)   No person shall place, post, paint, mark, write, print, or put any
sign, poster, picture, announcement, writing, device, advertisement, or other
marking upon any public or private building, fence, sidewalk, bridge, post,
automobile or vehicle, or property of another without the consent of the owner
or person in charge thereof.
(Prior Code, § 10-323)
   (B)   (1)   It is unlawful for any person to place any advertising matter of
any kind on any utility pole or to place any advertising on the streets or
sidewalks of the town, or to place any advertising on any signs or banners
stretched over the streets or sidewalks of the town.
      (2)   Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent any permanently
located commercial or business establishment in the town from erecting and
maintaining business or commercial signs in accordance with the ordinances of
the town, nor to prohibit the granting of permission by the town to religious,
charitable, patriotic, or civic bodies to use banners across the streets of the
town in such places as may be designated by the Town Clerk/Treasurer for the
observance of holidays, charitable drives, and the commemoration and
celebration of other public or civic occasions.
(Prior Code, § 10-324) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.23 INTERFERENCE WITH RADIO, TELEVISION, TELEPHONE RECEPTION OF OTHERS.
   It is unlawful for any person, or any officer or employee of any person, to
operate or use any citizen band radio, ham radio, or other electrical apparatus
or machine which materially and unduly interferes with the radio, television,
or telephone reception of others.
(Prior Code, § 10-325) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.24 FALSE WEIGHTS.
   It is unlawful for any person to sell any commodity or article of
merchandise and in the sale thereof, knowingly make or give a false or short
weight therefor, or for any person owning or keeping, or having in charge any
scale used in weighing any animal, commodity, or article to knowingly and
willfully report any false or untrue weight whereby another person shall be
defrauded or damaged.
(Prior Code, § 10-326) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.25 ELECTRIC FENCES PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to erect, install, or maintain any
electrically charged fence within the town, except that the building official
may issue a permit for an electrically-charged fence to retain animals upon
proof that the fence will not be hazardous to life, and upon proof that the
electric charge is regulated by a controlling device.
(Prior Code, § 10-327) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.26 UNLAWFUL USE OF ANOTHER’S GARAGE, REFUSE CONTAINER.
   (A)   It is unlawful and an offense for any person to dispose of garbage,
refuse, rubbish, or waste in any refuse container, dumpster, or other
receptacle for the deposit of the same belonging to, or leased by, another,
whether by rental agreement, lease, or agreement with the town or a public or
private trash, garbage, or refuse hauling service, without the permission of
the owner, lessee, or other person entitled to the possession or use thereof.
   (B)   It is unlawful and an offense to use the town’s dumpsters for dumping
without an issued permit therefor.
(Prior Code, § 10-328) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 133: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE; MORALS
Section
Offenses Against Public Peace
   
133.01   Disturbing the peace
   
133.02   Disturbing funerals
   
133.03   Disorderly conduct
   
133.04   Unnecessary noise prohibited
   
133.05   Parades, public assemblies
Offenses Against Public Morals
   
133.20   Public intoxication
   
133.21   Controlled substances prohibited
   
133.22   Drug paraphernalia
   
133.23   Sniffing glue, paint, other substances
   
133.24   False representation of disability
   
133.25   Prowling on premises
   
133.26   Misrepresentation of age
   
133.27   Obscene, threatening, harassing phone calls
   
133.28   Disorderly house
   
133.29   Gambling, gambling devices
   
133.30   Prostitution prohibited
   
133.31   Offenses near school
   
133.32   Sleeping in places, property
   
133.33   Contributing to delinquency of minors
   
133.34   Tobacco to minors prohibited
 
   
133.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Curfew for minors, see §
135.01 
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
§ 133.01 DISTURBING THE PEACE.
   (A)   It is unlawful to disturb or alarm the peace of another or others by
doing any of the acts set out in division (B) below.
   (B)   DISTURBING THE PEACE is the doing of any of the following in such a
manner as would foreseeably alarm or disturb the peace of another or others:
      (1)   Using obscene, offensive, abusive, profane, vulgar, threatening,
violent, or insulting language or conduct;
      (2)   Appearing in an intoxicated condition;
      (3)   Engaging in a fistic encounter;
      (4)   Lewdly exposing one’s person, or private parts thereof, in any
public place or in any place where there are present other persons to be
offended or annoyed thereby;
      (5)   Pointing any pistol or any other deadly weapon, whether loaded or
not, at any other person or persons either in anger or otherwise;
      (6)   Holding an unlawful assembly of two or more persons, including
being assembled together and acting in concert, to do any unlawful act against
the peace or to the terror of others, or preparing for or moving toward such
acts, or otherwise assembling unlawfully or riotously;
      (7)   Interrupting any lawful assembly of people by making noise, by
rude, indecent, or improper behavior, by profane, improper, or loud language,
or in any other manner, either within the place of assembly or within hearing
distance thereof;
      (8)   Obstructing the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles on a
street, right-of-way, or sidewalk, or other public place;
      (9)   Obstructing, molesting, or interfering with any person lawfully in
a public place;
      (10)   Making unnecessarily loud, offensive noises;
      (11)   Disturbing any congregation or assembly of persons meeting for
religious worship by making noise, by rude, indecent, or improper behavior, by
profane improper or loud language, or in any other manner, either within the
place of worship or within hearing distance thereof; or
      (12)   Committing any other act in such a manner calculated as to
unreasonably disturb, interfere, or alarm the public or the comfort and repose
of any person.
   (C)   Whenever any police officer shall, in the exercise of reasonable
judgment, decide that the presence of any person in any public place is causing
any of the conditions enumerated in division (A) above, he or she may, if he or
she deems it necessary for the preservation of the public peace and safety,
order that person to leave that place; and any who shall refuse to leave after
being ordered to do so by a police officer shall be guilty of a violation of
this section.
   (D)   This section shall not apply to peaceful picketing, public speaking,
or other lawful expressions of opinion not in contravention of other laws.
(Prior Code, § 10-401) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.02 DISTURBING FUNERALS.
   No person shall willfully disturb, interrupt, or disquiet any assemblage of
people who have met for the purpose of any funeral, or obstruct or detain any
person engaged in accompanying any funeral to a place of burial.
(Prior Code, § 10-402) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 133.03 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   A person shall be guilty of disorderly conduct if, with the intent to cause
public inconvenience, annoyance, alarm, or recklessly creating the risk
thereof, he or she:
   (A)   Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby any
person is placed in fear of safety of his or her life, limb, or health;
   (B)   Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby the
property of any person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged;
   (C)   Endangers the lawful pursuits of another by acts of violence, angry
threats, and abusive conduct;
   (D)   Jostles or crowds, or pushes any person in any public place;
   (E)   Uses “fighting words” directed toward any person and thus creates a
turmoil;
   (F)   Causes, provokes, or engages in any fight, brawl, or riotous conduct
so as to endanger the life, limb, health, or property of another; or
   (G)   By acts of violence interferes with another’s pursuit of a lawful
occupation.
(Prior Code, § 10-403) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.04 UNNECESSARY NOISE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any
excessive, unnecessary, or unusually loud noise or any noise which either
annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, or
safety of others, within the limits of the town.
   (B)   Permits may be granted by the town for certain activities and events,
which are exempt from the provisions of this section.
(Prior Code, § 10-404) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.05 PARADES, PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES.
   (A)   As used in this section, PARADE means any parade, march, ceremony,
show, demonstration, exhibition, pageant, or procession of any kind, or any
similar display, in or upon any street, park, or other public place in the
town.
   (B)   No person shall use any street, alley, public way, park, or other
property owned or controlled by the town, except those places specifically
designed and intended for such use, for the purpose of holding, conducting,
causing or participating in any parade, street fair, street dance, carnival,
assemblage, or activity of any nature which may cause the disturbance or
interference of the normal and ordinary use of the property by other persons,
without first having obtained a permit for such purpose. The permits may be
granted by the Town Clerk/Treasurer under such conditions as deemed
appropriate.
   (C)   Permits shall not be required under this section in the case of
construction or repairs to or within any such street or property, provided all
other requirements of this code are complied with.
   (D)   Not less than two weeks prior to the closing or use of a street or
property for a parade, an application shall be submitted by the party to the
town. The time requirements may be waived by the Town Clerk/Treasurer at his or
her discretion if sufficient time exists for the proper review of the
application as herein provided. The application shall be submitted upon a form
prescribed by the town. The application shall provide such other information as
requested.
   (E)   The Town Clerk/Treasurer shall issue a permit as provided for
hereunder when, from a consideration of the application and from such other
information as may otherwise be obtained, he or she finds that:
      (1)   The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe
and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route;
      (2)   The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so
great a number of police officers of the town to properly police the line of
movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police
protection to the town;
      (3)   The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so
great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions
of the town other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and
areas contiguous thereto;
      (4)   The concentration of persons, animals, and vehicles at assembly
points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police
protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly
areas;
      (5)   The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of
firefighting equipment en route to a fire;
      (6)   The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury
to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or create a disturbance;
and
      (7)   The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its
point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route.
   (F)   The Town Clerk/Treasurer, in such cases as shall be determined in his
or her discretion, may require as a condition to the issuance of a permit
herein such insurance or bond holding the town harmless from any and all
liability for injury or damage of any kind whatsoever occurring during such
activity covered by the permit.
   (G)   Without regard to the above provision of this division (G), the Town
Clerk/Treasurer, from his or her consideration of available, appropriate, and
necessary information, shall deny the application for a permit provided for by
this section when, from this information, he or she has reason to believe that
any contemplated advocacy at the proposed event will be directed to inciting or
producing imminent lawless action, and will likely incite or produce such
action.
   (H)   (1)   The Town Clerk/Treasurer, in denying an application for a parade
permit, may authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time, or over a
route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to
accept an alternate permit shall so indicate within five days after notice of
the action of the Town Clerk/Treasurer.
      (2)   An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of,
and shall have the effect of, a parade permit under this section.
(Prior Code, § 10-405)
Cross-reference:
   Funeral processions, see §
71.002(A)
Statutory reference:
   Powers of local authorities, see 47 O.S. § 15-102
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS
§ 133.20 PUBLIC INTOXICATION.
   No person shall be in any public place in a state of intoxication. A STATE
OF INTOXICATION means the condition in which a person is under the influence of
drugs, intoxicating liquors, or nonintoxicating beverage to such an extent as
to deprive the person of his or her full mental or physical power, or be unable
to exercise care for his or her own safety or the safety of others.
(Prior Code, § 10-501) Penalty, see §
10.99
Cross-reference:
   Alcoholic beverages generally, see §§
114.01 through
114.15
   Drinking in public places, see §
114.14
Statutory reference:
   Consuming or inhaling intoxicants in public places; penalties, see 37A O.S.
§ 6-101(D)
   Definitions, see 63 O.S. § 2-101
§ 133.21 CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Marijuana.
      (1)   It is unlawful for any person:
         (a)   To appear or be upon, or in, any street, alley, place of
business, or other public place while under the influence of marijuana;
         (b)   To use, have, or possess marijuana upon or in any street, alley,
place of business, or other public place within the town;
         (c)   To use or consume marijuana in any place within the town except
as legally prescribed by a physician licensed to practice in the state pursuant
to 63 O.S. §§ 420 et seq.; or
         (d)   To be about a place where marijuana is sold or furnished
illegally.
      (2)   For the purpose of this section, marijuana shall have the same
meaning as defined in the Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances Act, 63 O.S.
§§ 2-101 and 2-204.
   (B)   Medical marijuana.
      (1)   Pursuant to 63 O.S. §§ 420 et seq., a person in possession of a
state issued medical marijuana license shall be able to consume marijuana
legally and possess certain quantities of marijuana on his or her person and in
his or her residence, and shall legally possess certain quantities of marijuana
plants.
      (2)   A violation of this section occurs when a person can state a
medical condition but is not in possession of a state issued medical marijuana
license, as defined in 63 O.S. § 420.
   (C)   Methamphetamine.
      (1)   It is unlawful for any person:
         (a)   To appear or be upon, or in, any street, alley, place of
business, or other public place while under the influence of methamphetamine;
         (b)   To use, have, consume, or possess methamphetamine upon, or in,
any street, alley, place of business, or other public place within the town; or
         (c)   To be about a place where methamphetamine is sold or furnished.
      (2)   For the purpose of this section, methamphetamine shall have the
same meaning as defined in the Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances Act, 63
O.S. § 2-206.
   (D)   Heroin.
      (1)   It is unlawful for any person:
         (a)   To appear or be upon, or in, any street, alley, place of
business, or other public place while under the influence of heroin;
         (b)   To use, have, consume, or possess heroin upon or in any street,
alley, place of business, or other public place within the town; or
         (c)   To be about a place where heroin is sold or furnished.
      (2)   For the purpose of this section, heroin shall have the same meaning
as defined in the Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances Act, 63 O.S. § 2-204.
   (E)   Cocaine.
      (1)   It is unlawful for any person:
         (a)   To appear or be upon, or in, any street, alley, place of
business, or other public place while under the influence of cocaine;
         (b)   To use, have, consume, or possess cocaine upon or in any street,
alley, place of business, or other public place within the town; or
         (c)   To be about a place where cocaine is sold or furnished.
      (2)   For the purpose of this section, cocaine shall have the same
meaning as defined in the Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances Act, 63 O.S.
§ 2-206.
   (F)   Universality; controlled substances defined under schedules I, II,
III, IV, and V of the Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances Act. It is
unlawful for any person:
      (1)   To appear or be upon, or in, any street, alley, place of business,
or other public place while under the influence of any substance as defined in
the Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances Act, 63 O.S. §§ 2-204, 2-206, 2-
208, 2-210, and 2-212;
      (2)   To use, have, consume, or possess any substance as defined in the
Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances Act, 63 O.S. §§ 2-204, 2-206, 2-208, 2-
210, and 2-212 upon or in any street, alley, place of business, or other public
place within the town; or
      (3)   To be about a place where any substance as defined in the Uniform
Controlled Dangerous Substances Act, 63 O.S. §§ 2-204, 2-206, 2-208, 2-210, and
2-212 is sold or furnished.
(Ord. 10-502, passed 4-23-2019)
§ 133.22 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, DRUG PARAPHERNALIA means all
equipment, products, and materials of any kind which are used, intended for
use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing,
harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing,
preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing,
concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the
human body a controlled substance in violation of the State Uniform Controlled
Dangerous Substances Act, 63 O.S. §§ 2-101 et seq., hereinafter referred to as
“the act” and adopted by reference herein. It includes, but is not limited to:
      (1)   Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing, or harvesting of any species of plant which
is a controlled substance, or from which a controlled substance can be derived;
      (2)   Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing controlled
substances;
      (3)   Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or designed for use
in identifying, or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness, or purity of
controlled substances;
      (4)   Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed for use in
identifying, or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness, or purity of
controlled substances;
      (5)   Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use in
weighing or measuring controlled substances;
      (6)   Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol,
mannite, dextrose, and lactose, used, intended for use, or designed for use in
cutting controlled substances;
      (7)   Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or designed for
use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining,
marijuana;
      (8)   Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons, and mixing devices used,
intended for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled substances;
      (9)   Capsules, balloons, envelopes, and other containers used, intended
for use, or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled
substances;
      (10)   Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed
for use in storing or concealing controlled substances;
      (11)   Hypodermic syringes, needles, and other objects used, intended for
use, or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into
the human body; and
      (12)   Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting,
inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil
into the human body, such as:
         (a)   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes
with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal
bowls;
         (b)   Water pipes;
         (c)   Carburetion tubes and devices;
         (d)   Smoking and carburetion masks;
         (e)   ROACH CLIPS, meaning objects used to hold burning materials,
such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be
held in the hand;
         (f)   Miniature cocaine spoons, and cocaine vials;
         (g)   Chamber pipes;
         (h)   Carburetor pipes;
         (I)   Electric pipes;
         (j)   Air-driven pipes;
         (k)   Chillums;
         (l)   Bongs; or
         (m)   Ice pipes or chiller.
   (B)   In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or
other authority should consider, in addition to all other logically relevant
factors, the following:
      (1)   Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object
concerning its use;
      (2)   Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in control of
the object, under any state or federal law relating to any controlled
substance;
      (3)   The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct
violation of the act;
      (4)   The proximity of the object to controlled substances;
      (5)   The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the
object;
      (6)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of
anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he or she knows,
or should reasonably know, intended to use the object to facilitate a violation
of the act; the innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object,
as to a direct violation of the act shall not prevent a finding that the object
is intended for use, or designed for use as drug paraphernalia;
      (7)   Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning
its use;
      (8)   Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or
depict its use;
      (9)   National and local advertising concerning its use;
      (10)   The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;
      (11)   Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a
legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a
licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products;
      (12)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the
object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise;
      (13)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community; and
      (14)   Expert testimony concerning its use.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to
use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest,
manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack,
repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce
into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the act.
   (D)   It is unlawful for any person to deliver, possess with intent to
deliver, or manufacture with intent to deliver drug paraphernalia knowing, or
under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that it will be used to
plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert,
produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain,
conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a
controlled substance in violation of the act.
   (E)   It is unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper, magazine,
handbill, or other publication any advertisement knowing, or under
circumstances where one reasonably should know, that the purpose of the
advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects designed
or intended for use as drug paraphernalia.
(Prior Code, § 10-503) Penalty, see §
133.99
Statutory reference:
   Drug paraphernalia; factors used in determining, see 63 O.S. § 2-101.1
§ 133.23 SNIFFING GLUE, PAINT, OTHER SUBSTANCES.
   No person shall sniff or inhale paint, glue, gasoline, or other volatile
substances for purposes of intoxication.
(Prior Code, § 10-504) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.24 FALSE REPRESENTATION OF DISABILITY.
   No person shall falsely represent himself or herself as blind, deaf, dumb,
crippled, or physically defective for the purpose of obtaining money or other
things of value, or to secure aid or assistance on account of such false
representation.
(Prior Code, § 10-506) Penalty, see §
133.99
Statutory reference:
   Gross injuries; grossly disturbing the peace; openly outraging public
decency; injurious acts not expressly forbidden, see 21 O.S. § 22
§ 133.25 PROWLING ON PREMISES.
   No person shall be upon the property or premises of another with the intent
to peer or peep into the window or door of the dwelling.
(Prior Code, § 10-507) Penalty, see §
133.99
Statutory reference:
   Peeping Tom, see 21 O.S. § 1171
§ 133.26 MISREPRESENTATION OF AGE.
   No person shall, for the purpose of violating any statutes of the state or
any ordinances of the town, willfully and knowingly misrepresent his or her age
by presenting a false document purporting to state his or her true age, or by
presenting a document not his or her own.
(Prior Code, § 10-508) Penalty, see §
133.99
Statutory reference:
   Misrepresentation of age by false document, see 21 O.S. § 1518
   Penalties, see 21 O.S. § 1519
   Provisions as cumulative, see 21 O.S. § 1520
§ 133.27 OBSCENE, THREATENING, HARASSING PHONE CALLS.
   (A)   No person shall by means of a telephone, willfully:
      (1)   Make any comment, request, suggestion, or proposal which is
obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy, or indecent;
      (2)   Make a telephone call, whether or not conversation ensues, without
disclosing his or her identity and with intent to annoy, abuse, threaten, or
harass any person at the called number;
      (3)   Permit any telephone under his or her control to be used for any
purpose prohibited by this section; or
      (4)   In conspiracy or concerted action with other persons, make repeated
calls or simultaneous calls solely to harass any person at the called number.
   (B)   Use of a telephone facility under this section shall include all uses
made of such a facility between the points of origin and reception. Any offense
under this section is a continuing offense and shall be deemed to have been
committed at either the place of origin or the place of reception.
(Prior Code, § 10-509) Penalty, see §
133.99
Statutory reference:
   Obscene, threatening, or harassing telecommunication or other electronic
communications; penalty, see 21 O.S. § 1172
§ 133.28 DISORDERLY HOUSE.
   (A)   A disorderly house means any structure or vehicle by which the peace,
comfort, health, welfare or decency of the public is disturbed by reason of the
people therein committing or resorting to any of the following acts:
      (1)   The sale, distribution, possession, or use of any controlled
dangerous substance, the sale, distribution, possession, or use of which is
declared unlawful by state statute;
      (2)   The violation of any of the ordinances of the town or statutes of
the state regulating the sale, distribution, possession, or use of alcoholic
and non-intoxicating, beverages as defined by law;
      (3)   The performance of any sexual act declared unlawful by state
statute or town ordinance including, but not limited to, soliciting for
purposes of prostitution; or
      (4)   The violation of any state statute or town ordinance prohibiting
gambling.
   (B)   No person shall keep or maintain, or aid, abet, or assist in keeping
and maintaining a disorderly house.
   (C)   No owner, lessee, lessor, or other person, partnership, or corporation
having control over any house, building, structure, tent, vehicle, mobile home,
or recreational vehicle shall knowingly use, lease, sublease, or otherwise
permit the use of the same for the purpose of keeping therein any disorderly
house, and knowing or ascertaining that such house, building, structure, tent,
vehicle, mobile home, or recreational vehicle is so occupied as a disorderly
house, no persons, partnership, or corporation shall continue to grant
permission to so use such premises as a disorderly house.
   (D)   No person shall knowingly reside in, enter into, or remain in a
disorderly house. In any prosecution for violation of this section, the town
shall have the burden to prove such knowledge by direct evidence only and not
by circumstantial evidence. This section shall not apply to physicians or
officers in the discharge of their professional or official duties.
(Prior Code, § 10-510) Penalty, see §
133.99
Statutory reference:
   Disorderly houses and public indecencies, see 11 O.S. § 22-109
§ 133.29 GAMBLING, GAMBLING DEVICES.
   (A)   Any person who plays or carries on, or opens or causes to be opened,
or who conducts, either as an owner or employee, roulette, craps, or any
banking or percentage game, played with dice, cards, or any other device for
money, checks, credit, or any representative of value, or any other gambling
game, is guilty of an offense.
   (B)   Any person who bets on or plays at any of the prohibited games
mentioned in division (A) above, or otherwise gambles, is guilty of an offense.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to exhibit or expose to view in any
building, or in any part of or room in any building, any table, cards, dice,
roulette wheel, or other article or apparatus designed for or used for gambling
purposes.
   (D)   It is unlawful for any person to keep, own, operate, use, conduct, or
cause to be kept, operated, used, or conducted, either as owner, manager,
dealer, clerk, or employee, and whether for hire or not, any punch board,
machine, cards, game, parlay card, or any other device or paraphernalia,
wherein or whereby any money or property, or any representative of either, or
other valuable thing, may be played, bet, staked, wagered or hazarded, won,
lost, or obtained upon any change, combination of numbers, emblems, or any
uncertain or contingent event or condition, or football or baseball contest.
   (E)   It is unlawful for any person to play any prohibited game described in
this section.
   (F)   It is unlawful for any person to bar or barricade any building, or any
part of or room in any building, in order to render the same difficult of
access or ingress to the police officers of the town, in which building, or any
part of or room in any such building, any table, cards, dice, roulette wheel,
or other article or apparatus designed for, or being used for, gambling
purposes are exhibited or exposed to view.
   (G)   The apparatus and paraphernalia used in the conduct of any of the
gambling games prohibited by this section are hereby declared to be a public
nuisance and subject to seizure and suppression by any officer, and shall be
abated, forfeited, and destroyed upon the order and decree of any court of
competent jurisdiction.
   (H)   It is unlawful for any person to be about in the immediate vicinity
where a person or persons are gambling, whether by playing games, operating a
slot machine or other device, or otherwise.
   (I)   Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent the sponsoring
and operation of bingo games by nonprofit religious, fraternal, charitable, or
educational organizations; provided the organizations are properly licensed and
operated in accordance with law.
(Prior Code, § 10-512) Penalty, see §
133.99
Statutory reference:
   Administration of drugs or medications; determination by rule; penalties,
see 3A O.S. § 208.11
   Betting on or playing prohibited game; punishment, see 21 O.S. § 942
   Breakage; distribution of proceeds, see 3A O.S. § 208
   Compensation for wagering prohibited; penalties, see 3A O.S. § 208.9
   Conducting race or race meeting without license; permitting minors to
participate in certain activities; penalties, see 3A O.S. § 208.4
   Corrupt acts and practices; penalties, see 3A O.S. § 208.8
   County option, see 3A O.S. § 209
   Definitions, see 3A O.S. § 200.1
   Fraud regarding prior racing record, pedigree, identity, or ownership of
registered animal, see 3A O.S. § 208.10
   Gambling paraphernalia; disposition, see 21 O.S. § 943
   Gaming areas not subject to certain smoking prohibitions; requirements, see
3A O.S. § 208.12
   National Breeder’s Cup; pick seven wagers; apportionment of wagered funds,
see 3A O.S. § 205.8
   Oklahoma Breeding Development Administration Revolving Fund, see 3A O.S. §
208.3a
   Oklahoma Breeding Development Fund Special Account, see 3A O.S. § 208.3
   Oklahoma Horse Racing Commission; creation; membership; appointment; term;
removal; vacancies, see 3A O.S. § 201
   Opening, conducting, or carrying on gambling game; dealing for those engaged
in game, see 21 O.S. § 941
   Ownership interest in organization license, see 3A O.S. § 205.2a
   Persons ineligible for grant of organization license, see 3A O.S. § 205.3
   Race meetings conducted by fair associations; proportions of wagers
retained; licenses, see 3A O.S. § 208.2
   Seizure of apparatus and delivery to magistrate, 21 O.S. § 960
   Seizure of slot machines and punch boards; confiscation, procedure for, see
21 O.S. § 973
   Short title, see 3A O.S. § 200
   Tax imposed; distribution of proceeds, see 3A O.S. § 207
   Televised races, 3A O.S. see § 205.7a
   True name of horse to be used; violations, see 3A O.S. § 208.6
   Unclaimed winning tickets; claims; proceeds, see 3A O.S. § 208.1
   Use of certain devices for stimulating or depressing horse prohibited;
violations; penalties, see 3A O.S. § 208.7
   Wagering on out-of-state races, see 3A O.S. § 205.7
§ 133.30 PROSTITUTION PROHIBITED.
   (A)   As used in this section, PROSTITUTION means and includes the getting
or receiving of the body for sexual intercourse for hire, and includes the
giving or receiving of the body for indiscriminate sexual intercourse without
hire.
   (B)   It is unlawful:
      (1)   To engage in prostitution, lewdness, or assignation;
      (2)   To solicit, induce, entice, or procure another to commit an act of
lewdness, assignation, or prostitution; or
      (3)   To aid, abet, or participate in the doing of any of the acts herein
prohibited.
   (C)   No person shall in any way or manner whatever keep, harbor, or house
any prostitute.
   (D)   No person shall entice, or attempt to entice, any female into a house
of prostitution, or have illicit sexual intercourse with any female under 18
years of age.
   (E)   No person shall keep or maintain a house of prostitution or house of
assignation.
   (F)   No person shall lease, let, or furnish any building, room, tent, or
structure of any kind, or any conveyance used or to be used as a place of
prostitution or assignation within the town, or knowingly permit the same to be
so used.
   (G)   No person shall knowingly accept, receive, levy, or appropriate any
money or other thing of value without consideration from a prostitute or from
the proceeds of any women engaged in prostitution.
   (H)   No person shall offer, or offer to secure, another for the purpose of
prostitution, or for any other lewd or indecent act.
   (I)   No person shall direct, take, or transport, or offer or agree to take
or transport, or aid or assist in transporting, any person to any house, place,
building, or other structure, vehicle, trailer, or other conveyance, or to any
other person with knowledge or having reasonable cause to believe that the
purpose of such directing, taking, or transporting is prostitution, lewdness,
or assignation.
   (J)   It is unlawful for a person to be present in a public place in a
manner and under circumstances manifesting the purpose of inducing, enticing,
soliciting, or procuring another to commit an act of prostitution. Among the
circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such a purpose is
manifested are: That such person is a known prostitute or procurer; that such
person repeatedly beckons to, stops, or attempts to stop or engage passersby in
conversation, or repeatedly stops or attempts to stop motor vehicle operators
by hailing, waving of arms, or any other bodily gesture. No arrest shall be
made for a violation of this division (J) unless the arresting officer first
affords such person an opportunity to explain such conduct, and no one shall be
convicted of violating this division (J) if it appears at trial that the
explanation given was true and disclosed a lawful purpose.
   (K)   For the purpose of this section, a KNOWN PROSTITUTE OR PROCURER is a
person who, within one year prior to the date of the suspected violation of
this section has, within the knowledge of the arresting officer, been convicted
of a violation of this section or has been convicted of violating any statute
or ordinance of any jurisdiction which makes prostitution or soliciting for the
purpose of prostitution unlawful.
(Prior Code, § 10-513) Penalty, see §
133.99
Statutory reference:
   Definitions, see 21 O.S. § 1030
   Engaging in prostitution, and the like; soliciting or procuring; residing or
being in place for prohibited purpose; aiding, abetting, or participating;
child prostitution, see 21 O.S. § 1029
   Offense; punishment; fines, see 21 O.S. § 1081
§ 133.31 OFFENSES NEAR SCHOOL.
   No person shall engage in any of the conduct or acts hereinafter set forth
around, in, or near any school or school grounds, or streets and alleys
adjacent to any school:
   (A)   Any conduct that would disturb the orderly conduct of the school;
   (B)   Annoying or molesting any student or employee of the school;
   (C)   Lewd or wanton conduct in, near, or around any of the schools or
school grounds, or streets and alleys adjacent to the schools;
   (D)   Moving or parking any vehicle in the vicinity of any school for the
purpose of annoying or molesting any student or employee of the school; or
   (E)   Any other act or conduct calculated to, or likely to, annoy or molest
any student or employee of such school.
(Prior Code, § 10-514) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.32 SLEEPING IN PLACES, PROPERTY.
   It is unlawful for any person, without lawful reason, between the hours of
12:00 a.m. and sunrise, to sleep on any street, in any other public place, or
on any property of another without the expressed or tacit consent of the owner
or person in charge of such place.
(Prior Code, § 10-515) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.33 CONTRIBUTING TO DELINQUENCY OF MINORS.
   (A)   ANY PERSON, as used in this section, means any human being, without
regard to the legal or natural relationship to a minor, as well as legal or
corporate entities. MINOR means any person under the age of 18 years.
   (B)   Any person who shall knowingly or willfully cause, aid, abet, or
encourage a minor to be, to remain, or to become a delinquent child, as defined
by state law, shall be guilty of an offense.
(Prior Code, § 10-516)
Statutory reference:
   Causing, aiding, abetting, or encouraging a minor to be delinquent or
runaway child, to commit a felony, or to become involved with a criminal street
gang, see 21 O.S. § 856
§ 133.34 TOBACCO TO MINORS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It is unlawful and an offense for any person to sell, barter, give, or
otherwise furnish cigarettes, cigars, or tobacco in any form to a minor, or to
permit such minor to frequent any premises owned, held, or managed by him or
her for the purpose of using or procuring cigarettes, cigars, or tobacco in any
form.
(Prior Code, § 10-517)
   (B)   (1)   It is unlawful for a person who is under 21 years of age to
purchase, receive, or have in his or her possession a tobacco product, or vapor
product, or to present, or offer, to any person any purported proof of age
which is false or fraudulent, for the purpose of purchasing or receiving any
tobacco product or vapor product. It shall not be unlawful for any employee
under 21 years of age to handle tobacco products or vapor products when
required in the performance of the employee’s duties.
      (2)   Pursuant to 10A O.S. § 2-8-224(C), the Alcoholic Beverage Laws
Enforcement (ABLE) Commission is responsible for establishing rules to provide
for notification to a parent or guardian of any minor cited for a violation of
this division (B).
      (3)   Pursuant to 10A O.S. § 2-8-224(D), this division (B) is enacted by
the Board of Trustees of the town and hereby authorizes the officers of the
Town Police Department to enforce this division (B) prohibiting and penalizing
conduct under the provisions of this division (B), said provisions of this
division (B) being the same as provided under 10A O.S. § 2-8-224, and the
enforcement provisions under this division (B) shall not be more stringent than
those provided under 10A O.S. § 2-8-224.
      (4)   For the purposes of this division (B), the term vapor products
shall have the same meaning as provided in the Prevention of Youth Access to
Tobacco Act, 63 O.S. §§ 1-229.11 et seq.
(Ord. 10-518, passed 10-23-2019) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no
specific penalty is prescribed, shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Any person found to be in violation of §
133.21(A) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor which is punishable pursuant to 11
O.S. § 27-119.
      (2)   Any person found to be in violation of §
133.21(B) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor which is punishable pursuant to 63
O.S. § 420.
      (3)   Any person found to be in violation of §
133.21(C) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor which is punishable pursuant to 11
O.S. § 27-119.
      (4)   Any person found to be in violation of §
133.21(D) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor which is punishable pursuant to 11
O.S. § 27-119.
      (5)   Any person found to be in violation of §
133.21(E) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor which is punishable pursuant to 11
O.S. § 27-119.
   (C)   (1)   When a person violates §
133.34(B)(1), the Municipal Court of the town shall impose an administrative
fine:
         (a)   Not to exceed $ 100 for a first offense; and
         (b)   Not to exceed $200 for a second or subsequent offense within a
one-year period following the first offense.
      (2)   Upon failure of the individual to pay the administrative fine
within 90 days of the day of the fine, the Municipal Court shall notify the
State Department of Public Safety, and pursuant to 10A O.S. § 2-8-224(B) the
Department of Public Safety shall suspend or not issue a driver’s license to
the individual until proof of payment has been furnished to the Department of
Public Safety.
(Ord. 10-502, passed 4-23-2019; Ord. 10-518, passed 10-23-2019)
CHAPTER 134: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC AUTHORITY
Section
General Provisions
   
134.01   Assaulting police officer
   
134.02   Resisting police officer
   
134.03   Citizens’ duty to assist
   
134.04   Obedience to orders of police, firefighters
   
134.05   Eluding police officer by motor vehicle
   
134.06   Use of siren, whistle
   
134.07   Impersonating police officer, town officer
   
134.08   False statements, reports, complaints
   
134.09   Removal of barricades
   
134.10   Resisting public officials
   
134.11   Duties of the public at fires, emergencies
   
134.12   Tampering with signs, equipment
Persons in Confinement
   
134.25   Escaping custody
   
134.26   Conveying instruments to assist escape
   
134.27   Assisting prisoner to escape
   
134.28   Delivery of articles to persons in confinement
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 134.01 ASSAULTING POLICE OFFICER.
   No person shall knowingly commit any assault, battery, or assault and batter
any town official or police officer or firefighter while in the performance of
their duties.
(Prior Code, § 10-605) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Aggravated assault and battery upon peace officer, see 21 O.S. § 650
   Assault, battery, or assault and battery upon police officer or other peace
officer; penalties, see 21 O.S. § 649
§ 134.02 RESISTING POLICE OFFICER.
   (A)   It is unlawful to resist, oppose, or assault, prevent, fail to
cooperate with, or in any way interfere with, a police officer or any person
duly authorized to act as such, while the officer or person is discharging, or
attempting to discharge, his or her official duties within the limits of the
town.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to warn or signal another so as to
assist such other person to flee, escape, or evade an officer seeking to make
an arrest, or for any person to bar or lock any door or barrier in the face of,
or in front of, an approaching officer.
   (C)   Resisting an officer is the intentional opposition or resistance to,
or obstruction of, an individual acting in his or her official capacity, and
authorized by law to make a lawful arrest or seizure of property, or to serve
any lawful process or court order, when the offender knows, or has reason to
know, that the person arresting, seizing property, or serving process is acting
in his or her official capacity.
   (D)   The words OBSTRUCTION OF shall, in addition to their common meaning,
include:
      (1)   Flight by one sought to be arrested before the arresting officer
can restrain him or her, and after notice is given that he or she is under
arrest;
      (2)   Any violence toward, or any resistance or opposition to, the
arresting officer after the arrested party is actually placed under arrest, and
before he or she is under arrest; and
      (3)   Refusals by the arrested party to give his or her name and make his
or her identity known to the arresting officer.
(Prior Code, § 10-606) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 134.03 CITIZENS’ DUTY TO ASSIST.
   It is the duty of all persons in the town when called upon by any police
officer to promptly aid and assist him or her in the execution of his or her
duties.
(Prior Code, § 10-607)
§ 134.04 OBEDIENCE TO ORDERS OF POLICE, FIREFIGHTERS.
   No person shall fail to heed a reasonable order of a police officer or
firefighter while such officer is in the discharge of an official duty in
maintaining the public safety or welfare.
(Prior Code, § 10-608) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 134.05 ELUDING POLICE OFFICER BY MOTOR VEHICLE.
   No operator of a motor vehicle who has received a visual or audible signal,
a red light, or a siren from a police officer driving a motor vehicle, showing
the same to be an official police, Sheriff, or highway patrol car directing the
operator to bring his or her vehicle to a stop, shall willfully increase his or
her speed, or extinguish his or her lights to elude, or attempt to elude, such
police officer, or attempt in any other manner to elude the police officer.
(Prior Code, § 10-609) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 134.06 USE OF SIREN, WHISTLE.
   (A)   No person shall use any police whistle or any other instrument used by
a police officer to give signals to each other, or imitate any signal given by
one police officer to another, or any special signal used by police officers,
for the purpose of improperly or causelessly attracting the attention of the
police.
   (B)   No person, except members of the Police Department, Fire Department,
or ambulance services, shall ring, use, or otherwise sound any gong, siren,
whistle, or any other device for making similar noise.
(Prior Code, § 10-610) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 134.07 IMPERSONATING POLICE OFFICER, TOWN OFFICER.
   (A)   No person, other than police officers of the town, shall wear or carry
the uniform, apparel, badge, identification card, or any other insignia of
office like or similar to, or a colorable imitation of, that adopted and worn,
or carried, by the police officers of the town.
   (B)   No person shall do or attempt any act to impersonate a police officer.
   (C)   It is unlawful to falsely impersonate any officer or employee of the
town, or falsely represent himself or herself to be an officer or employee of
the town, by any kind of representation, pretense, insignia, sound, clothing,
or conduct, or exercise, or attempt to exercise, any of the duties, functions,
or powers of an officer or employee of the town without being authorized to do
so.
(Prior Code, § 10-611) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Falsely assuming to be a peace officer; private persons may make arrests,
see 21 O.S. § 264
   Falsely assuming to be an officer, see 21 O.S. § 263
   Penalties; definitions; certain defenses excluded, see 21 O.S. § 1533
§ 134.08 FALSE STATEMENTS, REPORTS, COMPLAINTS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly make or file, or cause to be made or filed,
a false or misleading report or misrepresentation, allegation, or complaint
with the Police Department, or any officer or employee of the town, or on any
official application or to commit perjury before any tribunal of the town.
   (B)   No person shall willfully and without probable cause make a false
report to any person of any crime, violation of the town’s ordinances, or
circumstances indicating the possibility of crime or violation having been
committed, including, but not limited to, the unlawful taking of personal
property, which report causes or encourages the exercise of police or other
official action or investigation.
(Prior Code, § 10-612) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 134.09 REMOVAL OF BARRICADES.
   It is unlawful for any person to turn in a false alarm of any nature, or in
any manner to deceive or attempt to deceive the Fire Department, Police
Department, or any other emergency personnel, or summon any officer or employee
thereof with reference to any fire alarm or reported fire, accident, or other
emergency or knowingly to cause the Fire Department or Police Department, or
its officers or employees, to make a useless or unnecessary run to any part of
the town or outside the town.
(Prior Code, § 10-613) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 134.10 RESISTING PUBLIC OFFICIALS.
   It is unlawful for any person, except by proper authority, to remove any
barricade or obstruction placed by authority of the town to keep traffic off
any pavement, street, curb, sidewalk, or other area.
(Prior Code, § 10-614) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 134.11 DUTIES OF THE PUBLIC AT FIRES, EMERGENCIES.
   It is unlawful for any person knowingly or willfully to:
   (A)   Resist, oppose, or obstruct the Chief of Police, any other police
officer, the municipal judge, or any other officer or employee of the town in
the discharge of his or her official duties;
   (B)   Obstruct, threaten, or otherwise intimidate or attempt to intimidate
any officer or employee from the discharge of his or her official duties; or
   (C)   Assault or beat, or revile, abuse, be disrespectful to, or use abusive
or indecent language toward or about any such officer or employee while such
officer or employee is in the discharge of his or her official duties.
(Prior Code, § 10-615) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 134.12 TAMPERING WITH SIGNS, EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   All persons at fires or other emergencies or accidents shall conduct
themselves in an orderly and lawful manner, and to assist in maintaining law
and order.
   (B)   No person at or near any fire or emergency shall conduct himself or
herself in a disorderly manner, or neglect or refuse to promptly obey any order
of the Fire Chief, or his or her assistants, relative to such fire; and no
person shall resist, obstruct, hinder, or abuse any officer of the Fire
Department or any firefighter in the proper discharge of his or her duty.
   (C)   Every police officer present at a fire shall keep back all persons who
are in the way or impeding the work of the Fire Department, and so far as
possible protect all property from loss or injury, and cooperate with and
assist the Fire Department in every way possible while at the fire. The Fire
Chief or an assistant Fire Chief, or any police officer, shall have the power
to designate persons to guard any goods.
   (D)   No person shall follow or block the way of any emergency vehicle
engaged in an emergency run, or knowingly interfere with officers at the
location of any fire or emergency.
(Prior Code, § 10-616) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Fires, refusing to aid at or interfering with others’ acts, see 21 O.S. §
1198
PERSONS IN CONFINEMENT
§ 134.25 ESCAPING CUSTODY.
   No person lawfully in custody or confined in the town jail, before or after
conviction for any violation of the ordinances of the town, or held in custody
going to the town jail, or working upon the streets or other public grounds of
the town, or in custody of any officer of the town, shall break, or attempt to
break, such town jail or custody, and escape, or attempt to escape, therefrom.
(Prior Code, § 10-601) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 134.26 CONVEYING INSTRUMENTS TO ASSIST ESCAPE.
   No person shall convey into the town jail any disguised instrument, or
anything proper or useful to facilitate the escape of any prisoner lawfully
committed to, or detained in, the town jail for any violation of the town
ordinances, for any criminal offense, or lawfully detained or imprisoned
therein, whether such escape is effected or attempted or not.
(Prior Code, § 10-602) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 134.27 ASSISTING PRISONER TO ESCAPE.
   No person shall in any way aid, remove, or assist any person to resist or
escape from custody of any police officer, or from any lawful confinement in
the town.
(Prior Code, § 10-603) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Assisting escape from officer, see 21 O.S. § 441
   Assisting prisoner to escape, see 21 O.S. § 437
   Prisoner defined, see 21 O.S. § 442
§ 134.28 DELIVERY OF ARTICLES TO PERSONS IN CONFINEMENT.
   No person shall deliver any article or thing to any person under arrest
without the consent of the officer having charge and custody of the prisoner.
(Prior Code, § 10-604) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 135: CURFEW FOR MINORS
Section
   
135.01   Curfew for minors
Cross-reference:
   Contributing to delinquency of minors, see §
133.33
   Tobacco to minors prohibited, see §
133.34
§ 135.01 CURFEW FOR MINORS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
      CUSTODIAN. Any person over the age of 21 years who is in loco parentis to
a minor.
      GUARDIAN. Any person other than a parent who has legal guardianship of a
minor.
      MINOR. Any person under the age of 18.
      PARENT. The natural or adoptive parent of a minor.
      PUBLIC PLACE. Any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, park, playground, or
place to which the general public has access and a right to resort for
business, entertainment, or other lawful purpose. A PUBLIC PLACE shall include,
but not be limited to, any store, shop, restaurant, tavern, bowling alley,
café, theater, drug store, pool room, shopping center, and any other place
devoted to amusement or entertainment of the general public. It shall also
include the front or immediate areas of the store.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any minor to remain, wander, stroll, or play in any
public place on foot or to cruise about without a set destination in any
vehicle in, about, or upon any public place in the town between the hours of
12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. on the days of Friday through Sunday; and between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. on the days of Monday through Thursday
unless:
      (1)   The minor is accompanied by a parent, guardian, custodian, or other
adult person having custody or control of such minor;
      (2)   The minor is on an emergency errand or specific business or
activity directed or permitted by his or her parent, guardian, or other adult
person having the care and custody of the minor; or
      (3)   Where the presence of such minor is connected with or required by
some legitimate employment, trade, profession, or occupation.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation operating or
having charge of any public place to knowingly permit or suffer the presence of
minors between the hours of curfew designated in division (B) above.
   (D)   It is unlawful for any parent, guardian, custodian, or other adult
person having custody or control of any minor to suffer or permit or be
inefficient control to allow such person to be on any public place within the
town between the hours of curfew designated in division (B) above. The
provisions of this section do not apply if:
      (1)   The minor is accompanied by a parent, guardian, custodian, or other
adult person having the care, custody, or control of the minor;
      (2)   The minor is on an emergency errand or specific business or
activity directed by his or her parent, guardian, custodian, or other adult
having the care and custody of the minor; or
      (3)   The parent, guardian, or other adult person herein has made a
missing person notification to the Police Department.
   (E)   The Board of Trustees may permit by resolution or motion procedures
for advance notice or registration with the town of special events or functions
sponsored by churches, schools, clubs, or other organizations which require
minors to be out at a later time. The Board of Trustees may also prescribe the
procedures for taking into custody minors found in violation of this section.
   (F)   A parent, guardian, or custodian, of such minor, may file a written
application directed to the Chief of Police of the town who may grant a special
exemption of enforcement of the curfew provided by this section being required
as to such minor, which exemption shall not exceed five consecutive days, or in
the alternative, two days of any week for a period not to exceed 30 days. All
requests shall be filed with the Town Clerk/Treasurer.
   (G)   The Chief of Police shall have the authority to grant or reject any
request for an exemption to enforcement of the curfew provided by this section
or may reduce the time limit of such exemption. However, any applicant for such
exemption, feeling aggrieved by the action of the Chief of Police, may file a
request for hearing before the judge of the municipal court of the town who
shall summarily hear same, and his or her judgment shall be final.
   (H)   Any law enforcement officer who shall witness a violation of this
section may take such offender into his or her custody to be prosecuted for
such violation, or may place the minor in the custody of his or her parents, if
feasible, or some responsible person. After signing a promise to appear (a
legal agreement) the officer shall contact the county youth services and bring
said minor for an intake interview with the required state employee.
(Prior Code, § 10-301) Penalty, see §
10.99
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
      
151.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
152.   TREES
      
153.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
Section
General Provisions
   
150.001   Mobile homes; permit
   
150.002   Fire limits defined
   
150.003   Moving buildings
   
150.004   Street numbers of buildings
Building Code Regulations
   
150.015   Building code adopted
   
150.016   Additions, changes
Plumbing Code Regulations
   
150.030   Plumbing code adopted
   
150.031   Additions, changes, insertions
   
150.032   Plumber’s license
Electric Code Regulations
   
150.045   Electric code adopted
   
150.046   Electricians; registration, fees
Fuel Gas Code Regulations
   
150.060   Fuel gas code adopted
   
150.061   License
Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code Regulations
   
150.075   Liquefied petroleum gas code adopted
Housing Maintenance Code Regulations
   
150.090   Housing maintenance code adopted
Mechanical Code Regulations
   
150.105   Mechanical code adopted
   
150.106   Additions, changes, insertions
   
150.107   License
Fire Code Regulations
   
150.120   Fire code adopted
   
150.121   Fire Department to enforce code
   
150.122   Storage of flammable liquids
   
150.123   Storage of liquefied petroleum gases
   
150.124   Storage of explosives, blasting agents
   
150.125   Modifications
   
150.126   New materials, processes, occupancies; permits
   
150.127   Transportation of inflammable liquids
   
150.128   Appeals
   
150.129   Violations
 
   
150.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.001 MOBILE HOMES; PERMIT.
   (A)   A permit must be obtained by the mobile home owner for placing a
mobile home at, or upon, any location inside the town by making application to
the Town Clerk/Treasurer of the town for such permit.
   (B)   No permit shall be issued unless the following provisions are met:
      (1)   Every mobile home in the town shall be skirted or enclosed from the
floor to the ground so that the area under such mobile home cannot be used for
the occupancy of animals. Skirting material shall be of a durable, waterproof,
and fire resistant nature;
      (2)   Every mobile home within the limits of the town shall have anchors
of sufficient quantity and strength to resist wind velocity of 90 mph imposed
on the structure; and
      (3)   Certain mobile homes of recent manufacture have built-in tie downs
as set forth in the regulations of the Department of Housing and Urban
Development. Any mobile home having such tie downs which meet Department of
Housing and Urban Development regulations shall be considered to meet the
requirements.
(Prior Code, § 5-106)
§ 150.002 FIRE LIMITS DEFINED.
   The boundaries of the fire limits of the town shall be as established by the
town board.
(Prior Code, § 5-104)
§ 150.003 MOVING BUILDINGS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to move any house or building in, along,
across, or over any street or alley in the town limits without first having
obtained a permit form the Board of Trustees of the town.
   (B)   The Board of Trustees shall issue the permit upon approval off the
proposed move and proper application of the person for a fee to be set by
motion or resolution. The permits are good for a five-day period from date of
issue.
   (C)   Any person moving such house or building shall plank all street
crossing and sidewalks to prevent damage to the streets and sidewalks, or
protect them as required by the town.
(Prior Code, § 5-701) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.004 STREET NUMBERS OF BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Each building and/or house within the corporate town limits to which a
street number has been assigned shall have such number displayed in a position
easily observed and readable from the public right-of-way.
   (B)   All numbers shall be at least three inches high and one-half inch
wide.
(Ord. 5-105, passed 12-8-2003)
BUILDING CODE REGULATIONS
§ 150.015 BUILDING CODE ADOPTED.
   The BOCA National Building Code, the latest edition thereof, as published by
the Building Officials and Code Administrators, International, Inc. is hereby
adopted as the building code of the town for the control of building and
structures herein provided. Each and all regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions, and terms of the building code are referred to, adopted,
incorporated, and made a part hereof as is fully set out in this code with the
additions, insertions, deletions, and changes, if any, prescribed in this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5-101)
Statutory reference:
   Publication of certain codes and ordinances by title and summary of
contents, see 11 O.S. § 14-107
   Uniform force and effect; authority of cities, towns, and counties, see 74
O.S. § 324.8
§ 150.016 ADDITIONS, CHANGES.
   The following sections of the town’s building code are hereby revised:
   (A)   Insert “Town of Bokchito;”
   (B)   Insert that applicable fees are set by the town by motion or
resolution; and
   (C)   Insert that offenses are punishable by fine and imprisonment as
provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 5-102)
PLUMBING CODE REGULATIONS
§ 150.030 PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED.
   The BOCA National Plumbing Code, the latest version thereof, and any
revisions or amendments thereto, as published by the R. Dodge Woodson, is
hereby adopted as the plumbing code of the town for the control of buildings
and structures as therein provided. Each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions, and terms of the plumbing code are hereby
referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this code,
with additions, insertions, and changes, if any, prescribed in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5-201)
§ 150.031 ADDITIONS, CHANGES, INSERTIONS.
   The following sections are hereby revised as follows:
   (A)   Insert the “Town of Bokchito;”
   (B)   Insert that applicable fees are as set by the town by motion or
resolution; and
   (C)   Insert that offenses are punishable as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 5-202)
§ 150.032 PLUMBER’S LICENSE.
   (A)   No person shall practice or engage in the business, trade, or
occupation of a plumbing contractor, a journeyman plumber, or a plumber’s
apprentice unless he or she is possesses a current and valid license as such
from the state.
   (B)   Bond and insurance requirements of plumbing contractors shall meet the
requirements established by state law.
(Prior Code, § 5-203) Penalty, see §
10.99
ELECTRIC CODE REGULATIONS
§ 150.045 ELECTRIC CODE ADOPTED.
   The National Electrical Code, the latest edition thereof, as approved by the
NFPA, for the installation of electrical wiring, devices, and equipment is
hereby adopted as the minimum standard for the installation of all electrical
wiring, devices, and equipment in the town, except as otherwise specifically
provided in this chapter. The National Electrical Code is hereby made a part of
this code as fully and to the same extent as if copied here in full provided
that the present or current issue of the National Electrical Code, and any
subsequent amendments thereto shall be considered as the National Electrical
Code, as that term is used herein.
(Prior Code, § 5-301)
§ 150.046 ELECTRICIANS; REGISTRATION, FEES.
   (A)   No person shall practice or engage in the business, trade, or
occupation of an electrical contractor, journeyman electrician, or
electrician’s apprentice unless he or she holds a current license obtained from
the state.
   (B)   Bond and insurance requirements of electrical contractors shall meet
the requirements established by state law.
(Prior Code, § 5-302) Penalty, see §
150.999
FUEL GAS CODE REGULATIONS
§ 150.060 FUEL GAS CODE ADOPTED.
   The National Fuel Gas Code, as issued by the National Fire Protection
Association, the latest edition thereof, is hereby adopted, incorporated, and
made a part hereof as if fully set out in this code, with the insertions,
deletions, and changes, if any, prescribed in this chapter. State licensed
plumbing and mechanical contractors and persons authorized to install gas
piping under state licensing laws are authorized to do so under this code.
(Prior Code, § 5-401)
§ 150.061 LICENSE.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of installing
gas piping or gas appliance without first obtaining a license. The license may
be obtained by persons holding plumbing contractor’s license issued by the
state.
   (B)   Bond and insurance shall be provided by the licensee in such amounts
as required by the state.
(Prior Code, § 5-402) Penalty, see §
10.99
LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS CODE REGULATIONS
§ 150.075 LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS.
   (A)   The National Fire Protection Association Pamphlet No. 59 entitled
Storage and Handling of Liquefied Petroleum Gases, also adopted by the State
Liquefied Petroleum Gas Board, is adopted and incorporated herein by reference,
and shall have full force and effect within this town.
   (B)   Any violation of these rules and regulations shall be deemed a
violation of the ordinances of the town, and shall be punished accordingly.
(Prior Code, § 5-501)
HOUSING MAINTENANCE CODE REGULATIONS
§ 150.090 HOUSING MAINTENANCE CODE ADOPTED.
   There is adopted and incorporated herein by reference a housing maintenance
code consisting of 23 pages and in booklet form heretofore approved by the Town
Board of Trustees. The code establishes general provision, definitions,
specific regulations, and standards for rooming, housing, administration, and
enforcement procedures, Board of Appeals, and methods of appeal and
interpretation.
(Prior Code, § 5-601)
MECHANICAL CODE REGULATIONS
§ 150.105 MECHANICAL CODE ADOPTED.
   (A)   The BOCA National Mechanical Code, the latest version thereof, as
published by the Building Officials and Code Administrators, International,
Inc. is hereby adopted as the mechanical code of the town for the control of
buildings and structures as therein provided.
   (B)   Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions,
and terms of the mechanical code are hereby referred to as adopted,
incorporated, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this code, with
the additions, deletions, and changes, if any, prescribed in this chapter.
   (C)   At least one copy of the code is kept on file in the town’s Utility
Department.
(Prior Code, § 5-801)
§ 150.106 ADDITIONS, CHANGES, INSERTIONS.
   The following sections are hereby revised as follows:
   (A)   Insert “Town of Bokchito;”
   (B)   Insert that applicable fees shall be set by the town by motion or
resolution; and
   (C)   Insert that offenses are punishable as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 5-802)
§ 150.107 LICENSE.
   (A)   No person shall practice or engage in the business, trade, or
occupation of a mechanical contractor, a mechanical journeyman, or a mechanical
apprentice unless he or she has a current and valid license issued by the
state.
   (B)   Bond and insurance requirements of mechanical contractors shall meet
the requirements established by state law.
(Prior Code, § 5-803) Penalty, see §
150.999
FIRE CODE REGULATIONS
§ 150.120 FIRE CODE ADOPTED.
   There is adopted by the Town Board of Trustees, for the purpose of
prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property
from fire or explosion, certain codes known as the International Fire Code
approved by the International Code Council Inc., the Fire Prevention Code,
recommended by the National Fire Protection Association, and the Life Safety
Code, recommended by the National Fire Protection Association, as may be
amended, save and except such portions as may be hereinafter deleted, modified,
or amended hereafter by this code. At least one copy of each code shall be kept
on file in the Fire Chief’s office. The International Fire Code, Fire
Prevention Code, and the Life Safety Code are adopted and incorporated as fully
as if set out at length herein; from the date on which this code shall take
effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the
town.
(Prior Code, § 13-101)
§ 150.121 FIRE DEPARTMENT TO ENFORCE CODE.
   (A)   The International Fire Code, Fire Prevention Code, and the Life Safety
Code shall be enforced by the Fire Department of the town under the supervision
of the Chief of the Fire Department. The terms BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION and
CHIEF OF THE BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION, wherever found in the codes, shall mean
the Fire Department and Chief of the Fire Department, respectively, of the
town. Whenever the word MUNICIPALITY is used, it means this town.
   (B)   The Chief of the Fire Department may detail such members of the Fire
Department as inspectors, as may from time to time be necessary.
(Prior Code, § 13-102)
§ 150.122 STORAGE OF FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS.
   (A)   The limits referred to in the Fire Prevention Code, in which storage
of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited, are
established as the fire limits for all commercial or nonresidential consumers,
but this provision shall not apply:
      (1)   To such tanks already in existence as of January 1, 1973; or
      (2)   Permits issued for liquefied petroleum gas.
   (B)   The limits referred to in the fire prevention code, in which new bulk
plants for flammable liquids are prohibited, are established as the town
limits, but this provision shall not apply to plants already in existence as of
January 1, 1973.
(Prior Code, § 13-103)
§ 150.123 STORAGE OF LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GASES.
   The limits referred to in the fire prevention code, in which bulk storage of
liquefied petroleum has been prohibited, are established as the town limits,
but this provision shall not apply to storage already in existence as of
January 1, 1973.
(Prior Code, § 13-104)
§ 150.124 STORAGE OF EXPLOSIVES, BLASTING AGENTS.
   The limits referred to in the fire prevention code, in which storage of
explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, are established as the town
limits.
(Prior Code, § 13-105)
§ 150.125 MODIFICATIONS.
   The Chief of the Fire Department, with the approval of the Town Board of
Trustees, shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the fire
prevention code and the life safety code upon application in writing by the
owner or lessee, or his or her duly authorized agent, when there are practical
difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided
that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured, and
substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification, when granted or
allowed, and the decision of the Fire Chief and Board thereon shall be entered
upon the records of the Board, and a signed copy shall be furnished to the
applicant.
(Prior Code, § 13-106)
§ 150.126 NEW MATERIALS, PROCESSES, OCCUPANCIES; PERMITS.
   The Chief of the Fire Department and the Town Board of Trustees shall act as
a committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an
opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes, or occupancies, which
shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in the code. The
Fire Chief shall post such list in a conspicuous place in his or her office,
and distribute copies thereof to interested persons.
(Prior Code, § 13-107)
§ 150.127 TRANSPORTATION OF INFLAMMABLE LIQUIDS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to deliver,
unload, or transfer at any point within the town any gasoline, kerosene, or
other inflammable or combustible substance in or from a tank, tank truck,
transport, or vehicle.
   (B)   However, such transporting, delivering, unloading, or transferring may
be done with and from a tank truck if the following safety precautions are
observed.
   (C)   The tank vehicle during unloading or loading must have the driver
thereof in attendance at the shut-off valve at all times during such operation:
      (1)   No person shall smoke, or be permitted to smoke, in the vicinity of
such vehicle during the unloading or transferring operations; and
      (2)   No unloading or transferring from any tank truck shall be made to
any storage tank within the fire limits unless such storage tank has above the
ground level a vent pipe of at least eight feet in height.
(Prior Code, § 13-108)
§ 150.128 APPEALS.
   Whenever the Chief of the Fire Department shall disapprove an application or
refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions
of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have
been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the
decision of the Chief of the Fire Department to the Town Board of Trustees
within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed.
(Prior Code, § 13-109)
§ 150.129 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of the fire prevention
code hereby adopted, or fails to comply therewith, who violates or fails to
comply with any order made thereunder, who builds in violation of any detailed
statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any
certificate or permit issued thereunder and from which no appeal has been
taken, or who fails to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the
Town Board of Trustees or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time
fixed therein, shall severally for every such violation and noncompliance
respectively be guilty of an offense, punishable pursuant to §
10.99. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the
violation or permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be required to
correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time. When not
otherwise specified, each ten days that prohibited conditions are maintained
shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   The application of division (A) above shall not be held to prevent the
enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
(Prior Code, § 13-110)
§ 150.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no
specific penalty is prescribed, shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   A person who violates a provision of §§
150.001,
150.002,
150.015, and
150.016, or fails to comply therewith or with any of the requirements thereof,
or who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, or removes, or has erected,
constructed, altered, repaired, or removed a building or structure in violation
of a detailed statement or plan submitted and approved thereunder, or of a
permit or certificate issued thereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and
upon conviction shall be fined any sum as provided in §
10.99. Each day upon which a violation continues shall be deemed a separate
offense.
(Prior Code, § 5-103)
   (C)   A violation of §§
150.030 through
150.032 shall be deemed a misdemeanor, and shall be punishable as provided in §
10.99. Any person who violates or refuses to comply with any of the provisions
of §§
150.030 through
150.032 shall be punished as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 5-204)
   (D)   A violation of §§
150.045 and
150.046 shall be deemed a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine. Any
person, firm, or corporation who violates or refuses to comply with any of the
provisions of §§
150.045 and
150.046 shall be punished as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 5-303)
   (E)   Any person who shall do any act prohibited by §§
150.060 and
150.061, or fail or refuse to comply therewith or fail or refuse to obey a
lawful order of the inspector shall be punished by a fine as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 5-403)
   (F)   Any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate §
150.075, or any division or part of section thereof, is guilty of an offense,
and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 5-502)
   (G)   A violation of §§
150.105 through
150.107 shall be deemed a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as provided in §
10.99. Any person who violates or refuses to comply with any of the provisions
of §§
150.105 through
150.107 shall be punished as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 5-804)
Statutory reference:
   Administrative fines; injunctions, see 59 O.S. § 1010.1
   Appeals from decisions of Board, see 59 O.S. § 1011
   Application and construction; electrical code, see 59 O.S. § 1692
   Applications, see 59 O.S. § 1007
   Change of address; notice; electrical code, see 59 O.S. § 1691
   Change of business address, see 59 O.S. § 1014
   Citation, see 59 O.S. § 1001
   Definitions; electrical code, see 59 O.S. § 1682
   Definitions; mechanical code, see 59 O.S. § 1850.2
   Definitions; plumbing code, see 59 O.S. § 1003
   Duration of licenses; expiration date; renewals, see 59 O.S. § 1009
   Electrical Hearing Board; investigations; revocation or suspension of
license; jurisdiction of political subdivisions, see 59 O.S. § 1689
   Electrical Revolving Fund, see 59 O.S. § 1694
   Examinations; plumbing code, see 59 O.S. § 1005
   Examinations for licenses; electrical code, see 59 O.S. § 1684
   Fees paid to State Treasury; disposition, see 59 O.S. § 1018
   Inapplicability, see 59 O.S. § 1017
   Issuance of citations for certain work prohibited; plumbing code, see 59
O.S. § 1023.1
   Issuance of license; qualification; transferability and use; electrical
code, see 59 O.S. § 1685
   License required; violation; penalty; electrical code, see 59 O.S. § 1690
   Licenses; transferability, see 59 O.S. § 1006
   Local regulation by municipalities not prohibited, see 59 O.S. § 1020
   Mechanical Licensing Act, see 59 O.S. § 1850.1
   Municipal plumbing inspector; combining plumbing inspector and electrical
inspector, see 59 O.S. § 1016
   Municipal regulation of electrical work; electrical inspector; combined
electrical and plumbing inspector, see 59 O.S. § 1693
   Municipal supervision and inspection of electrical facilities, see 59 O.S. §
1696
   Municipal water and sewage systems; rules and regulations, see 59 O.S. §
1015
   Necessity for licences; penalty, see 59 O.S. § 1012
   Oklahoma State Committee of Plumbing Examiners; membership; tenure;
qualifications and duties; travel expenses, see 59 O.S. § 1004
   Oklahoma State Plumbing Installation Code Variance and Appeals Board, see 59
O.S. § 1021.1
   Plumber’s apprentice; certificate, see 59 O.S. § 1013
   Plumbing Hearing Board, see 59 O.S. § 1010
   Registration as electrical apprentice; qualifications; applications; fees;
electrical code, see 59 O.S. § 1686
   Rules; electrical code, see 59 O.S. § 1681
   Rules; state bond, cash, or deposit in lieu of bond, see 59 O.S. § 1002
   Short title; electrical code, see 59 O.S. § 1680
   Short title; petroleum gas code, see 52 O.S. § 420.1
   Temporary licenses, see 59 O.S. § 1006.1
   Term of license and apprentice registration certificates; renewal or re-
registration; late renewal penalty; electrical code, see 59 O.S. § 1688
   Violations and penalties, see 59 O.S. § 1019
   Violations; fines; injunctions; electrical code, see 59 O.S. § 1695
   Voluntary review of project plans and specifications; electrical code, see
59 O.S. § 1681.1
   Voluntary review of project plans and specifications; plumbing code, see 59
O.S. § 1002.1
CHAPTER 151: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
General Provisions
   
151.01   No structures on, over streets, sidewalks
   
151.02   Obstructions
   
151.03   Interference with drainage
   
151.04   Duty to keep sidewalk, gutter clean
   
151.05   Special events
   
151.06   Barriers, signals for construction work
   
151.07   Unlawful to deposit trash upon streets, sidewalks
   
151.08   Playing prohibited
   
151.09   Erecting newspaper boxes
Streets and Sidewalks
   
151.20   Drainage of fluid; placement of oil, grease into storm sewers,
drainage ways
   
151.21   Water from filling stations, other businesses
   
151.22   Allowing construction material to spill on public ways
   
151.23   Maintenance of driveways at intersections
   
151.24   Interfering with streets, free flow of traffic
   
151.25   Signs obstructing view in right-of-way
Excavations and Cuts
   
151.40   Excavations and cuts
   
151.41   Permits
   
151.42   Cutting of pavement
   
151.43   Removal of street, sidewalk
   
151.44   Backfilling of trenches
   
151.45   Notification of completion of work
   
151.46   Inspection
 
   
151.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.01 NO STRUCTURES ON, OVER STREETS, SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to erect or construct, or cause to be
erected or constructed, any cellar or basement way, stairway, door, awning
post, canopy, or any other kind of structure projecting into, upon, or over,
and adjoining any street or sidewalk within the town, except that the Building
Official may, in his or her discretion, authorize the same to be done, where
the public health, safety, and necessity demand by granting a permit therefor.
   (B)   Upon the granting of a permit under this section, conditions as to the
erection of the structure through, upon, or over any street or sidewalk may be
fixed by the town, and a contract shall be entered into as to the maintenance
of the structure and as indemnifying agreement secured, indemnifying and saving
the town harmless from any loss costs or damage by reason of the structure
projecting into, upon, or over, and adjoining any street or sidewalk within the
fire limits of the town.
(Prior Code, § 14-101) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.02 OBSTRUCTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place upon, or permit to be
placed upon, the sidewalks, parkways, streets, or alleys of the town any goods,
wares, articles of merchandise, or any other obstruction, and leave the same
thereon.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use or obstruct the sidewalks
of the town in any manner so as to interfere unduly with pedestrian traffic
thereon, or to use or obstruct the streets or alleys of the town in any manner
so as to interfere unduly with lawful traffic and parking thereon.
   (C)   The Town Board of Trustees may suspend the operation of divisions (A)
and (B) above as to the obstruction of designated streets and alleys upon such
terms and conditions as it deems desirable while providing for adequate
emergency traffic. By way of example and not by way of limitation, such
obstruction and use of the streets include homecoming parades, Christmas
parades, patriotic events, and similar events.
(Prior Code, § 14-102) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.03 INTERFERENCE WITH DRAINAGE.
   It is unlawful for any person to obstruct any street, sidewalk, or alley, by
placing any approach driveway or other obstruction or substance whatever that
will obstruct or prevent the natural flow of water into the storm sewers or
drains, or dam the storm sewers or drains so as to back any water upon the
streets, alleys, sidewalks, or gutter.
(Prior Code, § 14-103) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.04 DUTY TO KEEP SIDEWALK, GUTTER CLEAN.
   It is the duty of the occupant of any lot or piece of ground abutting upon
any street where there is a sidewalk or gutter on the street to keep such
sidewalk or gutter clean, and to remove therefrom all materials, snow or ice,
trash, weeds, refuse, rubbish, or hazards of any kind, and to keep the sidewalk
and gutter in good repair. If there is no such occupant of any such lot other
than the owner, it is the duty of the owner to provide such maintenance and to
keep the sidewalk and gutter in good repair.
(Prior Code, § 14-104) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.05 SPECIAL EVENTS.
   Without the express written permission of the Town Board of Trustees, it
shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with normal and appropriate
traffic on either the paved portion of the streets or the adjacent side walks
of the town, which streets are designated highways, arterials, collectors,
alleys, or minor streets.
(Prior Code, § 14-105)
§ 151.06 BARRIERS, SIGNALS FOR CONSTRUCTION WORK.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be the duty of any person doing any type of
construction or excavating work upon or adjacent to any street, alley,
sidewalk, or public ground in the town, to maintain substantial guardrails and
barriers around such work or excavation in such manner as to protect
pedestrians, animals, and vehicles using such street, alley, or walk. Similar
barriers shall be placed around any materials or equipment, contact with which
would be dangerous to pedestrians, animals, or vehicles.
      (2)   If such obstruction is more than ten feet long, one danger sign
shall be placed at each end and additional ones placed along such obstruction
not more than 20 feet apart. It is an offense for any person to fail to provide
such safeguards, and each day of such omission shall constitute a separate
offense.
   (B)   For the protection of any pavement or sidewalk while they are in the
course of construction and before they are opened for traffic; and it shall be
unlawful for any person to enter into or upon such street, pavement, or
sidewalk, or to permit any person or thing under his or her control to do so,
before such pavement, street, or sidewalk is opened for general traffic.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or destroy any barrier
or danger signal placed or erected under the provisions of this section, unless
such act is done at the direction of the person in charge of such work or the
Town Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 14-106) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.07 UNLAWFUL TO DEPOSIT TRASH UPON STREETS, SIDEWALKS.
   It is unlawful for any person to deposit, throw, or sweep into or upon a
street, alley, parking, or sidewalk of the town any paper, rubbish, grass,
weeds, tree trimmings, dirt, trash, crates, boxes, or other refuse of any kind.
(Prior Code, § 14-107) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.08 PLAYING PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to play or engage in any sport, game, and
amusement or to play in, on, or across the main-traveled portion of any
sidewalk, street, avenue, or alley of the town, except as may be authorized by
ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 14-108) Penalty, see §
151.99
Cross-reference:
   Play streets authorized, see §
71.004
§ 151.09 ERECTING NEWSPAPER BOXES.
   It is unlawful for any person to erect or construct, or cause to be erected
or constructed, any type of box or container for the purpose of newspapers to
be placed inside along any street or sidewalk inside of the corporate town
limits.
(Ord. 14-112, passed 3-10-2003) Penalty, see §
151.99
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
§ 151.20 DRAINAGE OF FLUID; PLACEMENT OF OIL, GREASE INTO STORM SEWERS,
DRAINAGE WAYS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, whether directly or through an
agent, to cause or allow oil, grease, water, or any other fluid to flow across
or drain onto any sidewalk, parking lot, street, alley, or any other public
way. It shall be unlawful for any person to place oil or grease into any storm
sewer or other drainage way. Provided that water may be drained to that portion
of the streets and gutters which are designed for such purpose if this does not
interfere with normal traffic, and if the water is not contaminated with other
substance such as sewer waste or industrial waste. Provided further, that the
failure to prevent the flow of storm water is not prohibited by this section.
   (B)   No automobile or other vehicle shall be washed at any place within the
town where the water, dirt, mud, or other substances removed therefrom by, or
during, the washing thereof, shall drain into or upon any street or sidewalk of
the town.
   (C)   No vehicle shall track mud or debris from private property upon public
rights-of-way.
(Prior Code, § 14-109) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.21 WATER FROM FILLING STATIONS, OTHER BUSINESSES.
   It is unlawful for any owner or operator of a filling station or other place
of business, or any agent or employee thereof, to cause or allow water, grease,
or other fluid to flow or drain into, upon, over, or across any sidewalk,
parking, street, alley, or other public way.
(Prior Code, § 14-110) Penalty, see §
151.99
Statutory reference:
   Loads on vehicles, see 47 O.S. § 14-105
§ 151.22 ALLOWING CONSTRUCTION MATERIAL TO SPILL ON PUBLIC WAYS.
   No person shall place, spill, or allow the flow of concrete, or similar
construction materials on any public road, alley, highway, or sidewalk, except
as may be required for the construction or the maintenance of the public road,
street, highway, or sidewalk.
(Prior Code, § 14-111) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.23 MAINTENANCE OF DRIVEWAYS AT INTERSECTIONS.
   When real property adjoins a sidewalk, sidewalk area, or public and to which
property access is obtained through the use of a driveway of any nature, it is
the finding of the Town Board of Trustees that such driveways are the benefit
to the property owner and their, but are no directly beneficial to the general
public. Therefore, the owner or other person in charge of said real property
shall keep those portions of the driveway adjoining the street or adjoining the
sidewalk, or adjoining the sidewalk area in good condition and safe for the
anticipated pedestrian and vehicular use, and it shall be unlawful for such
owner or person in charge to fail to do so.
(Prior Code, § 14-112) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.24 INTERFERING WITH STREETS, FREE FLOW OF TRAFFIC.
   (A)   It is unlawful to:
      (1)   Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk, or any
other public place or building by hindering or impeding, or tending to hinder
or impede, the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic, or
pedestrians; or
      (2)   Commit in, or upon, any public street, public highway, public
sidewalk, or any other public place or building any act or thing which is an
obstruction or interference to the free and uninterrupted use of property, or
with any business lawfully conducted by anyone in, or upon, or facing or
fronting on any such public street, public highway, public sidewalk, or any
other public place or building, all of which prevents the free and
uninterrupted ingress, egress, and regress, therein, thereon, and thereto.
   (B)   When any person causes or commits any of the conditions enumerated in
division (A)(1) above, a police officer or any law enforcement officer shall
order that person to stop causing or committing such conditions, and to move on
or disburse, or to remove any obstructions. Any person who fails or refuses to
obey such orders shall be guilty of a violation of this section.
(Prior Code, § 14-113) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.25 SIGNS OBSTRUCTING VIEW IN RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to erect or construct, or cause to be
erected or constructed, any cellar or basement way, stairway, door, awning
post, canopy, or any other kind of structure projecting into, upon, or over,
and adjoining any street or sidewalk within the town, except that the Building
Official may, in his or her discretion, authorize the same to be done, where
the public health, safety, and necessity demand, by granting a permit therefor.
   (B)   Upon the granting of a permit under this section, conditions as to the
erection of the structure through, upon, or over any street or sidewalk may be
fixed by the town, and a contract shall be entered into as to the maintenance
of the structure and as indemnifying agreement secured, indemnifying and saving
the town harmless from any loss, costs, or damage by reason of the structure
projecting into, upon, or over, and adjoining any street or sidewalk within the
fire limits of the town.
(Prior Code, § 14-114) Penalty, see §
151.99
EXCAVATIONS AND CUTS
§ 151.40 EXCAVATIONS AND CUTS.
   It is unlawful for any person to cut, alter, mutilate, or change in any
manner for any purpose any paved or traveled portion of any right-of-way,
easement, street, or alley, or any curb, gutter, catch basin, or any other
appurtenance of any street or alley or any sidewalk in the town without first
securing a permit from the town to make such cut, alteration, or change;
provided this requirement shall not apply to any person repairing or replacing
a sidewalk under a sidewalk permit, provided such person changes only the
sidewalk.
(Prior Code, § 14-301) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.41 PERMITS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, alter, mutilate, or change
in any manner for any purpose any paved or traveled portion of any right-of-
way, easement, street, or alley, or any curb, gutter, catch basin, or any other
appurtenance of any street or alley, unless such person shall apply to the Town
Clerk/Treasurer for a permit therefor, and pay to the Town Clerk/Treasurer the
permit fee required as set by the Town Board of Trustees by motion or
resolution.
   (B)   Every person who desires to lay pipes or lines for the purpose of
making and preparing any connections to utilities which will require the
cutting of the pavement to make such connections shall make application for,
and procure from the town, a written permit to cut such pavement or curb, and
make such installations for the proposed purpose or otherwise. No person shall
have any right or authority to construct or install any pipes or lines, or
otherwise cut the pavement or curbs without first having secured such permit.
   (C)   Upon the payment of the fee and after approval by the Utility
Director, the town shall issue to such applicant a permit in accordance with
the application therefor.
(Prior Code, § 14-302) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.42 CUTTING OF PAVEMENT.
   Before removing pavement for the installation or repair of subsurface
utilities, all sides of the proposed cut shall be sawed with an approved
concrete saw to a depth as required by the town. Where it is necessary to cut
paving for emergency repairs, paving may be removed without sawing, provided
any damaged sections of paving are removed prior to making of all paving cut
shall be done by the applicant at his or her cost, but under the direct
supervision of the town.
(Prior Code, § 14-303)
§ 151.43 REMOVAL OF STREET, SIDEWALK.
   It is unlawful for any person to dig, remove, or carry away any earth, sand,
rock, gravel, or sod, or cut out any trees or bush from any street, alley,
land, or other public thoroughfare, to remove any porting of any sidewalk or
any support from any sidewalk or crossing, or to loosen or remove any plank,
stringer, or other support from any culvert or bridge without permission of the
town.
(Prior Code, § 14-304) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.44 BACKFILLING OF TRENCHES.
   All trenches excavated across or along any paved street of an alley, and
across any traveled portion of any unpaved street or alley, shall be backfilled
and compacted.
(Prior Code, § 14-305)
§ 151.45 NOTIFICATION OF COMPLETION OF WORK.
   All permits, when they have completed the work for which such cut has been
made, shall notify the town of the completion of such work in order that the
same may be inspected and approved.
(Prior Code, § 14-306)
§ 151.46 INSPECTION.
   The removing of such curbing, the construction of the driveway, and all
other parts of the work in connection therewith shall be subject to the
inspection and approval of the town.
(Prior Code, § 14-307)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no
specific penalty is prescribed, shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of §§
151.40 through
151.46 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction, shall be punished
as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 14-308)
CHAPTER 152: TREES
Section
   
152.01   Unlawful to injure trees, shrubbery
   
152.02   Public streets and trees
   
152.03   Trees and shrubbery to be trimmed
   
152.04   Removal of trees, shrubs obstructing view
   
152.05   Removal of trees, shrubs, obstructing view of traffic
 
   
152.99   Penalty
§ 152.01 UNLAWFUL TO INJURE TREES, SHRUBBERY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to injure any tree or shrubbery growing
on a street or alley in the town. This section shall not prohibit the lawful
and proper care and removal of such trees and, provided, that such removal
shall be done only with the permission of the Utility Director.
(Prior Code, § 14-201) Penalty, see §
152.99
Statutory reference:
   Works of art or ornamental improvements; injuring, see 21 O.S. § 1784
§ 152.02 PUBLIC STREETS AND TREES.
   It is unlawful for any person to:
   (A)   Willfully or wantonly cut, deface, or in any way injure any tree or
sapling standing or growing in any of the streets, alleys, or public place
within the town;
   (B)   Attach any guy wires, telephone, telegraph, or electric wire, or any
wire to any live tree;
   (C)   Dig any hole, ditch, or trench in any public street, road, or alley,
or any other public premises or ground within, belonging to, or under the
supervision or control of the town;
   (D)   Take or remove any dirt, earth, or any substance from any street,
road, alley, or other public place in the town; or to cut, break, or otherwise
injure any pavement, curb, or gutter therein;
   (E)   Connect any driveway to any street or other public place without first
securing permission from the town so to do; or
   (F)   Any such digging, removing, or driveway connection shall be done under
the supervision of the town.
(Prior Code, § 14-202) Penalty, see §
152.99
Statutory reference:
   Works of art or ornamental improvements; injuring, see 21 O.S. § 1784
§ 152.03 TREES AND SHRUBBERY TO BE TRIMMED.
   The owner of any premises abutting on any street of the town shall trim all
trees and shrubbery growing in the parkway, between the sidewalks and the
roadway, of any such street, and all trees and shrubbery growing on any part of
the roadway, of any such street, and all trees and shrubbery growing on any
part of the premises adjacent to the sidewalks, or any street or alley in such
manner that the boughs or limbs thereof shall not obstruct free and convenient
passage, view, and travel along the streets, sidewalks, and alleys. When such
premises are occupied by some person other than the owner, such occupant shall
trim the trees and shrubbery in the same manner as required of the owner in
this section. The trees and shrubbery shall be trimmed so that the lowest
branches or foliage shall not be lower than 14 feet above the roadway of a
street or alley, nor lower than eight feet above the sidewalk.
(Prior Code, § 14-203)
§ 152.04 REMOVAL OF TREES, SHRUBS OBSTRUCTING VIEW.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to otherwise place any object, vehicle,
or structure on or so near to any street right-of-way such that it constitutes
a traffic or safety hazard for either pedestrians or vehicular traffic
traveling on, or onto, the street.
   (B)   It is unlawful and an offense for any person to erect, construct,
locate, maintain, or allow to remain on his or her property any sign, fence, or
structure within an area known as the SIGHT TRIANGLE, which is defined as that
area formed by measuring from the point of intersection of two lot lines a
distance of 25 feet along each lot line, and connecting the points so
established to create a triangle with sides abutting the street right-of-way.
Any sign, fence, or structure placed or located in the area is hereby
determined to be a public nuisance, and the town is authorized to cause the
structure, fence, or sign to be removed.
(Prior Code, § 14-204) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.05 REMOVAL OF TREES, SHRUBS, OBSTRUCTING VIEW OF TRAFFIC.
   (A)   The owner of every lot or parcel of land in the town upon which any
trees, shrubs, or plants are growing, or upon which any obstruction has been
placed, shall remove such trees, shrubs, plants, or obstruction, or parts
thereof, if they are so situated as to constitute a traffic hazard by
obstructing the view of any driver of any vehicle on the streets of the town to
the extent that the driver is unable to observe the approach of other vehicles
on streets and alleys and at intersections.
   (B)   The owner of any premises abutting on any street shall trim all trees
and shrubbery growing in the parking, between the sidewalks and the roadway, of
any such street, and all trees and shrubbery growing on any part of the
premises adjacent to the sidewalks or any street or alley in such manner that
the boughs or limbs thereof shall not obstruct free and convenient passage,
sight, and travel along the streets, sidewalks, and alleys. If premises are
occupied by some person other than the owner, such occupant shall trim the
trees and shrubbery in the same manner as herein before required of the owner.
Such trees and shrubbery shall be trimmed so that the lowest branches or
foliage shall not be lower than 14 feet above the roadway of a street or alley,
nor lower than eight feet above the sidewalk.
(Prior Code, § 14-205)
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of an
offense, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in §
10.99. Each day upon which a violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Prior Code, § 14-206)
   (B)   Any owner or occupant who fails, refuses, or neglects to trim trees
and shrubbery, as provided in §
152.03, after receiving five days’ notice from th Town Board of Trustees, or
their authorized representative, to do so is guilty of an offense against the
town. Every day that the owner or occupant fails, refuses, or neglects to trim
such trees or shrubbery, after the expiration of the five days’ notice, shall
be a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 14-203)
   (C)   Any owner or occupant who fails, refuses, or neglects to trim trees
and shrubbery, as provided in §
152.05, after receiving five days’ notice from the Town Clerk/Treasurer or his
or her designee to do so, is guilty of an offense against the town. In addition
to any fine or punishment as an offense, the town may act to abate the
nuisance. Every day that the owner or occupant fails, refuses, or neglects to
trim such trees or shrubbery after the expiration of the five days’ notice
shall be a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 14-205)
CHAPTER 153: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
   
153.01   Definitions
   
153.02   Statutory authorization
   
153.03   Findings of fact
   
153.04   Statement of purpose
   
153.05   Methods of reducing flood losses
Application; Compliance; Interpretations
   
153.20   Lands to which this chapter applies
   
153.21   Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard
   
153.22   Establishment of development
   
153.23   Compliance
   
153.24   Abrogation, greater restrictions
   
153.25   Interpretation
   
153.26   Warning, disclaimer, liability
Administration
   
153.40   Designation of Floodplain Administrator
   
153.41   Duties, responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator
   
153.42   Permit procedures
   
153.43   Variance procedures
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
   
153.55   General standards
   
153.56   Specific standards
   
153.57   Standards for subdivision proposals
   
153.58   Certification
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO Zone on a community’s flood
insurance rate map (FIRM) with a 1% chance or greater annual chance of flooding
to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does
not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow
may be evident. The flooding is characterized by pending or sheet flow.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. The land in the floodplain within a community
is subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The AREA
may be designated as Zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After
detailed rate making has been completed in preparation for publication of the
FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, VO, V1-30, VE,
or V.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
   CRITICAL FEATURE. An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood
protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire
system would be compromised.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change in improved and unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations.
   ELEVATED BUILDING. No basement building:
      (1)   Built, in the case of a building in Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO,
AH, B, C, X, and D, to have the top of the elevated floor, or in the case of a
building in Zones V-30, VE, or V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal
structure member of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means
of piling, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the floor of
the water; and
      (2)   Adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of
the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the
case of Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, D, ELEVATED BUILDING also
includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid the to facilitate the
unimpeded movement of floodwaters. In the case of ZonesV1-30, VE, or V,
ELEVATED BUILDING also includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of
ELEVATED BUILDING, even though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway
walls if the breakaway walls meet the standards of § 60.3(e)(5) of the National
Flood Insurance Program regulations, being 44 CFR § 60.3(e)(5).
   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION. For the purposes of determining rates, structures for
which the start of construction commenced before the effective date of the
FIRM, or before January 1, 1975, for FIRM’s effective before that date.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION may also be referred to as EXISTING STRUCTURES.
   EXPANSION OF MOBILE HOME PARK OR MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION. The preparation of
additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the mobile homes are to be affixed, including the installation of
utilities, either final site grading or pouring of concrete pads, or the
construction of streets.
   FLOOD OR FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundator of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM). An official map of a community on which
the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated the boundaries of the
flood, mudslide (for example, mudflow) related erosion areas having special
hazards have been designated as Zones A, M, and/or E.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report provided by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, the water surface
elevation of the base flood, as well as the flood hazard boundary floodway map.
   FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD PRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being inundated
by water from any source. (See definition of FLOODING.)
   FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM. The physical structural works for which funds have
been authorized, appropriated, and expended, and which have been constructed
specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas
within a community subject to a special flood hazard and the extent of the
depths of associated flooding. Such SYSTEM typically includes hurricane tidal
barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees, or dikes. These specialized flood modifying
works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
   FLOODWAY (REGULATORY FLOODWAY). The channel of a river or other watercourse,
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than a designated height.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term
includes only docking facilities and port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair
facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
   HABITABLE FLOOR. Any floor usable for the following purposes, which includes
working, sleeping, eating, cooking, or recreation, or a combination thereof. A
floor used for storage purposes only is not a HABITABLE FLOOR.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   LEVEE. A human-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed, and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control,
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
   LEVEE SYSTEM. A flood protection system, which consists of a levee, or
levees, and associated structures, such as closure, and drainage devices, which
are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area including
basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure unable solely for parking
or vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement area
is not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR; provided, that such enclosure is
not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-
elevation design requirement of § 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program
regulations, being 44 CFR § 60.3.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain
management purposes, the term MANUFACTURED HOME also includes park trailer,
travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than
180 consecutive days. For insurance purposes, the term MANUFACTURED HOME does
not include park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base
flood elevations shown on a community’s flood insurance rate map are
referenced.
   MOBILE HOME PARK OR MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION. A parcel or contiguous parcels
of land divided into two or more mobile home lots for rent or sale for which
the construction of facilities for servicing the lot on which the mobile home
is to be affixed, including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities,
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads, and the construction
of streets is completed before the original effective date of this chapter.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. For floodplain management purposes, structures for which
the state of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a
floodplain management regulation adopted by a community.
   NEW MOBILE HOME PARK OR MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION. A parcel or contiguous
parcels of land divided into two or more mobile home lots for rent or sale for
which the construction of facilities for servicing the lot on which the mobile
home is to be affixed, including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities,
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads, and the construction
of streets is completed on or after the original effective date of this
chapter.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. For other than new construction or substantial
improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act, being 16 U.S.C. §§ 3501
et seq., includes substantial improvement and means the date the building
permit was issues, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the
permit date. The ACTUAL START means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
PERMANENT CONSTRUCTION does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers, or
foundations, or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of an accessory building, such as garages or
sheds, not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals of exceeds 50% of the market value of the
structure either:
      (1)   Before the improvement or repair is started; or
      (2)   If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the
damage occurred. For the purpose of this definition, SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however,
include either:
         (a)   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with
existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
         (b)   Any alterations of a structure listed on the National Register
of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this
chapter when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A
VARIANCE, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise
prohibited by this chapter. For full requirements, see § 60.6 of the National
Flood Insurance Program regulations, being 44 CFR § 60.6.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR § 60.3 (b)(5), (c)(4), (c)
(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in VIOLATION until
such time as that documentation is provided.
   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION. The high, in relation to the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, where specified, of floods of
various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or reverie
areas.
(Prior Code, § 17-205)
Statutory reference:
   NFIP Regulations, definitions, see 44 CFR § 59.1
§ 153.02 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The legislature of the state has, in 82 O.S. § 1604, delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to
minimize flood losses. Therefore, the town does ordain as follows.
(Prior Code, § 17-201)
§ 153.03 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the town are subject to periodic inundation,
which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the
public health, safety, and general welfare.
   (B)   These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in floodplains, which cause an increase in flood heights and
velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazards areas by uses vulnerable to
floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated,
flood proofed, or otherwise protected from flood damage.
(Prior Code, § 17-202)
§ 153.04 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
   (A)   Protect human life and health;
   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (D)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone, and sewer lines, and streets and bridges
located in floodplains;
   (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood
blight areas; and
   (G)   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that the property is in a
flood area.
(Prior Code, § 17-203)
§ 153.05 METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES.
   In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following
methods:
   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety, or
property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or
velocities;
   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may
increase flood damage;
   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters, or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands.
(Prior Code, § 17-204)
APPLICATION; COMPLIANCE; INTERPRETATIONS
§ 153.20 LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.
   The chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard with the
jurisdiction of the town.
(Prior Code, § 17-301)
Statutory reference:
   NFIP Regulations, see 44 CFR § 60.3(b)
§ 153.21 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
   The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency on its flood hazard boundary map (FHBM), Community No.
400349A, dated October 19,1982, and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by
reference and declared to be a part of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 17-302)
§ 153.22 ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT.
   A development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the
provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 17-303)
Statutory reference:
   NFIP Regulations, see 44 CFR § 60.3(b)(1)
§ 153.23 COMPLIANCE.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use
changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other
applicable regulations.
(Prior Code, § 17-304) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.24 ABROGATION, GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions
shall prevail.
(Prior Code, § 17-305)
§ 153.25 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(Prior Code, § 17-306)
§ 153.26 WARNING, DISCLAIMER, LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur, and flood
heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
(Prior Code, § 17-307)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 153.40 DESIGNATION OF FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Utility Director is hereby appointed the Floodplain Administrator to
administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and other appropriate
sections of 44 CFR (National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to
floodplain management, being 44 CFR, subchp. B, pt. 60, subpt. A.
(Prior Code, § 17-401)
Statutory reference:
   NFIP Regulations, see 44 CFR § 60.3(b)
§ 153.41 DUTIES, RESPONSIBILITIES OF FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include,
but not be limited to, the following:
   (A)   Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to
the provisions of this chapter;
   (B)   Review permit application to determine whether proposed building site
will be reasonable safe from flooding;
   (C)   Review, approve, or deny all applications for development permits
required by adoption of this chapter;
   (D)   Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state, or local governmental
agencies including § 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments
of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1344, from which prior approval is required;
   (E)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions
the Floodplain Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation;
   (F)   Notify, in riverside situations, adjacent communities and the State
Coordination Agency, which is the State Water Resources Board prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency;
   (G)   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained;
   (H)   When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance
with this section the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review, and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available
from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions;
   (I)   In unnumbered A Zones, flood hazard areas without base flood
elevations where the best available data must be used, one of the following
actions is required as a condition of a permit:
      (1)   Determine an elevation from the nearest benchmark outside of the
flood hazard area. The lowest floor of the structure in the unnumbered A Zone
must be tow foot or more above such elevation;
      (2)   Where flooding history is greater than the above elevation, the
lowest floor elevation must be two feet or more above such level of historical
flooding;
      (3)   The elevation of the lowest floor must be two or more feet above
the highest adjacent grade next to the building site; and
      (4)   The base flood elevation be established thought an engineering
study. The lowest floor elevation must be two feet or more above the base flood
elevation.
   (J)   When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the Floodplain
Administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements,
or other development including fill shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and
AE on the community’s FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative
effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the
base flood more than two feet at any point within the community.
(Prior Code, § 17-402)
Statutory reference:
   NFIP Regulations, see 44 CFR §§ 60.3(b)(4) through (b)(7)
§ 153.42 PERMIT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Application for a development permit shall be presented to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him or her and may include, but
not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location,
dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and
proposed structures, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of
special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required:
      (1)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor,
including basement, of all new and substantially improved structures;
      (2)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential
structure shall be flood proofed;
      (3)   A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect
that the nonresidential flood proofed structure shall meet the flood proofing
criteria of §
153.58;
      (4)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural
drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; and
      (5)   Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with this
section.
   (B)   Approval or denial of a development permit by the Floodplain
Administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the
following relevant factors:
      (1)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (2)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage, and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      (3)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      (4)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (5)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      (6)   The sources of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, and electrical and water
systems;
      (7)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site;
      (8)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront locations, where
applicable;
      (9)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use; and
      (10)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for
that area.
(Prior Code, § 17-403)
Statutory reference:
   NFIP Regulations, see 44 CFR § 60.3(b)(5)
§ 153.43 VARIANCE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The Appeal Board, as established by the community, shall hear and
render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of the chapter.
   (B)   The Appeal Board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when
it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination
made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of
this chapter.
   (C)   Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board
may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction.
   (D)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all actions
involving an appeal, and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency upon request.
   (E)   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation, or
restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or
the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set
forth in the remainder of this chapter.
   (F)   Variance may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous
to, and surrounded by, lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level, providing the relevant factors in this section have been fully
considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.
   (G)   Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this
chapter, the Appeal Board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of §
153.05.
   (H)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
   (I)   Prerequisites for granting variances are as follows:
      (1)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief;
      (2)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         (a)   Showing a good and sufficient cause;
         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimization of, the
public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
      (3)   Any application to whom a variance is granted shall be given
written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting form the
reduced lowest floor elevation.
   (J)   Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements, and for other development necessary for the conduct
of a functionally dependent use, provided that:
      (1)   The criteria outlined in this section are met; and
      (2)   The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimized flood damages during the base flood, and create no additional threats
to public safety.
(Prior Code, § 17-404)
Statutory reference:
   NFIP Regulations, 44 CFR § 60.6(a)
PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 153.55 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   In all areas of special flood hazards, the following provisions are required
for all new construction and substantial improvements:
   (A)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed or
modified and adequately anchored to prevent floatation, collapse, or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy;
   (B)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
   (C)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials resistant to flood damage;
   (D)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with electrical, heating ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment
and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding;
   (E)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
   (F)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge
from the systems into floodwaters; and
   (G)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them, or contamination from them, during flooding.
(Prior Code, § 17-501)
§ 153.56 SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
   In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has
been provided, as set forth in §§
153.21 and
153.41, the following provisions are required:
   (A)   Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement
of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to, or above, the base flood elevation. A registered professional
engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the
Floodplain Administrator that the standard of this division (A), as proposed in
§
153.42, is satisfied.
   (B)   Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvements of any commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential structure
shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to, or above,
the base flood level or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and
with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer
or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and
plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined
in this division (B). A record of such certification, which includes the
specific elevation in relation to mean sea level to which such structures are
flood proofed, shall be maintained by the Floodplain Administrator.
   (C)   Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements with fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall be
designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls
by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
      (1)   A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than
one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided;
      (2)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher the two foot above
grade; and
      (3)   Openings may be equipped with screen, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
   (D)   Manufactured homes.
      (1)   Requires that all manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A
shall be installed using methods and practices, which minimize flood damage.
For the purpose of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and
anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of
anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame
ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and
local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. Specific anchoring
requirements shall be:
         (a)   Over-the-top ties at each of the four corners of the mobile
home, with two additional ties per side at intermediate locations, and mobile
homes less than 50 feet long requiring one additional tie per side;
         (b)   Frame ties at each corner of the home, with five additional ties
per side at intermediate points, and mobile homes less than 50 feet long
requiring four additional ties per side;
         (c)   All components of the anchoring system shall be capable of
carrying a force of 4,800 pounds; and
         (d)   Any additions to the mobile home be similarly anchored.
      (2)   All manufactured homes shall be in compliance with this chapter.
      (3)   Require that all manufactured homes to be placed or substantially
improved within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community’s FIRM be elevated on
a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is
two or more feet above the base flood elevation, and be securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
      (4)   For new mobile home parks and subdivisions, for expansions to
existing mobile home parks and subdivisions, for existing mobile home parks and
subdivisions where the repair, reconstruction, or improvement of the streets,
utilities, and pads equals or exceed 50% of the value of the streets, utilities
and pad before the repair, reconstruction, or improvement has commenced, and
for mobile homes not placed in a mobile home park or subdivision require:
         (a)   Stands or lots are elevated on compacted fill or on pilings so
that the lowest floor of the mobile home will be at or above the base flood
level. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall
submit a certification to the Building Official that the standard of this
division (D) complies;
         (b)   Adequate surface drainage and access for a hauler are provided;
and
         (c)   In the instance of elevation on pilings:
            1.   Lots are large enough to permit steps:
            2.   Piling foundations are placed in stable soil no more than ten
feet apart; and
            3.   Reinforcement is provided for pilings more than six feet above
the ground.
   (E)   Floodways. Floodways located within areas of special flood hazard
established in this chapter are areas designated as floodways. Since the
floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters
which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following
provisions shall apply:
      (1)   Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements, and other developments unless certification by a
registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that
encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge; and
      (2)   If division (E)(1) above is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of the chapter.
(Prior Code, § 17-502)
Statutory reference:
   NFIP Regulations, see 44 CFR § 60.3(b)(2)
   NFIP Regulations, see 44 CFR §§ 60.3(b)(4) and 60.3(b)(8)
§ 153.57 STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS.
   (A)   All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home parks and
subdivisions, shall be consistent with §§
153.03,
153.04, and
153.05.
   (B)   All proposals for the development of subdivisions, including
manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall meet development permit
requirements of §§
153.55 through
153.58.
   (C)   Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals
and other proposed developments, including manufactured home parks and
subdivisions, which is greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is lesser,
if not otherwise provided pursuant to §§
153.21 or
153.41.
   (D)   All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home parks and
subdivisions, shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
   (E)   All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home parks and
subdivisions, shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
and electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage.
(Prior Code, § 17-503)
Statutory reference:
   NFIP Regulations, see 44 CFR §§ 60.3(b)(2) through (b)(3)
§ 153.58 CERTIFICATION.
   It is hereby found and declared by the town, as of March 5,1987, that severe
flooding has occurred in the past within its jurisdiction and will certainly
occur within the future; that flooding is likely to result in infliction of
serious personal injury or death, and is likely to result in substantial injury
or destruction of property within its jurisdiction; in order to effectively
comply with minimum standards for coverage under the National Flood Insurance
Program; and in order to effectively remedy the situation described herein, it
is necessary that this chapter become effective immediately. Therefore, an
emergency is hereby declared to exist, and this chapter, being necessary for
the immediate preservation of the public peace, health, and safety, shall be in
full force and effect from and after its passage and approval.
(Prior Code, § 17-504)
Statutory reference:
   Accrediting standards for Floodplain Administrators, see 82 O.S. § 1620.1
   Appeals, see 82 O.S. § 1616
   Application of act; accreditation of administrators, see 82 O.S. § 1618
   Business needs to be considered in promulgating floodplain rules and
preparing floodplain regulations, see 82 O.S. § 1614
   Construction or development in floodplain area prohibited; exceptions, see
82 O.S. § 1612
   Cooperative agreements for delineation of floodplains and adoption of
regulations, see 82 O.S. § 1609
   County and municipal floodplain boards; land use rules and regulations, see
82 O.S. § 1604
   County, municipal, and state floodplain board; composition; term;
compensation, see 82 O.S. § 1605
   Definitions, see 82 O.S. § 1603
   Establishment and delineation of floodplains and 100-year flood elevations
for Oklahoma, see 82 O.S. § 1606
   Existing prior use may continue; conditions, see 82 O.S. § 1613
   Floodplain Administrators, see 82 O.S. § 1620
   Floodplain definitions and 100-year flood elevations to be submitted, see 82
O.S. § 1607
   Floodplain regulations; requirements; contents, see 82 O.S. § 1608
   New structures, fills, excavations, or other uses prohibited without written
authorization; violations, see 82 O.S. § 1617
   Promulgation of floodplain rules; procedure, see 82 O.S. § 1610
   Purpose of act, see 82 O.S. § 1602
   Redefining floodplain upon completion of flood control protective work, see
82 O.S. § 1611
   Short title, see 82 O.S. § 1601
   Variances, see 82 O.S. § 1615
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   FRANCHISES AND AGREEMENTS
      
II.   PURCHASES AND AGREEMENTS
      
III.   ANNEXATIONS
      
IV.   LAND VACATIONS
TABLE I: FRANCHISES AND AGREEMENTS
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
                          Fifteen-year cable franchise with Universal
130           11-23-1982  Telecommunications. Transfer of franchise was
                          approved.
                          (Prior Code, Appendix 4)
                          Confirming the extension of the non-exclusive renewal
                          franchise of James Cable Partners, L.P., doing
R. 177     7-6-2000    business as Communicom Serives, to operate and
                          maintain a community antenna television and closed
                          circuit electronic system.
                         
 
TABLE II: PURCHASES AND AGREEMENTS
 
Ord./  Date
Res.   Passed Description
No.
R. 170 - -    Lease-purchase agreement between the town and the Government Capital
       1998   Corporation for the purpose of financing police cars.
R.     7-8-   Authorizing the Mayor to sign bank loan documents for the purchase of a
82002  2002   2003 Crown Victoria police car from Joe Cooper Ford.
R.     7-12-  Authorizing the town to match 20% for proposed flashing school zone
030811 2004   lights, the total estimate being $15,000 with the town’s portion being
              $3,000.
R.     10-11- Authorizing the state-apportioned federal-aid project funds to be used
2021-  2021   to create advance school warning signs with flashing beacons along U.S.
007           70.
             
 
TABLE III: ANNEXATIONS
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
                          Annexation of real property described as a tract in
-             - -         the N/2 of the SW/4 of the SE/4 in Section 22,
                          Township 6 South, Range 11 East in the county.
                          (Prior Code, § 1-204)
                          Annexation of real property described as a tract in
-             - -         Section 21, Township 6 South, Range 11 East in the
                          county.
                          (Prior Code, § 1-205)
                          Annexation of real property described as a tract in
                          Section 22, Township 6 South, Range 11 East in the
-             - -         county, and a tract in Section 23, Township 6 South,
                          Range 11 East in the county.
                          (Prior Code, § 1-206)
                          Annexation of real property located in Sections 22
2024-001      7-8-2024    and 23 of Township 6 South, Range 11 East of the
                          Indian Base and Meridian.
                         
 
 
 
TABLE IV: LAND VACATIONS
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
2018-001      5-9-2018    Vacation of various pieces of property throughout the
                          town.
                         
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
Reference to Oklahoma Statutes
References to Prior Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCE TO OKLAHOMA STATUTES
O.S. Cite Code Section
O.S. Cite                            Code Section
3A O.S. 200                          133.29
3A O.S. 200.1                        133.29
3A O.S. 201                          133.29
3A O.S. 205.2a                       133.29
3A O.S. 205.3                        133.29
3A O.S. 205.7                        133.29
3A O.S. 205.7a                       133.29
3A O.S. 205.8                        133.29
3A O.S. 207                          133.29
3A O.S. 208                          133.29
3A O.S. 208.1                        133.29
3A O.S. 208.2                        133.29
3A O.S. 208.3                        133.29
3A O.S. 208.3a                       133.29
3A O.S. 208.4                        133.29
3A O.S. 208.6                        133.29
3A O.S. 208.7                        133.29
3A O.S. 208.8                        133.29
3A O.S. 208.9                        133.29
3A O.S. 208.11                       133.29
3A O.S. 208.12                       133.29
3A O.S. 209                          133.29
4 O.S. 30.4                          91.007
10A O.S. 2-8-224                     133.34
10A O.S. 2-8-224(B)                  133.99
10A O.S. 2-8-224(C)                  133.34
10A O.S. 2-8-224(D)                  133.34
                                     90.07;
11 O.S. 1-102                        90.22;
                                     90.37
11 O.S. 11-112                       90.22
11 O.S. 14-107                       150.015
11 O.S. 14-111                       10.99
11 O.S. 16-101                       30.01
11 O.S. 16-101 et seq.               30.01
11 O.S. 16-301 et seq.               30.01
11 O.S. 16-302                       30.01
11 O.S. 20-101                       11.02
11 O.S. 20-102                       11.02
11 O.S. 20-105                       11.02
11 O.S. 22-106                       110.01
11 O.S. 22-107                       110.01
11 O.S. 22-107.1                     110.01
11 O.S. 22-107.2                     110.01
11 O.S. 22-109                       133.28
11 O.S. 22-110                       131.02
11 O.S. 22-111                       90.35
11 O.S. 22-112                       90.20
11 O.S. 22-112(A)(7)                 90.46
11 O.S. 22-112(B)                    90.24
11 O.S. 22-115                       91.001;
                                     91.025
11 O.S. 22-117                       71.006
11 O.S. 22-131                       34.038
11 O.S. 27-101                       33.01
11 O.S. 27-117                       33.27
11 O.S. 27-118                       33.25
11 O.S. 27-119                       10.99;
                                     133.99
11 O.S. 27-122                       33.25
11 O.S. 27-122.1                     33.35
11 O.S. 27-122.2                     33.35
11 O.S. 27-123                       33.33
11 O.S. 27-126                       33.34
11 O.S. 29-101                       34.002
11 O.S. 29-105                       34.014;
                                     34.015
11 O.S. 29-106                       34.013
11 O.S. 29-108                       34.018
11 O.S. 29-201                       34.002
11 O.S. 29-202                       34.001
11 O.S. 29-204                       34.008
11 O.S. 34-101                       34.032
11 O.S. 34-102                       34.031
11 O.S. 34-103                       34.032,
                                     34.033
11 O.S. 34-104                       34.034;
                                     34.071
11 O.S. 49-100.1                     34.019
11 O.S. 49-100.1 et seq.             34.019
11 O.S. 49-101                       34.019
11 O.S. 49-101.1                     34.019
11 O.S. 49-101.2                     34.019
18 O.S.                              34.034;
                                     34.071
20 O.S. 1313.2                       33.38
21 O.S. 22                           133.24
21 O.S. 263                          134.07
21 O.S. 264                          134.07
21 O.S. 437                          134.27
21 O.S. 441                          134.27
21 O.S. 442                          134.27
21 O.S. 641                          131.02
21 O.S. 649                          134.01
21 O.S. 650                          134.01
21 O.S. 856                          133.34
21 O.S. 942                          133.30
21 O.S. 943                          133.30
21 O.S. 960                          133.30
21 O.S. 973                          133.30
21 O.S. 1021                         133.29
21 O.S. 1029                         133.31
21 O.S. 1030                         133.31
21 O.S. 1081                         133.31
21 O.S. 1171                         133.25
21 O.S. 1172                         133.27
21 O.S. 1198                         134.12
21 O.S. 1451                         132.01
21 O.S. 1518                         133.26
21 O.S. 1519                         133.26
21 O.S. 1520                         133.26
21 O.S. 1533                         134.07
21 O.S. 1701                         132.01
21 O.S. 1713                         132.03
21 O.S. 1760                         132.09
21 O.S. 1784                         152.01;
                                     152.02
21 O.S. 1787                         132.11
21 O.S. 1788                         132.11
22 O.S. 1108                         33.25
22 O.S. 1115.1                       33.24
22 O.S. 1115.2                       33.24
22 O.S. 1115.3                       33.24
22 O.S. 1115.4                       33.24
22 O.S. 1115.5                       33.24
22 O.S. 1115.1 through 1115.5        33.24
22 O.S. 1221 through 1264            34.073
22 O.S. 1261                         34.072;
                                     34.073
25 O.S. 301                          30.16
25 O.S. 302                          30.16
25 O.S. 303                          30.16
25 O.S. 304                          30.16
25 O.S. 305                          30.16
25 O.S. 306                          30.15
25 O.S. 307                          30.16
25 O.S. 307.1v1                      30.16
25 O.S. 307.1v2                      30.16
25 O.S. 309                          30.16
25 O.S. 310                          30.16
25 O.S. 311                          30.16
25 O.S. 312                          30.16
25 O.S. 313                          30.16
25 O.S. 314                          30.16
27A O.S. 2-7-101 et seq.             37.07
                                     114.01,
                                     114.02,
                                     114.04,
                                     114.06,
                                     114.08,
37A O.S.                             114.09,
                                     114.30,
                                     114.32,
                                     114.34,
                                     114.37,
                                     114.40,
                                     114.43
37A O.S. 1-101 et seq.               34.073,
                                     114.14
37A O.S. 1-103                       37.07
37A O.S. 2-101                       114.02
37A O.S. 2-133                       37.02
37A O.S. 6-101(D)                    133.20
37A O.S. 6-127                       34.073
47 O.S.                              70.05,
                                     76.01
47 O.S. 1-101 et seq.                70.05
                                     70.03;
47 O.S. 7-204                        71.036;
                                     76.02
47 O.S. 7-503                        70.03
47 O.S. 7-600                        70.03
47 O.S. 7-600 through 7-607          70.03
47 O.S. 7-600.1                      70.03
47 O.S. 7-601                        70.03
47 O.S. 7-601.1                      70.03
47 O.S. 7-601.2                      70.03
47 O.S. 7-602                        70.03
47 O.S. 7-602.1                      70.03
47 O.S. 7-603                        70.03
47 O.S. 7-605                        70.03
47 O.S. 7-606                        70.03
47 O.S. 7-606, Article VI, Chapter 7 70.02
47 O.S. 7-607                        70.03
47 O.S. 10-101 et seq.               70.05
47 O.S. 10-104                       77.03
47 O.S. 11-103                       70.23
47 O.S. 11-104                       70.28
47 O.S. 11-105                       70.26
47 O.S. 11-106                       70.25
47 O.S. 11-1113                      71.016,
                                     71.999
47 O.S. 11-201                       75.01;
                                     75.05
47 O.S. 11-202                       75.05
47 O.S. 11-301                       71.030
47 O.S. 11-401                       71.075
47 O.S. 11-402                       71.075
47 O.S. 11-405                       71.046
47 O.S. 11-501                       74.01
47 O.S. 11-506                       74.08
47 O.S. 11-601                       71.095
47 O.S. 11-604                       71.099
47 O.S. 11-605                       71.102
47 O.S. 11-606                       71.102
47 O.S. 11-704                       71.079
47 O.S. 11-705                       71.036
47 O.S. 11-803                       71.060
47 O.S. 11-804                       71.061
47 O.S. 11-805                       73.25
47 O.S. 11-901                       71.042
47 O.S. 11-902                       71.047
47 O.S. 11-1001                      72.01
47 O.S. 11-1002                      72.13
47 O.S. 11-1007                      72.02
47 O.S. 11-1101                      72.08
47 O.S. 11-1103                      73.25
47 O.S. 11-1109                      71.044
47 O.S. 11-1201                      73.01
47 O.S. 11-1204                      73.11
47 O.S. 12-203                       73.26
47 O.S. 12-205                       73.26
47 O.S. 12-206                       73.26
47 O.S. 12-218                       70.25
47 O.S. 12-301                       73.26
47 O.S. 12-402                       76.02
47 O.S. 13-101                       76.01
47 O.S. 13-102                       76.05
47 O.S. 14-105                       151.21
47 O.S. 15-102                       133.05
47 O.S. 15-104                       75.02
47 O.S. 15-105                       75.02
47 O.S. 15-106                       75.02
47 O.S. 15-107                       74.01
47 O.S. 15-112                       72.02
47 O.S. 15-115                       72.02
47 O.S. 434                          113.01
47 O.S. 756                          71.047
47 O.S. 1134                         71.016
50 O.S. 1                            90.01
50 O.S. 1.1                          90.01
50 O.S. 2                            90.01
50 O.S. 3                            90.01
50 O.S. 5                            90.02
50 O.S. 7                            90.03
50 O.S. 12                           90.04
50 O.S. 13                           90.04
50 O.S. 14                           90.04
50 O.S. 15                           90.04
50 O.S. 16                           90.05;
                                     90.07
50 O.S. 21                           90.06;
                                     90.07
51 O.S. 24A.1                        38.15
                                     38.15,
51 O.S. 24A.1 et seq.                38.16,
                                     38.18,
                                     38.19
51 O.S. 24A.2                        38.15
52 O.S. 420.1                        150.999
57 O.S. 227                          33.35
57 O.S. 228                          33.35
59 O.S. 1001                         150.999
59 O.S. 1002                         150.999
59 O.S. 1002.1                       150.999
59 O.S. 1003                         150.999
59 O.S. 1004                         150.999
59 O.S. 1005                         150.999
59 O.S. 1006                         150.999
59 O.S. 1006.1                       150.999
59 O.S. 1007                         150.999
59 O.S. 1009                         150.999
59 O.S. 1010                         150.999
59 O.S. 1010.1                       150.999
59 O.S. 1011                         150.999
59 O.S. 1012                         150.999
59 O.S. 1013                         150.999
59 O.S. 1014                         150.999
59 O.S. 1015                         150.999
59 O.S. 1016                         150.999
59 O.S. 1017                         150.999
59 O.S. 1018                         150.999
59 O.S. 1019                         150.999
59 O.S. 1020                         150.999
59 O.S. 1021.1                       150.999
59 O.S. 1023.1                       150.999
59 O.S. 1301 et seq.                 33.25
59 O.S. 1680                         150.999
59 O.S. 1681                         150.999
59 O.S. 1681.1                       150.999
59 O.S. 1682                         150.129
59 O.S. 1684                         150.129
59 O.S. 1685                         150.999
59 O.S. 1686                         150.999
59 O.S. 1688                         150.999
59 O.S. 1689                         150.129
59 O.S. 1690                         150.999
59 O.S. 1691                         150.129
59 O.S. 1692                         150.129
59 O.S. 1693                         150.999
59 O.S. 1694                         150.129
59 O.S. 1695                         150.999
59 O.S. 1696                         150.999
59 O.S. 1850.1                       150.999
59 O.S. 1850.2                       150.129
61 O.S. 101                          36.03
63 O.S. 1-508                        91.071
63 O.S. 1-229.11 et seq.             133.34
63 O.S. 1-1011                       90.07
63 O.S. 1-1101                       111.01
63 O.S. 2-101                        90.06,
                                     133.20
63 O.S. 2-101 et seq.                71.047,
                                     133.22
63 O.S. 2-101.1                      133.22
63 O.S. 2-101 and 2-204              133.21
63 O.S. 2-204                        133.21
63 O.S. 2-206                        133.21
63 O.S. 2-208                        133.21
63 O.S. 2-210                        133.21
63 O.S. 2-212                        133.21
63 O.S. 420 et seq.                  112.01
63 O.S. 420                          133.99
63 O.S. 420 et seq.                  133.21
63 O.S. 683.1 et seq.                35.01,
                                     35.02
63 O.S. 683.3                        35.01
63 O.S. 683.11                       35.02
63 O.S. 683.12                       35.03
68 O.S. 205                          37.17;
                                     37.41
68 O.S. 217                          37.13;
                                     37.38
68 O.S. 220                          37.14;
                                     37.39
68 O.S. 227                          37.15;
                                     37.40
68 O.S. 1350                         37.01
68 O.S. 1350 et seq.                 37.02,
                                     37.07
68 O.S. 1352                         37.02
68 O.S. 1358                         37.07
68 O.S. 1358.1                       37.07
68 O.S. 1361                         37.11
68 O.S. 1401                         37.42
68 O.S. 1401 et seq.                 37.41
68 O.S. 1408                         37.36
68 O.S. 1622                         93.01
68 O.S. 2601                         36.20;
                                     36.35
68 O.S. 2601 et seq.                 36.35
68 O.S. 2701                         37.01
68 O.S. 6001 through 6004            37.07
68 O.S. 6002                         37.07
68 O.S. 6003                         37.07
68 O.S. 6004                         37.07
70 O.S. 3311                         34.032
74 O.S. 324.8                        150.015
75 O.S. 308a - 323                   33.55
82 O.S. 1601                         153.58
82 O.S. 1602                         153.58
82 O.S. 1603                         153.58
82 O.S. 1604                         153.02,
                                     153.58
82 O.S. 1605                         153.58
82 O.S. 1606                         153.58
82 O.S. 1607                         153.58
82 O.S. 1608                         153.58
82 O.S. 1609                         153.58
82 O.S. 1610                         153.58
82 O.S. 1611                         153.58
82 O.S. 1612                         153.58
82 O.S. 1613                         153.58
82 O.S. 1614                         153.58
82 O.S. 1615                         153.58
82 O.S. 1616                         153.58
82 O.S. 1617                         153.58
82 O.S. 1618                         153.58
82 O.S. 1620                         153.58
82 O.S. 1620.1                       153.58
                                     
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code 2023 Code
Prior Code 2023 Code
Appendix 4 TSO Table I
1-201      11.01
1-202      11.02
1-204      TSO Table III
1-205      TSO Table III
1-206      TSO Table III
2-101      30.15
2-102      30.16
2-103      30.30
2-104      30.01
2-105      31.20
2-106      31.21
2-107      31.01
2-108      31.02
2-109      31.03
2-110      31.04
2-201      31.05
2-211      34.019
2-212      34.019
2-301      38.15
2-302      38.16
2-303      38.17
2-304      38.18
2-305      38.19
2-306      38.20
2-307      38.21
2-308      38.22
3-101      114.01
3-102      114.02
3-103      114.03
3-104      114.04
3-105      114.05
3-106      114.11
3-107      114.06
3-108      114.10
3-109      114.14
3-110      114.07
3-111      114.12
3-112      114.13
3-113      114.08
3-114      114.08
3-115      114.09
3-116      114.15
3-201      114.30
3-202      114.31
3-203      114.32
3-204      114.33
3-205      114.34
3-206      114.35
3-207      114.36
3-208      114.37
3-209      114.38
3-210      114.39
3-211      114.40;
           114.99
3-212      114.41
3-213      114.42
3-214      114.43
4-101      91.001
4-102      91.002
4-103      91.003
4-104      91.004
4-105      91.005
4-106      91.006
4-121      91.025
4-122      91.026
4-131      91.040
4-132      91.041
4-133      91.042
4-141      91.055
4-142      91.056
4-143      91.057
4-151      91.008
4-161      91.070
4-162      91.071
4-163      91.072
4-164      91.073
4-165      91.009
4-166      91.010
4-171      91.999
5-101      150.015
5-102      150.016
5-103      150.999
5-104      150.002
5-106      150.001
5-201      150.030
5-202      150.031
5-203      150.032
5-204      150.999
5-301      150.045
5-302      150.046
5-303      150.999
5-401      150.060
5-402      150.061
5-403      150.999
5-501      150.075
5-502      150.999
5-601      150.090
5-701      150.003
5-801      150.105
5-802      150.106
5-803      150.107
5-804      150.999
5-901      92.01
5-902      92.02
5-903      92.03
5-904      92.04
5-905      92.05
5-906      92.06
5-907      110.01
5-911      92.99
5-912      92.07
6-101      33.01
6-102      33.02
6-103      33.03
6-104      33.15
6-105      33.16
6-106      33.17
6-107      33.18
6-108      33.19
6-109      33.20
6-110      32.01
6-111      33.21
6-112      33.22
6-113      33.23
6-114      33.24
6-115      33.25
6-116      33.25
6-117      33.25
6-118      33.26
6-119      33.27
6-120      33.28
6-121      33.29
6-122      33.30
6-123      33.31
6-124      33.32
6-125      33.32
6-126      33.32
6-127      33.32
6-128      33.34
6-129      33.35
6-130      33.36
6-131      33.37
6-132      33.38
6-133      33.39
6-201      33.50
6-202      33.51
6-203      33.52
6-204      33.53
6-205      33.54
6-206      33.55
6-207      33.56
7-101      36.01
7-102      36.02
7-103      36.03
7-104      36.04
7-105      36.05
7-201      37.01
7-202      37.02
7-203      37.03
7-204      37.04
7-205      37.05
7-206      37.06
7-207      37.07
7-208      37.07;
           37.99
7-209      37.07
7-210      37.07;
           37.99
7-211      37.07
7-212      37.07
7-213      37.08
7-214      37.09
7-215      37.10
7-216      37.11
7-217      37.12
7-218      37.13
7-219      37.14
7-220      37.15
7-221      37.16
7-222      37.17
7-223      37.18
7-224      37.19
7-301      36.20
7-302      36.21
7-401      36.35
7-402      36.36
7-403      36.37
7-404      36.38
7-405      36.39
7-406      36.40
8-101      111.01
8-102      111.02
8-201      90.20
8-202      90.21
8-203      90.22
8-204      90.23
8-205      90.99
8-301      90.35
8-302      90.36
8-303      90.37
8-304      90.38
8-305      90.39
8-306      90.40
8-307      90.41
8-308      90.42
8-309      90.43
8-310      90.44
8-311      90.45
8-401      90.01
8-402      90.02
8-403      90.03
8-404      90.04
8-405      90.05
8-406      90.06
8-407      90.07
8-408      90.07
8-409      90.08
8-410      90.07
8-411      51.01;
           51.02
8-412      51.03
8-413      51.04
8-414      51.99
9-101      110.01
9-102      110.02
9-103      110.03
9-104      110.04
9-105      110.05
9-106      110.06
9-107      110.07
9-108      110.08
9-109      110.09
9-201      113.01
9-202      113.02
9-203      113.03
9-204      113.04
9-206      113.06
9-207      113.07
9-208      113.08
9-209      113.09
9-210      113.10
9-212      113.99
10-101     130.01
10-102     130.02
10-103     130.03
10-104     130.03
10-105     130.04
10-106     70.05,
           93.01
10-106     130.05
10-107     70.06
10-107     130.06
10-108     130.07
10-109     130.08
10-110     130.09
10-111     130.10
10-112     130.11
10-201     131.02
10-202     131.01
10-203     131.01
10-204     131.03
10-301     132.01,
           135.01
10-302     132.01
10-303     132.02
10-304     132.03
10-305     132.04
10-306     132.05
10-307     132.06
10-308     132.07
10-309     132.08
10-310     132.09
10-311     132.10
10-312     132.10
10-313     132.11
10-314     132.12
10-315     132.13
10-316     132.15
10-317     132.16
10-318     132.17
10-319     132.18
10-320     132.19
10-321     132.20
10-322     132.21
10-323     132.22
10-324     132.22
10-325     132.23
10-326     132.24
10-327     132.25
10-328     132.26
10-401     133.01
10-402     133.02
10-403     133.03
10-404     133.04
10-405     133.05
10-501     133.20
10-503     133.22
10-504     133.23
10-506     133.24
10-507     133.25
10-508     133.26
10-509     133.27
10-510     133.28
10-512     133.29
10-513     133.30
10-514     133.31
10-515     133.32
10-516     133.33
10-517     133.34
10-601     134.25
10-602     134.26
10-603     134.27
10-604     134.28
10-605     134.01
10-606     134.02
10-607     134.03
10-608     134.04
10-609     134.05
10-610     134.06
10-611     134.07
10-612     134.08
10-613     134.09
10-614     134.10
10-615     134.11
10-616     134.12
10-617     132.14
13-101     150.120
13-102     150.121
13-103     150.122
13-104     150.123
13-105     150.124
13-106     150.125
13-107     150.126
13-108     150.127
13-109     150.128
13-110     150.129
13-201     34.001
13-202     34.002
13-203     34.003
13-204     34.004
13-205     34.005
13-206     34.006
13-207     34.007
13-208     34.008
13-209     34.009
13-210     34.010
13-211     34.011
13-212     34.012
13-213     34.013
13-214     34.014
13-215     34.015
13-216     34.016
13-217     34.017
13-218     34.018
13-301     34.030
13-302     34.031
13-303     34.032
13-304     34.033
13-305     34.034
13-306     34.035
13-307     34.036
13-308     34.037
13-309     34.038
13-401     34.050
13-402     34.051
13-403     34.052
13-404     34.053
13-405     34.054
13-406     34.055
13-501     35.02
13-502     35.03
13-503     35.01
13-601     34.070
13-602     34.071
13-603     34.072
13-604     34.073
13-605     34.074
13-606     34.075
13-607     34.076
14-101     151.01
14-102     151.02
14-103     151.03
14-104     151.04
14-105     151.05
14-106     151.06
14-107     151.07
14-108     151.08
14-109     151.20
14-110     151.21
14-111     151.22
14-112     151.23
14-113     151.24
14-114     151.25
14-201     152.01
14-202     152.02
14-203     152.03;
           152.99
14-204     152.04
14-205     152.05;
           152.99
14-206     152.99
14-301     151.40
14-302     151.41
14-303     151.42
14-304     151.43
14-305     151.44
14-306     151.45
14-307     151.46
14-308     151.99
15-101     70.01
15-102     70.02
15-103     70.03
15-104     70.04
15-105     70.04
15-201     75.01
15-202     75.02
15-203     75.03
15-204     75.04
15-205     75.05
15-206     75.06
15-207     75.07
15-208     75.06
15-209     75.08
15-210     75.09
15-211     75.10
15-301     76.01
15-302     76.02
15-303     76.03
15-304     76.04
15-305     76.05
15-306     76.06
15-401     70.65
15-402     70.66
15-501     71.030
15-502     71.031
15-503     71.032
15-504     71.032
15-505     71.033
15-506     71.034
15-507     71.035
15-508     71.036
15-509     71.037
15-510     71.038
15-511     71.039
15-512     71.040
15-513     71.041
15-514     71.042
15-515     71.043
15-516     71.044
15-517     71.045
15-518     71.045
15-519     71.046
15-520     71.047
15-521     71.001
15-522     71.001
15-523     71.001
15-524     71.002
15-525     71.002
15-526     71.002
15-527     71.003
15-528     71.004
15-529     71.004
15-530     71.005
15-531     71.006
15-532     71.007
15-533     71.008
15-534     71.009
15-535     71.010
15-536     71.011
15-537     71.012
15-538     71.013
15-539     71.014
15-540     71.015
15-541     71.016;
           71.999
15-542     71.016;
           71.999
15-543     71.017
15-544     71.017
15-601     72.01
15-602     72.02
15-603     72.03
15-604     72.04
15-605     72.05
15-606     72.06
15-607     72.07
15-608     72.08
15-609     72.09
15-610     72.10
15-611     72.11
15-612     72.12
15-613     72.13
15-620     72.30
15-621     72.31
15-622     72.32
15-623     72.33
15-624     72.34
15-625     72.35
15-701     71.060
15-702     71.061
15-801     71.075
15-802     71.075
15-803     71.075
15-804     71.076
15-805     71.076
15-806     71.077
15-807     71.077
15-809     71.078
15-810     71.079
15-811     71.080
15-901     71.095
15-902     71.096
15-903     71.097
15-904     71.098
15-905     71.099
15-906     71.100
15-907     71.102
15-1001    71.018
15-1002    72.14
15-1101    72.50
15-1102    72.51
15-1103    72.52
15-1104    72.50
15-1201    77.01
15-1202    77.02;
           77.99
15-1203    77.03
15-1204    77.04
15-1205    77.05
15-1206    77.06
15-1207    77.07
15-1301    73.25
15-1302    73.26
15-1303    73.27
15-1304    73.28
15-1401    73.01
15-1402    73.02
15-1403    73.03
15-1404    73.04
15-1405    73.05
15-1406    73.06
15-1407    73.07
15-1408    73.08
15-1409    73.09
15-1410    73.10
15-1411    73.11
15-1412    73.12
15-1413    73.13
15-1414    73.99
15-1501    74.01
15-1502    74.02
15-1503    74.03
15-1504    74.04
15-1505    74.05
15-1506    74.06
15-1507    74.07
15-1508    74.08
15-1509    74.09
15-1510    74.10
15-1511    74.11
15-1601    70.20
15-1602    70.21
15-1603    70.22
15-1604    70.23
15-1605    70.24
15-1606    70.25
15-1607    70.26
15-1608    70.27
15-1609    70.28
15-1701    70.40
15-1702    70.41
15-1703    70.42
15-1704    70.43
15-1705    70.44
15-1706    70.45
15-1707    70.46
15-1708    70.47
15-1709    70.48
15-1710    70.49
15-1711    70.50
15-1712    70.51
15-1801    70.99
15-1802    72.15
17-101     50.01
17-102     50.02
17-201     153.02
17-202     153.03
17-203     153.04
17-204     153.05
17-205     153.01
17-301     153.20
17-302     153.21
17-303     153.22
17-304     153.23
17-305     153.24
17-306     153.25
17-307     153.26
17-401     153.40
17-402     153.41
17-403     153.42
17-404     153.43
17-501     153.55
17-502     153.56
17-503     153.57
17-504     153.58
           
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
170      - -1998     TSO Table II
177      7-6-2000    TSO Table I
82002    7-8-2002    TSO Table II
030811   7-12-2004   TSO Table II
208      8-14-2006   38.01
2019-04  6-24-2019   36.06
2019-004 8-12-2019   112.06
2021-007 10-11-2021  TSO Table II
                    
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord.No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord.No.                Date Passed Code Section
130                    11-23-1982  TSO Table I
14-112                 3-10-2003   151.09
5-105                  12-8-2003   150.004
4-103                  11-13-2006  91.003
4-101                  7-9-2007    91.001
4-104                  7-9-2007    91.004
2018-001               5-9-2018    TSO Table IV
                                   73.40-
2018-004               6-18-2018   73.49;
                                   73.99
10-502                 4-23-2019   133.21;
                                   133.99
                                   112.01-
                                   112.05;
                                   112.20-
                                   112.22;
Part 9, Chapter 3      8-12-2019   112.35-
                                   112.37;
                                   112.50-
                                   112.52;
                                   112.65
10-518                 10-23-2019  133.34;
                                   133.99
                                   37.30-
Chapter 5, 7-501-7-522 10-12-2020  37.45;
                                   37.99
1-108                  5-10-2021   10.99
4-107                  3-14-2022   91.007
8-205                  6-20-2022   90.24
8-312                  6-20-2022   90.46
10-113                 7-14-2022   130.12
- -                    6-12-2023   Adopting Ordinance
92.02                  2-12-2024   92.02
31.03                  6-10-2024   31.03
2024-001               7-8-2024    TSO Table III
91.011                 11-12-2024  91.011
30.16                  3-10-2025   30.16
31.03                  9-8-2025    31.03
75.11                  9-8-2025    75.11
                                  
 
 
