CITY CODE
of
GROVE, OKLAHOMA
1983
Code current through:
Ord. 866, passed 7-1-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
         This code of the City of Grove, as supplemented, contains ordinances
up to and including ordinance 866, passed July 1, 2025. Ordinances of the City
adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to the
extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City
office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code has
been amended, superseded or repealed.
                     American Legal Publishing
                     Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not amend the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
ORDINANCE NO. 867
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF GROVE, OKLAHOMA, AMENDING PART 11, CHAPTER 4, SEC
TION 11-414 OF THE GROVE CITY CODE, RELATED TO CEMETERY LANDSCAPING AND DECORA
TIONS TO ALLOW FOR SPECIAL REQUESTS BY APPLICATION TO THE CITY MANAGER;
PROVIDING FOR SEVERABILITY; AND DECLARING AN EFFECTIVE DATE.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF GROVE, OKLAHOMA:
SECTION ONE:
Part 11, Chapter 4, Section 11-414 of the Grove City Code is hereby amended to
add the fol lowing provision at the end of the existing section:
Special Requests by Application to City Manager
Cemetery patrons who wish to place landscaping or decorative items that are
otherwise re stricted under this section may submit a written application to
the City Manager for review and consideration.
The application must describe the proposed item(s), purpose, location,
materials, duration (if temporary), and any other supporting documentation as
required by the city.
Approval of such requests is at the sole discretion of the City Manager and may
be subject to conditions including time limits, maintenance responsibilities,
or removal requirements. The City reserves the right to deny any request that
conflicts with the intended maintenance, safety, or dignity of the cemetery
grounds.
Approved applications do not create a vested right, and the City may revoke
approval and require removal of any items at any time.
 
SECTION TWO: This ordinance is in no way to affect, alter or change any of the
other provisions of the City of Grove Code of Ordinance.
 
SECTION THREE: Any Ordinance or parts of the ordinance of the City of Grove,
Oklahoma, found to be in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
 
SECTION FOUR: EFFECTIVE DATE
Passed and approved by the City of Grove Mayor and Council at Grove, Oklahoma,
this 7th day of October 2025.
 
 
EMERGENCY CLAUSE RULED UPON SEPARATELY THIS 7th DAY OF OCTOBER 2025.
 
 
 
                  __________________________________
                  Ed Trumbull, Mayor
(SEAL)
ATTEST:
 
 
___________________________________
Karyn Pesich, City Clerk
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF GROVE,
OKLAHOMA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN,
EXCEPT AS HEREAFTER PROVIDED; PROVIDING WHEN THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME
EFFECTIVE; PROVIDING FOR SALE AND COPIES IN THE CLERK'S OFFICE; AND PROVIDING
FOR SUPPLEMENTS OR CHANGES TO CODE:
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF GROVE, OKLAHOMA:
SECTION 1 TITLE.
A code and revision of the ordinances of the City of Grove is hereby adopted as
the "Code of Ordinances, City of Grove, Oklahoma," or by any other properly
identifying designation.
SECTION 2 CODE SUPERSEDES OTHER ORDINANCES.
This code shall be treated and considered as a new and comprehensive ordinance
of the city which shall supersede all other general and permanent ordinances
enacted by the council prior to November 1, 1983, except such as by reference
thereto are expressly saved from repeal or continued in force and effect for
any purpose.
SECTION 3 EFFECTIVE DATE OF CODE, REPEAL.
All provisions of this code shall be in full force and effect from the date
this ordinance becomes law. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature of
the city in effect on or before November 1, 1983, and not in the code or
recognized and continued in force by reference herein and which are in conflict
herewith, are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of this
ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
SECTION 4 ORDINANCES NOT REPEALED.
The repeal provided for in Section 3 hereof shall not affect any offense or act
committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or
right established or accruing before the effective date of this ordinance; nor
shall the repeal affect any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing
the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of
the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or
obligation assumed by the city; nor shall the repeal affect the administrative
regulations or resolution of the city council not in conflict or inconsistent
with the provisions of the code; nor shall the repeal affect any right or
franchise granted by any ordinance or resolution of the city council to any
person, firm or corporation; nor shall the repeal affect any ordinance
dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, vacating,
etc., any street or public way in the city; nor shall the repeal affect any
annual budget or salary ordinance; nor shall the repeal affect any ordinance
levying or imposing taxes; nor shall the repeal affect any ordinance
establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city; nor
shall the repeal affect any ordinance providing for local improvements and
assessing charges therefor; nor shall the repeal affect any ordinance
dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city; nor shall the
repeal affect any ordinance extending the limits of the city; nor shall the
repeal be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been
repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this ordinance. The
continuance in effect of temporary and/or special ordinances and parts of
ordinances, although omitted from the code, shall not be affected by such
omission therefrom; and the adoption of the code shall not repeal or amend any
such ordinance or part of any such ordinance.
SECTION 5 CODE NOT NEW ENACTMENT.
The provisions appearing in this code, so far as they are the same as those
ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this code, shall be
considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments.
SECTION 6 ORDINANCES ADOPTED AFTER EFFECTIVE DATE OF CODE.
Ordinances and parts of ordinances of a permanent and general nature passed or
adopted on and after the effective date of this code may be passed or adopted
either:
      1.   In the form of amendments to the code of ordinances adopted by this
ordinance; or
      2.   Without specific reference to the code.
In either case, all such ordinances and parts of ordinances shall be deemed
amendments to the code. All of the substantive permanent and general parts of
such ordinances and changes made thereby in the code, shall be inserted and
made in the code whenever authorized or directed by motion, resolution or
ordinance of the city council, as provided hereinafter.
SECTION 7 SUPPLEMENTS TO CODE.
By contract or by city personnel, a change, or supplement, to the code of
ordinances adopted by this ordinance shall be prepared and printed whenever
authorized or directed by the city council. A change to the code shall include
all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the council
or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the change
and all changes made thereby in the code. The pages of a change shall be so
numbered that they will fit properly into the code and, where necessary,
replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new
pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the code will be
up to date to the date to which the code is being brought up to date. Each
change shall include a new title page for the code; and the title page shall
include a notation below the title indicating that the code contains all
permanent and general ordinances and parts of ordinances passed prior to the
date to which the code is brought up to date and still in effect. The words "as
amended" and the date, may be added to the title after the year. After every
change has been prepared and printed, a number of copies of the change equal at
least to the number of copies of the code still in existence, shall be
deposited in the office of the city clerk. The city clerk, if possible, shall
notify each holder of a copy of the original code about the availability of the
change or supplement.
SECTION 8 SALE OF COPIES OF THE CODE.
The city clerk is hereby authorized and directed to sell copies of the code of
ordinances to the public at a price determined from time to time by motion or
resolution of the city council.
SECTION 9 COPY OF CODE IN CLERK'S OFFICE.
A copy of the current code as amended or supplemented from time to time shall
be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. This copy of the code shall be
available for all persons desiring to examine it; it shall be considered the
official code of ordinances of the city, and may be so certified by the city
clerk as may be required.
SECTION 10 PREPARATION OF CODE.
The code of ordinances hereby adopted was prepared by the Oklahoma Municipal
League and consists of Seventeen (17) Parts, all of which have been examined,
considered and approved by the council of the City of Grove and adopted by
compliance with Sections 14-109 et seq. of Title 11 of the Oklahoma Statutes.
SECTION 11 EMERGENCY.
It being immediately necessary for the preservation of the peace, health and
safety of the city that the provisions of this ordinance and the new provisions
of this code not heretofore enacted be put into full force and effect, an
emergency is hereby declared to exist, by reason whereof this ordinance shall
take effect and be in full force and effect from and after its passage.
YEAS:
NAYS:
ABSENT:
Passed and approved this       day of           , 1983 with the emergency
clause.
                       
Mayor
ATTEST:
                    
Clerk
PART 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 1
USE AND CONSTRUCTION OF THE CODE
SECTION:
1-101: How Code Designated And Cited
1-102: Rules Of Construction
1-103: Catchlines Of Sections; Citations
1-104: Effect Of Repeal Of Ordinances
1-105: Severability Of Parts Of Code
1-106: Amendment To Code; Effect Of New Ordinances; Amendatory Language
1-107: Altering Code
1-108: General Penalty
1-109: Methods To Recover Fines
1-110: Ordinances In Effect In Outlying Territory Of City
1-101: HOW CODE DESIGNATED AND CITED 1 :
The provisions embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute
and be designated the CODE OF ORDINANCES, CITY OF GROVE, OKLAHOMA, and may be
so cited. (1983 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS §§ 14-108, 14-109.
1-102: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION:
In the construction of this code and of all ordinances, the following rules are
observed unless the construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent
of the council:
CITY OR THIS CITY: Shall be construed as if the words "of Grove, Oklahoma",
followed them.
COMPUTATION OF TIME: Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be
done a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day on
which the notice is given or the act is done shall be counted in computing the
time but the day on which the proceeding is to be had shall not be counted.
COUNCIL OR CITY COUNCIL: The city council of Grove.
COUNTY OR THIS COUNTY: The county of Delaware, Oklahoma.
GENDER: A word importing one gender only shall extend and be applied to other
genders and to firms, partnerships, and corporations as well.
JOINT AUTHORITY: All words giving "joint authority" to three (3) or more
persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority
of such persons or officers.
LAW: Includes applicable federal law, provisions of the constitution and
statutes of the state of Oklahoma, the ordinances of the city, and when
appropriate, any and all rules and regulations promulgated thereunder.
MANAGER OR CITY MANAGER: The city manager of the city.
MAYOR: The mayor of the city.
MONTH: A calendar month.
NONTECHNICAL AND TECHNICAL WORDS: Words and phrases which are not specifically
defined shall be construed according to the common and accepted usage of the
language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired
a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood
according to such meaning.
NUMBER: A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to
several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. Words used in
the plural number may also include the singular unless a contrary intention
plainly appears.
OATH: Shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by
law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases, the
words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and
"affirmed".
OR, AND: "Or" may be read "and", and "and" may be read "or", if the sense
requires it.
OTHER OFFICIALS OR OFFICERS, ETC.: Whenever reference is made to officers,
agencies or departments by title only, i.e., "clerk", "city clerk", "city
attorney", "fire chief", "chief of police", etc., they shall mean the officers,
agencies or departments of the city.
PERSON: Shall extend and be applied to an actual person, any persons and to
associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships, and bodies politic and
corporate, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any
of them, unless a contrary intention plainly appears.
PRECEDING, FOLLOWING: Next before and next after, respectively.
PROPERTY: Shall include real and personal property.
SIGNATURE OR SUBSCRIPTION: Includes a mark when a person cannot write.
STATE OR THIS STATE: Shall be construed to mean the state of Oklahoma.
STATUTORY REFERENCES: References to statutes of the state of Oklahoma as they
now are or as they may be amended to be.
STREET: Shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads,
alleys, lanes, viaducts, highways, courts, places, squares, curbs and all other
public ways in the city which are dedicated and open to public use.
TENSE: Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as
the past and present.
WEEK: Seven (7) days.
YEAR: A calendar year. (Prior Code, Secs. 10-1–10-3)
1-103: CATCHLINES OF SECTIONS; CITATIONS:
The catchlines of sections in this code are printed in capital letters and
citations included at the end of sections are intended to indicate the contents
of the section and original historical source respectively, and shall not be
deemed or taken to be titles and official sources of such sections; nor as any
part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed
when any of the sections, including the catchlines, or citations, are amended
or reenacted. (1983 Code)
1-104: EFFECT OF REPEAL OF ORDINANCES:
   A.   The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force
before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect.
   B.   The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty
incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding
pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance
repealed. (1983 Code)
1-105: SEVERABILITY OF PARTS OF CODE:
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the council that the sections,
paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this code are severable, and if
any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this code or of any
ordinance in the code shall be declared unconstitutional, illegal or otherwise
invalid by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction,
such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining
phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this code. (Prior Code,
Sec. 10-5)
1-106: AMENDMENT TO CODE; EFFECT OF NEW ORDINANCES; AMENDATORY LANGUAGE 1 :
   A.   All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in
any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering
system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent
ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof,
the repealed portions may be excluded from this Code by omission from reprinted
pages.
   B.   Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by
amending the provisions by specific reference to the section of this Code in
substantially the following language: "Be it ordained by the City Council of
the City of Grove, Oklahoma, that Section                 of the code of
ordinances of the City of Grove, Oklahoma, is hereby amended to read as
follows:" (set out new provisions in full).
   C.   When the Council desires to enact an ordinance of a general and
permanent nature on a subject not heretofore existing in the Code, which the
City Council desires to incorporate into the Code, a section in substantially
the following language may be made part of the ordinance:
Section                      Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of
Grove, Oklahoma, that the provisions of this ordinance shall become and be made
a part of the code of ordinances of the City of Grove, Oklahoma, and the
sections of this ordinance may be re-numbered to accomplish this intention.
   D.   All sections, articles, chapters or provisions of this Code desired to
be repealed may be specifically repealed by section or chapter number, as the
case may be. (1983 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS § 14-103 et seq.
1-107: ALTERING CODE:
It is unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions any
part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof,
or to alter or tamper with this Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause
the law of the City to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this
section shall be punished as provided in section
1-108 of this chapter. (1983 Code)
1-108: GENERAL PENALTY:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided by State law, whenever in this Code or in
any ordinance of the City an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be
unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in this Code or ordinances
the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be
unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any
provision of this Code or of any ordinance related to alcohol or drug related
offenses, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine, of not exceeding eight
hundred dollars ($800.00), plus court costs and penalties, or by imprisonment
for not more than sixty (60) days, or both such fine and imprisonment. For all
other offenses, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine, of not exceeding
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), plus court costs and penalties, or by
imprisonment for not more than sixty (60) days, or both such fine and
imprisonment. Each day or any portion of a day during which a violation of this
Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
   B.   Any person who shall aid, abet or assist in the violation of any
provision of this Code or any other ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in this section.
   C.   The amount of court costs to be charged to a defendant in the event of
a bond forfeiture, guilty plea, or conviction, shall not exceed the sum of
thirty dollars ($30.00) plus the fees and mileage of jurors and witnesses plus
penalties as set forth in section
6-136 of this Code.
The maximum fine for traffic related offenses relating to speeding or parking
shall not exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) plus court costs and penalties.
The maximum fine for violation of any provisions of this Code or of any
ordinance related to alcohol or drug related offenses shall not exceed eight
hundred dollars ($800.00) plus cost and penalties.
The maximum fine for all other offenses shall not exceed seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) plus court costs and penalties. (Ord. 742, 12-5-2017)
1-109: METHODS TO RECOVER FINES:
   A.   All fines are recoverable by civil action before any court of competent
jurisdiction in addition to any other method provided by law.
   B.   A Municipal Court seeking to collect a debt, unpaid fines and cost or
final judgment of at least fifty dollars ($50.00) from an individual who has
filed a State Income Tax return may file a claim with the Oklahoma Tax
Commission requesting that the amount owed to the Municipal Court be deducted
from any State Income Tax refund due to that individual. The claim shall be
filed electronically in a form prescribed by the Tax Commission and shall
contain information necessary to identify the person owing the debt, including
full name and social security number of the debtor. (Ord. 585, 11-3-2009)
1-110: ORDINANCES IN EFFECT IN OUTLYING TERRITORY OF CITY:
All ordinances of the City now in effect within the City are hereby extended to
all real property belonging to, or under the control of, the City outside the
corporate limits of the City, and shall be in full effect therein, insofar as
they are applicable. All ordinances of the City which shall go into effect in
the future, shall also apply to, and be in full effect within the boundaries of
all outlying real property, insofar as they may be applicable. Any words in any
ordinance indicating that the effect of an ordinance provision is limited to
the corporate limits of the City shall be deemed to mean and include also the
outlying real property belonging to, or under the control of, the City, unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise. (Prior Code § 10-4)
CHAPTER 2
CORPORATE AND WARD LIMITS
SECTION:
1-201: Map of city designated as official map.
1-202: Ward number and boundaries.
1-201: MAP OF CITY DESIGNATED AS OFFICIAL MAP:
The map of the city showing its territorial limits is hereby designated as the
official map of the city, and the corporate limits as shown thereon are
declared to be the true and correct corporate limits of the city, including all
annexations made to the city through and including the date of March 1, 1983.
1-202: WARD NUMBER AND BOUNDARIES:
The wards and boundaries shall be changed as follows:
      1.   Ward One: O'Daniel Parkway North to city limits and Main Street West
to the GRA taking line;
      2.   Ward Two (2): 13th Street North to city limits and Main Street East
to city limits;
      3.   Ward Three (3): 13th Street North to O'Daniel Parkway and Main
Street West to city limits; and including lands in Sections 1 and 2, Township
24 North, Range 23 East, lying South of Carey Bay of Grand Lake; and
      4.   Ward Four (4): 13th Street South to city limits.
(Ord. No. 285, 9/6/83)
State Law Reference: Review of wards after each federal census, 11 O.S. Section
20-101; establishment and number of wards in council-manager city, 11 O.S.
Section 2-105; changing wards, 11 O.S. Sections 20-102 to 20-105.
PART 2
ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT
CHAPTER 1
GOVERNMENT ORGANIZATION
SECTION:
2-101: Council manager form of government.
2-101: COUNCIL MANAGER FORM OF GOVERNMENT:
The city is governed by the statutory council manager form of government. The
powers of the city are vested in the city council.
State Law Reference: Council manager form, Sections
10-101 et seq. of Title 11 of the Oklahoma Statutes.
Note: Resolution No. 80-10 called for an election to be held on October 7,
1980, to change from a town to a city and adopt the council-manager government.
The election approved the change. Resolution 80-11 called for first city
officers to be elected April 7, 1981.
CHAPTER 2
THE COUNCIL
SECTION:
2-201: City Council Membership And Election
2-202: Time Of Regular Meetings Of The Council
2-203: Place Of Meetings Of The Council
2-204: Rules Of Order And Procedure
2-201: CITY COUNCIL MEMBERSHIP AND ELECTION 1 :
   A.   The city council consists of one council member from each ward of the
city and one council member at large. The terms of the council members are
staggered so that at any one general municipal election, the following council
members are to be elected for four (4) year terms:
      1.   Council members from wards one and two.
   B.   At the next general municipal election, the following officers are to
be elected for four (4) year terms:
      1.   Council members from wards three and four; and
      2.   The council member at large. (1983 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS § 16-208.
2-202: TIME OF REGULAR MEETINGS OF THE COUNCIL 1 :
The council shall hold at least two (2) regular meetings every month at such
times as it may prescribe by ordinance or otherwise. The mayor or any three (3)
council members may call special meetings. All meetings of the council shall be
open to the public, and the journal of its proceedings shall be open to the
public inspection; except the council may hold executive sessions if held in
accordance with the laws of the state of Oklahoma. (Ord. 549, 1-15-2008)
 
Notes
1 2. 25 OS § 301 et seq.; 11 OS § 10-108.
2-203: PLACE OF MEETINGS OF THE COUNCIL:
Every meeting of the council shall be held in the council chamber in the city
community center unless, in case of an emergency, the mayor or the council
members calling a special meeting designate another place in the city for the
holding of the special meeting. Any adjourned meeting may be held at any other
place within the city designated by the council. (Prior Code, Sec. 1-4)
2-204: RULES OF ORDER AND PROCEDURE 1 :
   A.   The city council may determine its own rules, and may compel the
attendance of absent members in the manner and under penalties as the council
may prescribe. Whenever a councilman is absent from more than one-half (1/2) of
all meetings of the council, regular and special, held within any period of
four (4) consecutive months, he shall thereupon cease to hold office.
   B.   The order of business for each meeting of the city council shall be as
follows:
      1.   Call to order;
      2.   Determination of a quorum;
      3.   Reading and approval of the minutes;
      4.   Report: City treasurer;
      5.   Report: City clerk;
      6.   Petitions of the people;
      7.   Report: City manager;
      8.   Report: Building inspector/zoning administrator;
      9.   Ward reports;
      10.   Report: City attorney;
      11.   Unfinished business;
      12.   Review, approval of purchase orders; and
      13.   Adjournment.
   C.   The following rules of procedure shall apply to any regular or special
meeting of the council unless three (3) councilmen agree to waive the rule or
rules:
      1.   At the request of the mayor or any council member, all motions shall
be reduced to writing;
      2.   A motion to reconsider any of the proceedings of the council shall
not be entertained unless it be made by a council member who previously voted
in the majority;
      3.   No motion shall be debated or put until it be seconded and stated by
the mayor. It is then and not until then in possession of the board and cannot
be withdrawn but by leave of the city council;
      4.   A motion to adjourn shall be in order at any time, except as
follows:
         a.   When repeated without intervening business or discussion;
         b.   When made as an interruption of a member while speaking;
         c.   When the previous question has been ordered; or
         d.   While a vote is being taken.
A motion to adjourn is debatable only as to the time to which the meeting is
adjourned;
      5.   When a question is under debate, no motion shall be received but:
         a.   To adjourn;
         b.   To lay on the table;
         c.   For the previous question;
         d.   To postpone to a day certain;
         e.   To commit;
         f.   To amend; or
         g.   To postpone indefinitely,
which several motions shall have precedence in the order they stand arranged;
      6.   When a proper motion is made, but information is wanted, the motion
is to postpone to a day certain;
      7.   Matters claiming present attention for which it is desired to
reserve for more suitable occasion, the order is a motion to lay on the table;
the matter may then be called for at any time. If the proposition may need
further consideration at the hands of a committee, the motion is to refer to a
committee, but if it need but a few and simple amendments, the board shall
proceed to consider and amend at once;
      8.   On an amendment's being moved, a member who has spoken on the main
question may speak again to the amendment;
      9.   The question is to be put first on the affirmative and then on the
negative side. After the affirmative part of the question has been put, any
member who has not spoken before to the question may arise and speak before the
negative be put; and
      10.   When a question has been moved and seconded and has been put by the
presiding officer in the affirmative and negative, it cannot be debated unless
under motion for reconsideration. (1983 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS § 10-109.
CHAPTER 3
CITY MANAGER
SECTION:
2-301: City manager appointment.
2-302: Duties.
2-301: CITY MANAGER APPOINTMENT:
The council shall appoint a city manager for an indefinite term by a vote of a
majority of all its members. It shall choose him solely on the basis of his
executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to his
actual experience in, or his knowledge of, accepted practice in respect to the
duties of his office.
State Law Reference: City manager appointment and duties, 11 O.S. Sections 10-
112, 10-113.
2-302: DUTIES:
The city manager shall be the chief executive officer and head of the
administrative branch of the city government. He shall execute the laws and
administer the government of the city, and shall be responsible therefor to the
council. He shall:
      1.   Appoint, and when necessary for the good of the service, remove,
demote, lay off or suspend all heads of administrative departments and other
administrative officers and employees of the city except as otherwise provided
by law. The manager or the council by ordinance may authorize the head of a
department, office or agency to appoint and remove the subordinates in such
department, office or agency;
      2.   Supervise and control all administrative departments, officers and
agencies;
      3.   Prepare a budget annually and submit it to the council and be
responsible for the administration of the budget after it goes into effect; and
recommend to the council any changes in the budget which he deems desirable;
      4.   Submit to the council a report after the end of the fiscal year on
the finances and administrative activities of the city for the preceding year;
      5.   Keep the council advised of the financial condition and future needs
of the city, and make recommendations as he deems desirable; and
      6.   Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by law or by
ordinance.
State Law Reference: Similar provisions, 11 O.S. Section 10-113.
CHAPTER 4
CITY CLERK AND CITY TREASURER
SECTION:
2-401: City Clerk; Duties
2-402: Office Of City Treasurer; Appointment, Term, Duties
2-403: Clerk's And Treasurer's Offices Combined
2-404: Office Of Deputy City Clerk Created; Duties, Bond
2-405: Compensation
2-401: CITY CLERK; DUTIES 1 :
   A.   There shall be a city clerk appointed by the city manager for an
indefinite term, and removable by the manager. The city clerk shall be an
officer of the city.
   B.   The city clerk shall collect or receive revenue and other money for the
city, and shall deposit the same daily with the city treasurer or for the city
treasurer in an account or accounts maintained by the city treasurer in a
depository or depositories. The city clerk shall maintain a general accounting
system for the city government. He shall have such other powers, duties and
functions as may be prescribed by applicable law or by ordinance. (Prior Code,
Secs. 1-9, 1-10 as amended)
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS § 10-117.
2-402: OFFICE OF CITY TREASURER; APPOINTMENT, TERM, DUTIES:
   A.   There shall be a city treasurer who shall be an officer of the city and
who shall be appointed by the council for an indefinite term, serving at will,
and subject to removal by the city council for the good of the service. The
city treasurer is an officer of the city and shall report to the city council.
   B.   The city treasurer shall:
      1.   Deposit all funds coming into the city or its trusts in such
depositories as the council or the authorities may designate;
      2.   Receive all taxes, special assessments, license fees, and other
revenues of the city from all sources;
      3.   Have custody of all funds belonging to or under control to the city
or any office, department, or agency of the city government or covered by
separate agreement with its trust authorities;
      4.   Have custody of all investments and invested funds of the city
government or in possession of the city government, in a fiduciary capacity,
and ensure the safe keeping of same;
      5.   Maintain a general accounting system for the city government and its
departments, office, agencies, and authorities;
      6.   Review for payment all bills, invoices, payrolls, and charges to
ensure compliance with the city's purchasing policy and budget;
      7.   Submit to the city council and city manager a monthly statement of
all receipts and disbursements in sufficient detail to show the exact financial
condition of the city;
      8.   Assist the city manager in the preparation of the annual budget and
year end financial statement;
      9.   Appoint, and when necessary for the good of the service, hire,
remove, demote, lay off or suspend other employees of the office of the city
treasurer as may be provided in the annual budget, and do so according to the
adopted personnel policies of the city;
      10.   Provide information on and access to the city's financial records,
as necessary, to support the annual audit by the city's independent auditor.
(Ord. 517, 5-18-2004)
2-403: CLERK'S AND TREASURER'S OFFICES COMBINED:
The offices of city clerk and city treasurer of the city may be held by the
same person, all as authorized by applicable state law. (Prior Code, Sec. 1-
17.1)
2-404: OFFICE OF DEPUTY CITY CLERK CREATED; DUTIES, BOND 1 :
   A.   The office of deputy city clerk is hereby created to be appointed by
the city manager.
   B.   The duties of the deputy city clerk shall be those of the city clerk
when so designated by the city clerk and the city manager.
   C.   The bond of the deputy city clerk shall be in the same amount as that
bond required of the city clerk. (Prior Code, Secs. 1-11 to 1-13)
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS § 8-105.
2-405: COMPENSATION:
Each deputy city clerk shall be paid such compensation as determined by the
city manager. (Prior Code, Sec. 1-15)
CHAPTER 5
OTHER OFFICERS, DEPARTMENTS AND PERSONNEL
SECTION:
2-501: Department of law; city attorney.
2-502: Public works department; superintendent.
2-503: Duties of public works department.
2-504: Department of health; health officer.
2-505: Police department; chief of police; duties.
2-506: Officers and employees; number and classes.
2-507: Certain personnel to be bonded.
2-508: Oaths.
2-509: Compensation of officers and employees.
2-501: DEPARTMENT OF LAW; CITY ATTORNEY:
   A.   There shall be a department of law, the head of which shall be the city
attorney appointed by the city council for one-year term and removable by the
council. The city attorney shall be an officer of the city, and shall have
supervision and control of the department of law.
   B.   The city attorney shall be the chief legal adviser of the council, all
officers, departments and agencies of the city government in matters relating
to their official powers and duties. He shall represent the city in proceedings
in the courts. He shall perform all services incident to his position which may
be required by law or ordinance. (Prior Code, Sec. 1-38)
2-502: STREET DEPARTMENT; SUPERINTENDENT:
There shall be a street department, the head of which shall be the street
superintendent appointed by the city manager for an indefinite term, and
removable by the manager. The city manager shall be ex officio street
superintendent unless he appoints another to serve in this capacity. The street
superintendent shall be an officer of the city, and shall have supervision and
control of the street department. (Prior Code, Sec. 1-16)
Cross Reference: Streets and public works, 11 O.S. Sections
14-101 et seq.
2-503: DUTIES OF STREET DEPARTMENT:
It shall be the duty of the street department, insofar as the city government
performs these functions with its own personnel, to construct, improve,
maintain and clean streets, including alleys and other public ways, bridges and
sidewalks; to erect and maintain street name signs; and to supervise the use of
streets by privately owned utilities. (Prior Code, Sec. 1-17)
2-504: DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH; HEALTH OFFICER:
   A.   There shall be a department of health, the head of which shall be the
health officer appointed by the city manager for an indefinite term, and
removable by the manager. Any mention in the ordinances of the city of the
"superintendent of health" or "superintendent of public health" shall be deemed
to refer to the health officer unless otherwise indicated by the context in
which such words may be found. He shall be an officer of the city, and shall
have supervision and control of the department of health. The director of the
county cooperative health department or his representatives may also perform
the duties and functions of the city health officer.
   B.   The department of health shall perform such duties, and have such
powers, as may be prescribed by ordinance, law and the rules and regulations of
the State Department of Health. (Prior Code, Sec. 1-39)
2-505: POLICE DEPARTMENT; CHIEF OF POLICE; DUTIES:
   A.   There shall be a police department, the head of which shall be the
chief of police appointed by the city manager for an indefinite term, and
removable by the manager. The chief of police shall be an officer of the city,
and shall have supervision and control of the police department. All police
officers shall be officers of the city.
   B.   It is the duty of the police department to apprehend and arrest on view
or on warrant and bring to justice violators of the ordinances of the city; to
suppress riots, affrays and unlawful assemblies which may come to their
knowledge, and generally to keep the peace; to serve warrants, writs,
executions and other processes properly directed and delivered to them; to
apprehend and arrest persons violating federal or state law as provided by law,
and to turn them over to proper authorities; and in all respects to perform all
duties pertaining to the offices of police officers. The police department
shall have charge of and operate the city jail. (Prior Code, Secs. 1-18, 1-19)
Cross Reference: Police department, see Sections
13-401 et seq.
2-506: OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES; NUMBER AND CLASSES:
The council, by motion, resolution or ordinance, may regulate the number and
classes of officers and positions of employment in the various departments,
offices and agencies of the city government. Appointments and promotions shall
be in the service of a statutory council-manager city shall be made solely on
the basis of merit and fitness; and removals, demotions, suspensions and
layoffs shall be made solely for the good of the service. The council by
ordinance may establish a merit system and provide for its organization and
functioning and provide for regulation of personnel matters. (Prior Code, Secs.
1-41, 1-52)
State Law Reference: Similar provisions, 11 O.S. Section 10-119.
2-507: CERTAIN PERSONNEL TO BE BONDED:
Before entering upon their official duties, the following personnel of the city
government shall provide bonds for the faithful performance of their official
duties, payable to the city, with a surety company authorized to operate within
the state, in the amounts respectively indicated after their titles:
      1.   City clerk and deputy clerks, Eleven Thousand Dollars ($11,000.00);
      2.   City treasurer, One Hundred Thousand Dollars ($100,000.00); and
      3.   City clerk and city treasurer, in case same person holds both
offices, One Hundred Thousand Dollars ($100,000.00).
The council, by motion or resolution, may require other officers and employees
in such positions as it may designate to be bonded. The city shall pay the
premiums on such bonds. (Prior Code, Sec. 1-48)
State Law Reference: Bonds of officers, treasurer and other officers to give
bond, 11 O.S. Section
8-105.
2-508: OATHS:
All officers, elective and appointive, including salaried employees of the city
shall, within five (5) days of their election or appointment and before
entering upon the duties of the respective offices take and subscribe to the
following oath or affirmation:
"I,                , do solemnly swear, (or affirm), that I will support, obey
and defend the Constitution of the United States, and the Constitution of the
State of Oklahoma, and will faithfully discharge the duties of the office of
               ; that I have not paid or contributed, either directly or
indirectly, any money or other valuable thing to procure my nomination,
election or appointment, except necessary and proper expense expressly
authorized by law; that I have not knowingly violated any election law of the
state or procured it to be done by others in my behalf; that I will not
knowingly receive, directly or indirectly, any money or other valuable thing
for the performance or nonperformance of any act or duty pertaining to the
office of                , other than compensation allowed by law."
(Prior Code, Sec. 1-49)
State Law Reference: Oath to be as prescribed by Oklahoma Constitution, filed
in clerk's office, 11 O.S. Section
8-103.
2-509: COMPENSATION OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES:
   A.   The compensation of officers and employees may be determined by motion
or resolution adopted by the city council and may be changed at any time in the
same manner.
   B.   In no case shall the salary or emoluments of any officer elected or
appointed for a definite term be changed after his election or appointment or
during his term of office unless by operation of an ordinance passed prior to
such election or appointment. This section shall not apply to officers chosen
for indefinite terms nor to employees. (Prior Code, Secs. 1-52, 1-53)
State Law Reference: Section 19 Article 23 of the Oklahoma Constitution
prescribes prohibition in changing compensation during term of office.
CHAPTER 6
SOCIAL SECURITY
SECTION:
2-601: Declaration of policy to come under coverage.
2-602: Execution of agreement with state agency.
2-603: Withholdings.
2-604: Contributions.
2-605: Records and reports.
2-606: Exclusions.
2-601: DECLARATION OF POLICY TO COME UNDER COVERAGE:
It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend, at
the earliest date, to the eligible employees and officials of the city the
benefits of the system of Federal Old- Age and Survivors Insurance as
authorized by the Federal Social Security Act and all amendments thereto, and
Sections 121 et seq. of Title 51 of the Oklahoma Statutes. In pursuance of this
policy, the officers and employees of the city shall take such action as may be
required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. (Prior Code, Sec.
1-58)
State Law Reference: Social security coverage for local governments, 51 O.S.
Section 125.
2-602: EXECUTION OF AGREEMENT WITH STATE AGENCY:
The mayor is authorized and directed to execute all necessary agreements and
amendments with the State Department of Human Services to accomplish the
provisions of Section
2-601 of this code. (Prior Code, Sec. 1-59)
2-603: WITHHOLDINGS:
Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees and officials for the purposes
provided in Section
2-601 of this code are hereby authorized to be made in the amounts and at such
times as may be required by applicable state and federal laws or regulations,
and shall be paid over to the state or federal agency designated by the laws
and regulations. (Prior Code, Sec. 1-60)
2-604: CONTRIBUTIONS:
Employer contributions shall be paid from amounts appropriated for these
purposes from available funds to the designated state or federal agency in
accordance with applicable state or federal laws or regulations. (Prior Code,
Sec. 1-61)
2-605: RECORDS AND REPORTS:
The city shall keep such records and submit such reports as may be required by
applicable state or federal laws or regulations. (Prior Code, Sec. 1-62)
2-606: EXCLUSIONS:
Excluded from this chapter authorizing the extension of social security
benefits to city officers and employees are the following:
      1.   Any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position,
employee or official now covered or authorized to be covered by any other
ordinance creating any retirement system for any employee or official of the
city; or
      2.   Any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position,
employee or official for which compensation is on a fee basis, or any position,
employee or official not authorized to be covered by applicable state or
federal laws or regulations.
(Prior Code, Secs. 1-63, 1-64)
CHAPTER 7
FIRE PENSION SYSTEM
SECTION:
2-701: Local fire pension and retirement board.
2-702: Fund to be operated in accordance with law.
2-703: Contributions to fund.
2-701: LOCAL FIRE PENSION AND RETIREMENT BOARD:
There is hereby created a local firefighters' pension and retirement board
composed of the mayor, the clerk, the treasurer and three (3) members from the
fire department. The board shall have the membership, organization, powers,
duties and functions as prescribed by Section 49-103 et seq. of Title 11 of the
Oklahoma Statutes. (Prior Code, Sec. 1-55, brought up to date to reflect 1981
state law)
State Law Reference: Firefighters' retirement and pension law, 11 O.S. Sections
49-101 et seq.
2-702: FUND TO BE OPERATED IN ACCORDANCE WITH LAW:
The city's firefighters' pension and retirement system and fund shall be
operated in accordance with state law relating to the fund and system. (Prior
Code, Sec. 1-56)
2-703: CONTRIBUTIONS TO FUND:
   A.   The clerk shall deduct from the salaries or wages of each paid member
of the fire department the amounts which are required by applicable state law.
If the members of the fire department, by a majority vote of its paid members,
vote to increase the amount of the deductions, the amounts authorized by this
subsection shall be increased to reflect the amounts approved by the majority
vote. The treasurer of the city shall deposit monthly in the Oklahoma
Firefighters' Pension and Retirement Board the amounts deducted pursuant to
this subsection. Any amounts deducted from the salary or wages of a fire
department member shall be made at the time of each payroll. The deductions
shall be set forth in the payroll so that each member may be able to ascertain
the exact amount which he is contributing.
   B.   The city treasurer shall deposit monthly with the Oklahoma
Firefighters' Pension and Retirement Board the amounts of money which are
required by applicable state law for each paid member of the fire department.
   C.   For each volunteer member of the fire department, the city treasurer
shall deposit yearly with the Oklahoma Firefighters' Pension and Retirement
Board the amounts of money which are required by applicable state law. These
amounts may be revised according to actuarial studies and amounts as set by the
Oklahoma Firefighters' Pension and Retirement Board.
   D.   All assets of the city firefighters' pension and retirement fund shall
be transferred to the Oklahoma Firefighters' Pension and Retirement Board.
Assets shall be transferred in the form of cash, negotiable securities and such
other specific assets as permitted by the State Board. (Prior Code, Sec. 1-51,
brought up to date to reflect state law 1/1/81)
State Law Reference: Firefighters' pension law, 11 O.S. Section 49-122,
effective 1/1/81.
Cross Reference: Fire department and services, Section
13-101 of this code.
CHAPTER 8
ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES
SECTION:
2-801: Time Limits For Destruction Of Papers, Documents And Records
2-801: TIME LIMITS FOR DESTRUCTION OF PAPERS, DOCUMENTS AND RECORDS:
   A.   The city of Grove may destroy, sell for salvage or otherwise dispose of
the following papers, documents and records after the expiration of the
specified period of time following the end of the fiscal year in which the
paper, document or record was created, except as otherwise specified:
      1.   One Year: Parking citations may be destroyed or otherwise
permanently disposed of one year after the date of issuance;
      2.   Two Years: Municipal court warrants, water, sewer, garbage and
utility receipts and statements, which have been previously audited; inspection
records relating to water meters and sewer inspections; miscellaneous petitions
and letters addressed to the city of Grove on matters other than pertaining to
the items hereinafter set forth; utility billing ledger or register; utility
cash receipts ledger or register; and utility accounts receivable ledger or
register. Fire run contracts may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of two (2)
years after their expiration;
      3.   Five Years: Successful and unsuccessful bids for the purchase or
furnishing of equipment, material and improvements; inspection records except
as provided for in subsection A2 of this section; claims that have been denied;
license applications; bonds; special, primary and general election payrolls;
election tabulations and returns; withholding statements; garnishment records;
traffic tickets and receipts; bond receipts and fine receipts; information and
complaints; court dockets; paid general obligation and revenue bonds; paid
street improvements, sewer and sidewalk district bonds; warrants; claims;
checks; vouchers; purchase orders; payrolls;
      4.   Ten Years: Inventories; appropriation ledgers; sidewalk assessment
records, except payment records; cash receipt book or register for the general
fund, the street and alley fund, any bond fund or sinking fund, and all other
trust funds that have been audited; and
      5.   Fifteen Years: Sewer and improvement district records, except
payment records.
None of the above mentioned records, papers or documents pertaining to pending
litigation shall be disposed of until such litigation is finally terminated.
This section shall not be construed to authorize or allow the destruction of
any testing laboratory results or the inspection records of public improvements
of a municipality.
   B.   The city of Grove may destroy, sell or otherwise dispose of municipal
papers, documents and records which are not mentioned in subsection A of this
section within five (5) years. (Ord. 496, 10-1-2002)
CHAPTER 9
SALE OF SURPLUS OR OBSOLETE ITEMS
(Rep. by Ord. 573, 1-20-2009)
CHAPTER 10
HOSPITALS AND AMBULATORY SURGICAL CARE FACILITIES
SECTION:
2-1001: Definitions
2-1002: Hospitals
2-1003: Ambulatory Surgical Care Facilities
2-1001: DEFINITIONS:
AMBULATORY SURGICAL CENTER: An establishment with an organized medical staff of
physicians, with permanent facilities that are equipped and operated primarily
for the purpose of performing surgical procedures, with continuous physician
services available on call, and registered professional nursing services
available on site, whenever a patient is in the facility, which provides
services or other accommodations for patients to recover for a period not to
exceed twenty three (23) hours after surgery.
HOSPITAL: Any institution, place, building or agency, public or private,
whether organized for profit or not, devoted primarily to the maintenance and
operation of facilities for the diagnosis, treatment or care of patients
admitted for overnight stay or longer in order to obtain medical care, surgical
care, obstetrical care, or nursing care for illness, disease, injury,
infirmity, or deformity. (Ord. 518, 6-1-2004)
2-1002: HOSPITALS:
   A.   No new hospital shall be developed, either through construction or
conversion of existing space, or an existing hospital expanded, in the city of
Grove, Oklahoma, unless a permit therefor has been issued by the city clerk.
However, no such permit is required for a conversion of existing space or an
expansion of an existing hospital that does not increase the number of patient
beds or the number of operating rooms.
   B.   Before developing a facility for use as a newly licensed hospital or
expanding an existing hospital to increase the number of patient beds or the
number of operating rooms, the person, firm or corporation, proposing to
operate the hospital shall apply to the city clerk for a permit for the
facility, which shall be in addition to any other required approvals. The
application for permit shall be in such form as the city clerk shall prescribe
and shall include a demonstration of the hospital's or hospital expansion's
probable impact on existing hospital and surgical services in the city of Grove
including permitted facilities not yet completed.
   C.   The application for permit shall be accompanied by a filing fee equal
to one percent (1%) of the capital cost of the proposed hospital plus two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00), with a minimum fee of three thousand
five hundred dollars ($3,500.00) and a maximum fee chargeable hereunder of
twenty two thousand five hundred dollars ($22,500.00). It is intended that the
fee charged herein shall be used to cover the costs of the application
administration and evaluation by the city staff in an amount of two thousand
five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). In addition, the remainder of the application
fee shall be used to pay all costs for a feasibility study, to be conducted by
a recognized healthcare industry consulting firm, demonstrating the existence
of the matters herein, declared essential for determination by the city
council, prior to the issuance of such a permit, as well as cost of publication
and other matters required to be accomplished under this chapter. Any portion
of the application fee not so expended shall be refunded to the applicant. If
it is determined that costs of the feasibility study shall exceed the amount
submitted with the application fee, the city clerk shall notify the applicant,
in writing. Said applicant shall submit the additional amount requested within
ten (10) days or the application shall be stayed until such time as the
remainder of the application fee is submitted to the city clerk.
   D.   Within two (2) working days after receipt of the application fee the
city clerk shall provide the applicant with a notice of receipt and shall
present to the city manager the application for permit. Within ten (10) days
after receiving a completed application for permit, the city manager shall
cause a paid public notice to be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the area where the hospitals or hospital expansion is to be
located and in a newspaper of general circulation in the area where the
application is available for inspection. The notice shall include the name and
proposed location of the facility, a brief description of the proposal,
information on where the original application can be viewed, and an explanation
of how parties may file materials to be considered along with the application.
The city manager shall also request information on firm.
   E.   Any person may submit written evidence and argument regarding the
proposed hospital to the city manager to be reviewed by city staff and the
planning and zoning commission. Written materials shall be submitted to the
city manager within thirty (30) days after publication of the paid notice, the
city manager shall immediately provide these materials to the applicant by
certified mail or in person with the applicant signing a receipt. The applicant
shall have fifteen (15) days after receipt of the materials to respond in
writing to materials timely filed by other persons. The planning and zoning
commission shall be provided with all materials included in the application
process described herein and at a meeting to be held within sixty (60) days of
the completion of process. The application and feasibility study shall be
examined by the planning and zoning commission, who shall make a recommendation
to the city council.
   F.   No permit to establish a hospital or expand an existing hospital shall
be issued by the city clerk unless, after reviewing the application, the
feasibility study and timely filed written materials and responses, the city
manager shall provide to the city council the following findings made by the
planning and zoning commission:
      1.   The proposed hospital will contribute to the orderly development of
hospital and surgical services in the city of Grove; and
      2.   The proposed hospital will not cause an undue financial or staffing
hardship on any existing provider or essential hospital or surgical services in
the city of Grove including permitted facilities not yet completed, which
hardship shall be deemed potentially capable of causing the existing facility
to alter its services to such a degree that it will adversely impact the
citizens of the city of Grove, Oklahoma; and
      3.   The proposed hospital or hospital expansion can be adequately served
by the city's existing utility systems and/or infrastructure; and
      4.   That the proposed hospital or hospital expansion will not cause an
increase in the cost of medical care, which would adversely impact the citizens
of the city of Grove. The findings of the planning and zoning commission shall
be summarized with appropriate documentation by the city manager, with said
findings to be provided to the city council for its consideration in
determining the granting or denial of said permit.
   G.   The city manager shall schedule the application for permit for
consideration by the city council within one hundred fifty (150) days after
publication of the paid notice. The city permit is effective for eighteen (18)
months from the date of issuance. Within eighteen (18) months from the date of
issuance of the city permit, the applicant must obtain a building permit and
complete construction within a reasonable time. At the time the building permit
is issued, the applicant shall submit a construction schedule for approval by
the city. If construction or conversion work is not started within the time
required by this section and completed within a reasonable time, the permit
shall be null and void. The city council, in approving or denying the
application, will consider the recommendation of the planning and zoning
commission, but only grant or deny the application subsequent to its
consideration of those items addressed in subsection F of this section.
   H.   In the event the city council approves the application for permit
submitted by the prospective builders, it shall be understood that all existing
requirements contained in part 12, "Planning, Zoning And Development", of this
code, dealing with appropriate zoning and building standards, shall be complied
with by the permit recipient. (Ord. 518, 6-1-2004)
2-1003: AMBULATORY SURGICAL CARE FACILITIES:
   A.   No new ambulatory surgical care facility shall be developed either
through construction, expansion, or conversion of existing space, or an
existing surgical care facility expanded, in the city of Grove, Oklahoma,
unless a permit therefor has been issued by the city clerk. However, no such
permit is required for the conversion of existing space or the expansion of an
existing ambulatory surgical care facility that does not increase the number of
operating rooms.
   B.   Before developing a facility for use as a newly licensed ambulatory
surgical care facility or before converting existing space or expanding an
existing facility to increase the number of operating rooms, the person
proposing to operate the ambulatory surgical care facility shall apply to the
city clerk for a permit for the facility in addition to any other required
approvals. The application for permit shall be in such form as the city clerk
shall prescribe and shall include a demonstration of the ambulatory surgical
care facility's probable impact on the existing surgical services in the city
of Grove including permitted facilities not yet completed.
   C.   The application for permit shall be accompanied by a filing fee equal
to one percent (1%) of the capital cost of the proposed surgical care facility
plus two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00), with a minimum fee of three
thousand five hundred dollars ($3,500.00) and a maximum fee chargeable
hereunder of twenty two thousand five hundred dollars ($22,500.00). It is
intended that the fee charged herein shall be used to cover the costs of the
application administration and evaluation by the city staff in an amount of two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). In addition, the remainder of the
application fee shall be used to pay all costs for a feasibility study, to be
conducted by a recognized healthcare industry consulting firm, demonstrating
the existence of the matters herein, declared essential for determination by
the city council, prior to the issuance of such a permit, as well as costs of
publication and other matters required to be accomplished under this chapter.
Any portion of the application fee not so expended shall be refunded to the
applicant. If it is determined that costs of the feasibility study shall exceed
the amount submitted with the application fee, the city clerk shall notify the
applicant, in writing. Said applicant shall submit the additional amount
requested within ten (10) days or the application shall be stayed until such
time as the remainder of the application fee is submitted to the city clerk.
   D.   Within two (2) working days after receipt of the application fee the
city clerk shall provide the applicant with a notice of receipt and shall
present to the city manager the application for permit. Within ten (10) days
after receiving a completed application for permit, the city manager shall
cause a paid public notice to be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the area where the ambulatory surgical care facility is to be
located and in a newspaper of general circulation in the area where the
application is available for inspection. The notice shall include the name and
proposed location of the facility, a brief description of the proposal,
information on where the original application can be viewed, and an explanation
of how parties may file materials to be considered along with the application.
The city manager shall also request information on firm.
   E.   Any person may submit written evidence and argument regarding the
proposed hospital to the city manager to be reviewed by city staff and the
planning and zoning commission. Written materials shall be submitted to the
city manager within thirty (30) days after publication of the paid notice, the
city manager shall immediately provide these materials to the applicant by
certified mail or in person with the applicant signing a receipt. The applicant
shall have fifteen (15) days after receipt of the materials to respond in
writing to materials timely filed by other persons. The planning and zoning
commission shall be provided with all materials included in the application
process described herein and at a meeting to be held within sixty (60) days of
the completion of process. The application and feasibility study shall be
examined by the planning and zoning commission, who shall make a recommendation
to the city council.
   F.   No permit to establish a surgical care facility shall be issued by the
city clerk unless, after reviewing the application, the feasibility study and
timely filed written materials and responses, the city manager shall provide to
the city council the following findings made by the planning and zoning
commission:
      1.   The proposed surgical care facility will contribute to the orderly
development of hospital and surgical services in the city of Grove; and
      2.   The proposed surgical care facility will not cause an undue
financial or staffing hardship on any existing provider or essential hospital
or surgical services in the city of Grove including permitted facilities not
yet completed, which hardship shall be deemed potentially capable of causing
the existing facility to alter its services to such a degree that it will
adversely impact the citizens of the city of Grove, Oklahoma; and
      3.   The proposed surgical care facility can be adequately served by the
city's existing utility systems and/or infrastructure; and
      4.   That the proposed surgical care facility will not cause an increase
in the cost of medical care, which would adversely impact the citizens of the
city of Grove. The findings of the planning and zoning commission shall be
summarized with appropriate documentation by the city manager, with said
findings to be provided to the city council for its consideration in
determining the granting or denial of said permit.
   G.   The city manager shall schedule the application for permit for
consideration by the city council within one hundred fifty (150) days after
publication of the paid notice. The city permit is effective for eighteen (18)
months from the date of issuance. Within eighteen (18) months from the date of
issuance of the city permit, the applicant must obtain a building permit and
complete construction within a reasonable time. At the time the building permit
is issued, the applicant shall submit a construction schedule for approval by
the city. If construction or conversion work is not started within the time
required by this section and completed within a reasonable time, the permit
shall be null and void. The city council, in approving or denying the
application, will consider the recommendation of the planning and zoning
commission, but only grant or deny the application subsequent to its
consideration of those items addressed in subsection F of this section.
   H.   In the event the city council approves the application for permit
submitted by the prospective builders, it shall be understood that all existing
requirements contained in part 12, "Planning, Zoning And Development", of this
code, dealing with appropriate zoning and building standards, shall be complied
with by the permit recipient. (Ord. 518, 6-1-2004)
PART 3
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
CHAPTER 1
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND TAX
SECTION:
3-101: Definitions And Interpretations
3-102: Occupation Tax Levied; License To Be Issued
3-103: City Clerk To Submit Annual Report
3-104: Certificate Of Compliance
3-105: Wine, Beer And Mixed Beverage Sales For On Premises Consumption
3-106: Retail Package Stores And Retail Stores Selling Wine Or Beer For Off
Premises Consumption
3-107: Regulations Applicable To Alcoholic Beverages
3-108: Penalty
3-109: Revocation Of License
3-101: DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS:
Word, phrases, and terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings
prescribed by, and be construed in conformity with, the definitions of title
37A of the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act of 1959, force and effect as
if the definitions were set forth in full in this chapter, unless the context
clearly indicates a different meaning or construction.
ABLE COMMISSION: The Alcoholic Beverage Laws Enforcement Commission.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Alcohol, spirits, beer and wine and includes every liquid
or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer capable of
being consumed as a beverage by human beings, but does not include low-point
beer.
APPLICANT: Any individual, legal or commercial business entity, or any
individual involved in any legal or commercial business entity allowed to hold
any license in accordance with the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.
BEER: Any beverage containing more than three and two-tenths percent (3.2%) of
alcohol by weight and obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or
decoction of barley, or other grain, malt or similar products. Beer may or may
not contain hops or other vegetable products, and includes ale, stout, lager
beer, porter and other malt or brewed liquors, but does not include sake, known
as Japanese rice wine.
BREWER: Any person who produces beer in the State of Oklahoma.
BREWERY: A licensed establishment operated on the premises of, or on premises
located contiguous to, a small brewer, that prepares and serves food and
beverages, including alcoholic beverages, for on-premises consumption.
CLASS B WHOLESALER: Any person doing any such acts or carrying on any such
business that would require such person to obtain a Class B wholesaler license.
DISTILLER: Any person who produces spirits from any source or substance, or any
person who brews or makes mash, wort, or wash, fit for distillation or for the
production of spirits (except a person making or using such material in the
authorized production of wine or beer, or the production of vinegar by
fermentation), or any person who by any process separates alcoholic spirits
from any fermented substance, or any person who, makes or keeps mash, wort, or
wash, has also in his or her possession or use a still.
LICENSEE: Any person holding a license under the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage
Control Act, and any agent, servant, or employee of such licensee while in the
performance of any act or duty in connection with the licensed business or on
the licensed premises.
MANUFACTURER: A brewer, distiller, winemaker, rectifier or bottler of any
alcoholic beverage.
MIXED BEVERAGE: One or more servings of a beverage composed in whole or part of
an alcoholic beverage in a sealed or unsealed container of any legal size for
consumption on the premises where served or sold by the holder of a mixed
beverage, beer and wine, caterer, public event, charitable event or special
event license.
MIXED BEVERAGE COOLER: Any beverage, by whatever name designated, consisting of
an alcoholic beverage and fruit or vegetable juice, fruit or vegetable
flavorings, dairy products or carbonated water containing more than one-half of
one percent (1/2 of 1%) of alcohol measured by volume but not more than seven
percent (7%) alcohol by volume at sixty degrees Fahrenheit (60°F) and which is
packaged in a container not larger than three hundred seventy five milliliters
(375 mL). Such terms shall include, but not be limited to, the beverage
popularly known as a "wine cooler".
OCCUPATION: Used in connection with "Occupation Tax" means the sites occupied
as the places of business of the manufacturers, wholesalers, Class B
wholesalers, retailers, mixed beverage licensees, beer and wine licensees,
bottle clubs, caterers, public event and special event licensees.
ORIGINAL PACKAGE: Any container of alcoholic beverage filled and stamped or
sealed by the manufacturer.
PATRON: Any person, customer or visitor who is not employed by a licensee or
who is not a licensee.
PERSON: An individual, any type of partnership, corporation, association,
limited liability company or any individual involved in the legal structure of
any such business entity.
PREMISES: The grounds and all buildings and appurtenances pertaining to the
grounds including any adjacent premises if under the direct or indirect control
of the licensee and the rooms and equipment under the control of the licensee
and used in connection with or in furtherance of the business covered by a
license. Provided that the ABLE Commission shall have the authority to
designate areas to be excluded from the licensed premises solely for the
purpose of: a) allowing the presence and consumption of alcoholic beverages, by
private parties which are closed to the general public or b) allowing the
services of a caterer serving alcoholic beverages provided by a private party.
This exception shall in no way limit the licensee's concurrent responsibility
for any violations of the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act occurring on
the licensed premises.
PRIVATE EVENT: A social gathering or event attended by invited guests who share
a common cause, membership, business or task and have a prior established
relationship. For purposes of this definition, advertisement for general public
attendance or sales of tickets to the general public shall not constitute a
private event.
PUBLIC EVENT: Any event that can be attended by the general public.
RECTIFIER: Any person who rectifies, purifies or refines spirits or wines by
any process (other than by original and continuous distillation, or original
and continuous processing from mash, wort, wash or other substance, through
continuous closed vessels and pipes, until the production thereof is complete),
and any person who, without rectifying, purifying or refining spirits, shall by
mixing (except for immediate consumption on the premises where mixed) such
spirits, wine or other liquor with any material, manufactures any spurious,
imitation, or compound liquors for sale, under the name of whiskey, brandy,
rum, gin, wine, spirits, cordials, or any other name.
RESTAURANT: An establishment that is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages by
the individual drink for on-premises consumption and where food is prepared and
sold for immediate consumption on the premises.
RETAIL BEER AND/OR WINE: Establishments that sell beer and/or wine for
consumption off the premises. Beer and/or wine may be sold refrigerated or non-
refrigerated.
RETAIL CONTAINER FOR SPIRITS AND WINES: An original package of any capacity
approved by the United States Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms.
RETAIL SALESPERSON: A salesperson soliciting orders from and calling upon
retail alcoholic beverage stores with regard to his or her product.
RETAILER: The holder of a package store license. Products are sold for
consumption off the premises.
SALE: Any transfer, exchange or barter in any manner or by any means
whatsoever, and includes and means all sales made by any person, whether as
principal, proprietor or as an agent, servant or employee.
SPIRITS: Beverage other than wine, beer or light beer, which contains more than
one-half of one percent (1/2 of 1%) alcohol measured by volume and obtained by
distillation, whether or not mixed with other substances in solution and
includes those products known as whiskey, brandy, rum, gin, vodka, liqueurs,
cordials and fortified wines and similar compounds; but shall not include any
alcohol liquid completely denatured in accordance with the Acts of Congress and
regulations pursuant thereto.
WHOLESALER: Includes any person doing any such acts or carrying on any such
business or businesses that would require such person to obtain a wholesaler's
license or licenses.
WINE: Includes any beverage containing more than one-half of one percent (1/
2 of 1%) alcohol by volume and not more than twenty four percent (24%) alcohol
by volume at sixty degrees Fahrenheit (60°F) obtained by the fermentation of
the natural contents of fruits, vegetable, honey, milk or other products
containing sugar, whether or not other ingredients are added, and include
vermouth and sake, known as Japanese rice wine.
WINEMAKER: Any person who produces wine.
WINEMAKER, OKLAHOMA: A business premises in Oklahoma licensed pursuant to the
Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act wherein wine is produced by the
licensee who must be a resident of the State. The wine product fermented in
said licensed premises shall be of grapes, berries, and other fruits and
vegetables imported into this State and processed herein or shall be of grapes,
berries and other fruits and vegetables grown in Oklahoma. (Ord. 753, 9-4-2018)
3-102: OCCUPATION TAX LEVIED; LICENSE TO BE ISSUED 1 :
   A.   There is hereby levied and assessed an annual Occupational Tax on every
business or occupation relating to alcoholic beverages. The Occupational Tax at
the time this chapter was approved is fifty dollars ($50.00). Beginning July 1,
2019 the Occupational Tax will increase as indicated on the tax table, and will
continue to increase on an annual basis until the tax reaches the maximum
amount.
   CITY OF GROVE
   OCCUPATIONAL TAX TABLE - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
 7/1/2019 7/1/2020 7/1/2021 7/1/2022 7/1/2023
                            7/1/2019 7/1/2020 7/1/2021 7/1/2022 7/1/2023
Brewer                      $200.00  $300.00  $400.00  $500.00  $600.00 maximum
Caterer                     200.00   300.00   400.00   500.00   600.00 maximum
Distiller                   200.00   300.00   400.00   500.00   600.00 maximum
On-premises mixed           200.00   300.00   400.00   500.00   600.00 maximum
beverages, beer and/or wine
Rectifier                   200.00   300.00   400.00   500.00   600.00 maximum
Retail package store        200.00   300.00   400.00   500.00   600.00 maximum
Retail beer and/or wine     200.00   300.00   400.00   500.00   600.00 maximum
store
Winemaker                   200.00   300.00   400.00   500.00   600.00 maximum
   Oklahoma winemaker    $50.00 maximum
Wholesaler - beer, wine and $200.00  $300.00  $400.00  $500.00  $600.00 maximum
spirits
Exempt organizations under  200.00   300.00   400.00   $500.00 maximum
IRS 501(c)(19)
Special event               $50.00 per day maximum
 
   B.   Any State licensee originally entering upon any business or occupation
herein listed shall pay the tax at the Office of the City Clerk on or before
the date upon which he enters upon such business or occupation. The licensee
shall provide a copy of his current State license before payment of an
Occupation Tax will be accepted. Thereafter, the licensee shall pay the tax
annually on or before July 1. The fee is non-refundable; and shall be used to
offset Municipal expenses covering the costs related to licensing, inspection,
administration and enforcement relating to alcoholic beverage establishments.
   C.   If a brewer or a Class B wholesaler also holds a license from the State
to manufacture or wholesale malt beverage, then the Occupation Tax for such
brewer or Class B wholesaler shall be reduced by seventy five percent (75%).
   D.   The Occupation Tax subject to this chapter shall be prorated on a
monthly basis for the year in which an occupation or business begins
operations.
   E.   Upon payment of the Occupation Tax, the City shall issue a receipt to
the State licensee, which the licensee shall post in a conspicuous place on the
premises wherein he carries on his business or occupation.
   F.   Except for the sale of wine or beer to the public, an interim
Occupational Tax shall allow all qualified retail wine and retail beer, beer
distributors and wine and spirits wholesaler State licensees to perform all
activities permissible under a full license including but not limited to
purchasing, stocking and storing wine and/or beer on the premises prior to
October 1, 2018. In order to qualify for an interim Occupational Tax, the State
licensee must satisfy all the requirements set forth in article XXVIIIA of the
Oklahoma Tax Commission and State law. After October 1, 2018, the interim
Occupational Tax shall convert to a full Occupational Tax and shall be renewed
prior to July 1 of each year. (Ord. 753, 9-4-2018)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section 9-101 of this Code.
3-103: CITY CLERK TO SUBMIT ANNUAL REPORT:
The City Clerk shall submit an annual report to the ABLE Commission, covering
the fiscal year, showing the number and class of license subject to the
Occupation Tax and the amount of money received therefrom. (Ord. 753, 9-4-2018)
3-104: CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE:
   A.   Every applicant that is applying for an original first-time license,
except applicants for an employee, charitable event, special event or airline/
railroad beverage license shall obtain a Certificate of Compliance from the
City by:
      1.   Filing a written application on forms prescribed by the City; and
      2.   Paying one hundred dollar ($100.00) Certificate of Compliance fee;
such fee may be amended per action of the City Council.
   B.   Upon receipt of an application for a Certificate of Compliance, the
following City departments shall review and verify compliance:
      1.   The proposed location and use thereof must comply with all Municipal
zoning ordinances, verified by the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
      2.   The proposed site and structure must comply with all Building Codes,
verified by the building inspector.
      3.   The proposed site, structure and location must comply with all Fire
Code requirements, verified by the Fire Chief or his designee.
      4.   The proposed location and use must comply with provisions regarding
food services, verified by the Delaware County Health Department.
   C.   The City shall act on all such applications within twenty (20) days of
receipt thereof.
   D.   Upon finding that the premises of an applicant for a Certificate of
Compliance is in compliance with all applicable zoning ordinances, Building,
Fire, Safety and Health Codes, a Certificate of Compliance shall be issued. The
applicant is responsible for submitting the Certificate of Compliance to ABLE
with their license application.
   E.   The above Certificate of Compliance shall be signed by the City Manager
or his designee. (Ord. 753, 9-4-2018)
3-105: WINE, BEER AND MIXED BEVERAGE SALES FOR ON PREMISES CONSUMPTION:
No person shall operate or maintain any business serving mixed beverages or
beer or wine without having previously paid the Occupational Tax as provided in
this chapter.
   A.   Hours Of Operation: Establishment to which the on premises mixed
beverage, beer and wine, caterer, public event, charitable event, or special
event Occupational Tax is applicable may sell, dispense, serve or allow to be
consumed any mixed beverages, beer or wine on the premises Monday through
Sunday ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. to two o'clock (2:00) A.M.
   B.   Location: It shall be unlawful for any establishment to which mixed
beverages, beer or wine is served to be consumed on- premises be located within
three hundred feet (300') of any public or private school or church property
primarily and regularly used for worship services and religious activities.
The distance indicated in this section shall be measured from the nearest
property line of the public or private school or church to the nearest
perimeter wall of the premises of the place which has received a permit or
which has been licensed to sell alcoholic beverages.
      1.   Exceptions:
         a.   When any establishment licensed to serve mixed beverages, beer or
wine to be consumed on-premises prior to November 1, 2000; provided, if at the
time of application for license renewal the licensed location has been in
actual operation for a continuous period of more than sixty (60) days, the
license shall be renewed.
         b.   Establishments licensed prior to October 1, 2018, to sell low-
point beer which were permitted to be located within three hundred feet (300')
of any public or private school or church property primarily and regularly used
for worship services and religious activities, pursuant to the provisions of
title 37A of the Oklahoma Statutes, shall be permitted to have any license in
effect on October 1, 2018, transferred to a mixed beverage license; provided,
if such an establishment ceases to regularly be open to the public or changes
ownership, the provisions of this paragraph shall cease to apply.
         c.   When any establishment licensed to serve mixed beverages, beer or
wine to be consumed on-premises subject to the provisions of this section
changes ownership or the operator thereof is changed and such change of
ownership results in the same type of business being conducted on the premises,
the provisions of this section shall not be a deterrent to the issuance of a
license to the new owner or operator if he or she is otherwise qualified.
         d.   If any school or church shall be established within three hundred
feet (300') of any establishment licensed to serve mixed beverages, beer or
wine to be consumed on-premises subject to the provisions of this section after
such establishment has been licensed, the provisions of this section shall not
be a deterrent to the renewal of such license if there has not been a lapse of
operations for more than sixty (60) days.
A college or university may waive the three hundred foot (300') requirement by
providing written notice to the establishment seeking the license and to the
District Court of the County in which the establishment is located during the
County beverage permit application process. Provided, the college or university
prior to waiving the three hundred foot (300') requirement found in this
section shall publish a notice of its intention to waive such requirement in a
legal newspaper of general circulation at least thirty (30) days but no more
than forty (40) days prior to providing written notice to any establishment
seeking the license or to the District Court of the County. As used in this
section "legal newspaper of general circulation" means a newspaper meeting the
requisites of a newspaper for publication of legal notices as prescribed in 25
Oklahoma Statutes section 106 in a majority of the counties in the State.
   C.   Employment: No person shall employ any person under eighteen (18) years
of age in the selling of beer or wine or employ any person under twenty one
(21) years of age in the selling of mixed beverages. Provided:
      1.   A mixed beverage, beer and wine, caterer, public event, special
event, bottle club, retail wine or retail beer licensee may employ servers or
sales clerks who are at least eighteen (18) years of age, except persons under
twenty one (21) years of age may not serve in designated bar or lounge areas,
and
      2.   A mixed beverage, beer and wine, caterer, public event, special
event or bottle club licensee may employ or hire musical bands who have
musicians who are under eighteen (18) years of age if each such musician is
either accompanied by a parent or legal guardian or has on their person, to be
made available for inspection upon demand by any employee of the ABLE
Commission or law enforcement officer, a written, notarized affidavit from the
parent or legal guardian giving the underage musician permission to perform in
designated bar or lounge areas. (Ord. 753, 9-4-2018)
3-106: RETAIL PACKAGE STORES AND RETAIL STORES SELLING WINE OR BEER FOR OFF
PREMISES CONSUMPTION:
No person shall operate, manage or work in any retail establishment that sells,
for off premises consumption only, any type of alcoholic beverage without
having previously obtained an occupational license for that store as provided
in this chapter.
   A.   Hours Of Operation: Retail package stores will be permitted to remain
open and operational on Monday through Saturday from eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
through midnight Further, no person shall open or operate a retail package
store at any time on the following days:
      1.   Sunday;
      2.   Thanksgiving Day;
      3.   Christmas Day;
No wholesale dealer shall sell or deliver to any retail package store on any of
the days listed above.
Retail establishments selling beer and/or wine may offer for retail sale on
Monday through Sunday between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and two
o'clock (2:00) A.M. the following day.
   B.   Location: It shall be unlawful for any retail package store and retail
stores selling beer and/or wine to be located within three hundred feet (300')
of any public or private school or church property primarily and regularly used
for worship services and religious activities.
The distance indicated in this section shall be measured from the nearest
property line of the public or private school or church to the nearest
perimeter wall of the premises of the place which has received a permit or
which has been licensed to sell alcoholic beverages.
      1.   Exceptions:
         a.   Retail package stores and retail stores selling beer and/or wine
prior to November 1, 2000; provided, if at the time of application for license
renewal the licensed location has not been in actual operation for a continuous
period of more than sixty (60) days, the license shall not be renewed.
         b.   When any retail package store and retail stores selling beer and/
or wine subject to the provisions of this section changes ownership or the
operator thereof is changed and such change of ownership results in the same
type of business being conducted on the premises, the provisions of this
section shall not be a deterrent to the issuance of a license to the new owner
or operator if he or she is otherwise qualified.
         c.   If any school or church shall be established within three hundred
feet (300') of any retail package store and retail stores selling beer and/or
wine subject to the provisions of this section after such establishment has
been licensed, the provisions of this section shall not be a deterrent to the
renewal of such license if there has not been a lapse of operations for more
than sixty (60) days.
A college or university may waive the three hundred foot (300') requirement by
providing written notice to the establishment seeking the license and to the
District Court of the County in which the establishment is located during the
County beverage permit application process. Provided, the college or university
prior to waiving the three hundred foot (300') requirement found in this
section shall publish a notice of its intention to waive such requirement in a
legal newspaper of general circulation at least thirty (30) days but no more
than forty (40) days prior to providing written notice to any establishment
seeking the license or to the District Court of the County. As used in this
section "legal newspaper of general circulation" means a newspaper meeting the
requisites of a newspaper for publication of legal notices as prescribed in 25
Oklahoma Statutes section 106 in a majority of the counties in the State.
   C.   Employment: Retail package stores shall not employ any person under the
age of twenty one (21) years of age in the selling of spirits.
Retail stores selling beer and/or wine shall not employ any person under the
age of eighteen (18) years of age in the selling of beer or wine.
   D.   Sale Only In Original Package: Retail package stores and retail stores
selling beer and/or wine may sell alcoholic beverages only in retail containers
for consumption off the premises.
Retail package stores and retail stores selling beer and/or wine may sell beer
and wine at refrigerated temperatures.
   E.   Sale Of Other Goods Allowed: Retail package stores may sell anything
sold in a grocery or convenience store including items such as lottery tickets,
tobacco, Tylenol, etc. Sale of other goods shall not exceed twenty percent
(20%) of their gross monthly sales.
   F.   Alcohol By Volume: Retail beer license holders may sell beer up to 8.99
percent alcohol by volume (ABV).
Retail wine license holders may sell wine up to fifteen percent (15%) alcohol
by volume (ABV). (Ord. 753, 9-4-2018; amd. Ord. 827, 2-7-2023)
3-107: REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person:
      1.   Knowingly to sell, deliver, or furnish alcoholic beverages to any
person under twenty one (21) years of age;
      2.   Who is under the age of twenty one (21), to misrepresent his age in
writing or by presenting documentation of age for the purpose of inducing any
person to sell him alcoholic beverages;
      3.   To employ any person under the age of twenty one (21) years in the
selling or handling of alcoholic beverages;
      4.   Who is a licensee or an agent or employee thereof to permit any
person under twenty one (21) years of age to enter into, remain within, or
loiter about a licensed premises;
      5.   Knowingly sell, deliver or furnish alcoholic beverages to an
intoxicated person or to any person who has been adjudged insane or mentally
deficient;
      6.   To open a retail container or consume alcoholic beverages on the
premises of a retail package store; or for any operator of a retail package
store or any person in charge thereof, to permit any person to open a retail
container therein or consume alcoholic beverages therein;
      7.   To transport in any vehicle upon any street, alley, or other public
way within the City any alcoholic beverage except in the original container,
which shall not have been opened and the seal of which shall not have been
broken, and from which the original cap or cork shall not have been removed,
unless the opened container be in the trunk or any closed compartment of other
container out of public view and out of reach of the driver or any occupant of
the vehicle;
      8.   To drink intoxicating liquor in public or to be intoxicated in a
public place; and
      9.   Who is the operator of a cafe, restaurant, club or any place of
recreation, to permit any person to be drunk or intoxicated in such a place of
business. (Ord. 753, 9-4-2018)
3-108: PENALTY:
   A.   Failure To Comply: Any person, firm or corporation who engages in any
business, profession, trade or occupation, or exercises any privilege, for
which a license or permit is required by this chapter without a valid license
or permit as hereby required, or who otherwise violates any provisions of this
chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction, punished by
fines not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), plus court costs and
penalties, if any. Each day of such violation shall constitute a separate
offense. (Ord. 753, 9-4-2018)
3-109: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The City Council shall have the power, after public hearing, to revoke any
license granted hereunder for violation of law or ordinance by the license
holder. (Ord. 753, 9-4-2018)
CHAPTER 2
NONINTOXICATING BEVERAGES
SECTION:
3-201: Definitions
3-202: License Fee Levied
3-203: License Required
3-204: Compliance With Law; Expiration Of License
3-205: Revocation Of License
3-206: Minors Not To Be Employed
3-207: Dancing Prohibited
3-208: Intoxicated Persons; Gambling; Disorderly Conduct
3-209: Loitering By Minors
3-210: Sale And Purchase To Or By Minors
3-211: Minors; Possession Of Alcoholic Beverages Or Beer Prohibited
3-212: Drinking In Public
3-213: Penalty
3-201: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this section:
MINOR: Any person who, pursuant to state law, has not yet attained the age at
which a person is permitted to consume nonintoxicating beverages.
NONINTOXICATING BEVERAGES: All beverages containing more than one-half of one
percent (1/2 of 1%) alcohol by volume, and not more than three and two-tenths
percent (3.2%) alcohol by weight.
RETAIL DEALER: Any person, firm, corporation, association, or concessionaire
who sells, distributes, or dispenses at retail, any nonintoxicating beverage
within the corporate limits of the city, without regard as to any place where
such beverages may be consumed or used. (Prior code § 2-11)
3-202: LICENSE FEE LEVIED:
   A.   There is hereby levied upon each retail dealer in nonintoxicating
beverages for consumption on or off the premises an annual occupation tax of
twenty dollars ($20.00), and upon each retail dealer in nonintoxicating
beverages for consumption off the premises only an annual occupation tax of ten
dollars ($10.00).
   B.   All such occupation taxes shall be paid to the city clerk at the time
of issuance of license and in the manner prescribed herein. (Prior code § 2-12;
amd. Ord. 211, 5-4-1976)
3-203: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any retail dealer, whether permanent or temporary, to sell,
distribute, or dispense any nonintoxicating beverages without having first
received a municipal occupational license as herein required. (Prior code § 2-
13)
3-204: COMPLIANCE WITH LAW; EXPIRATION OF LICENSE:
No municipal license shall be issued to any retail dealer by the city clerk
without a satisfactory showing that the applicant has obtained all state and
county permits required by law, and has in all other respects complied with the
state and local alcoholic beverage control requirements. All such licenses
shall expire on June 30. No license shall be transferable. (Prior code § 2-14)
   A.   It shall be unlawful:
      1.   For any place which has received a permit or which has been licensed
by the alcoholic beverage laws enforcement commission to sell nonintoxicating
beverages (low point beer) and which has as its main purpose the selling or
serving of nonintoxicating beverages (low point beer) for consumption on the
premises to be located within three hundred feet (300') of any public or
private school or church property primarily and regularly used for worship
services and religious activities; however, a college or university may waive
the three hundred foot (300') requirement by providing written notice to the
establishment seeking the license and to the district court of the county in
which the establishment is located during the county beverage permit
application process.
Provided, a college or university prior to waiving the three hundred foot
(300') requirement found in this subsection shall publish a notice of its
intention to waive such requirement in a legal newspaper of general circulation
at least thirty (30) days but no more than forty (40) days prior to providing
any establishment seeking the license or to the District Court of the County.
As used in this subsection "legal newspaper of general circulation" means a
newspaper meeting the requisites of a newspaper for publication of legal
notices as prescribed in 25 Oklahoma Statutes section 106 in a majority of the
counties in the State.
The distance indicated shall be measured from the nearest property line of the
public or private school or church to the nearest perimeter wall of the
premises of the place which has received a permit or which has been licensed to
sell nonintoxicating beverages (low point beer).
The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to places which have received
a permit or which have been licensed to sell nonintoxicating beverages (low
point beer) for on premises consumption prior to July 1, 1999.
If any school or church shall be established within three hundred feet (300')
of any place subject to the provisions of this subsection after the place has
received a permit or been licensed, the provisions of this subsection shall not
be a deterrent to the renewal of the permit or license if there has not been a
lapse of more than sixty (60) days.
When any place subject to the provisions of this subsection which has a permit
or license to sell nonintoxicating beverages (low point beer) for on premises
consumption changes ownership or the operator thereof is changed, and the
changes results in the same type of business being conducted on the premises,
the provisions of this subsection shall not be a deterrent to the issuance of a
license or permit to the new owner or operator if he or she is otherwise
qualified.
If an establishment selling nonintoxicating beverages (low point beer) also is
the holder of a mixed beverage or beer and wine license issued by the Alcoholic
Beverage Laws Enforcement Commission, the establishment shall be subject to the
provisions set forth in chapter 1 of this part. (Ord. 654, 8-21-2012)
3-205: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The City Council shall have power, after public hearing, to revoke any license
granted hereunder for violation of law or ordinance by the license holder.
(Prior Code § 2-13)
3-206: MINORS NOT TO BE EMPLOYED:
It is unlawful for any owner, manager, or operator of a place where
nonintoxicating beverages are sold for consumption on the premises, except an
eating place where the service of such beverages is incidental to the main
business of serving food, to employ a minor to work in such place. (Prior Code
§ 2-16)
3-207: DANCING PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any retail dealer operating a place of business where
nonintoxicating beverages are sold for consumption on the premises, or any
person in charge of such place, to permit dancing therein; and it is unlawful
for any person to dance in such a place. (Prior Code § 2-17)
3-208: INTOXICATED PERSONS; GAMBLING; DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
   A.   It is unlawful for the owner, manager, or operator of a place where
nonintoxicating beverages are sold for consumption on the premises to sell or
otherwise furnish such beverages to an intoxicated person or to permit an
intoxicated person to remain or loiter therein.
   B.   It is unlawful for the owner, manager, or operator of such a place to
permit therein gambling, betting, operation of a lottery; sale, furnishing, or
drinking of intoxicating liquor; disorderly conduct; loud or disturbing
language, noise, or music; profane language; or any other violation of the laws
of the State or of the ordinances of the City, or for any person to engage in
any such activity or conduct in such a place.
   C.   It is unlawful for the owner, manager, or operator of such a place to
permit therein fighting, boxing, wrestling, or other contests of physical
strength; or for any person to fight, box, wrestle, or engage in other contests
of physical strength in such a place. (Prior Code § 2-18)
3-209: LOITERING BY MINORS:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation operating or maintaining a
place of business where nonintoxicating beverage is sold for consumption on the
premises, or any person in charge thereof to allow any minor to loiter; and it
is unlawful for any minor to loiter or loaf, or to be or remain in or around
such a place of business. (Prior Code § 2-19)
3-210: SALE AND PURCHASE TO OR BY MINORS:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to sell, offer for sale,
give away, procure for, or otherwise dispense to any minor any nonintoxicating
beverage; or for any minor to purchase, receive or procure any nonintoxicating
beverage. (Prior code § 2-21)
3-211: MINORS; POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES OR BEER PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful and an offense for any minor to be in possession of any
nonintoxicating beverages while such person is on any public street, road or
highway, or in any public building or place. (Prior code § 2-22)
3-212: DRINKING IN PUBLIC:
It is unlawful for any person, whether a minor or of age, to drink any
nonintoxicating beverage while such person is upon any public street, alley, or
other public highway, or in any public building or other public place within
the city. This section shall not prohibit a person who is of age from drinking
such beverage in a place licensed to sell it for consumption on the premises.
(Prior code § 2-23)
3-213: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section
1-108 of this code. (Ord. 454, 5-16-2000)
PART 4
ANIMALS
CHAPTER 1
ANIMAL REGULATIONS
SECTION:
4-101: Definitions
4-102: Obedience To Officers
4-103: Keeping, Care And Control
4-104: Confinement
4-105: Tethering Requirements
4-106: Kennels
4-107: Animal Traps
4-108: Rabies And Animal Bites
4-109: Adoption Process And Fees
4-110: Impoundment And Disposition
4-111: Dog Parks
4-112: Sell Or Give Away
4-113: Licensing Required
4-114: Enforcement
4-115: Penalty
4-101: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER: The person, firm or agency appointed or designated by
the Chief of Police for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter
and shall include, without limitation, police officers, and Code Enforcement
Officers.
ANIMAL RESCUE GROUP: Any organization qualified as a nonprofit organization
under title 26, United States Code, section 501(c)(3), along with their
affiliated foster homes, operating for the sole purpose of rescuing stray dogs
and cats.
ANIMAL SHELTER: Any facility operated by a humane society, the City or its
authorized agent, for the purpose of impounding animals under the authority of
this chapter or State law for care, confinement, return to the owner, adoption
or euthanasia.
ANIMALS, ABANDONED: The voluntary relinquishment of an animal with no intention
to retain possession including, but not limited to, vacating a premises and
leaving the animal in or at the premises, failing to feed and/or water an
animal, allowing an animal to stray or wander onto public or private property
with the intention of surrendering ownership or custody over said animal.
ANIMALS, AGRICULTURE: Any type of animal that is normally housed on farm, ranch
or agricultural area, including, but not limited to, bovine, cattle, horses,
mules, donkeys and other equines, hogs, goats, rabbits, sheep, chicken, ducks,
geese, turkey, guinea, other types of fowl and poultry.
ANIMALS, DOMESTIC: All vertebrate and invertebrate animals that have been tamed
and domesticated, and are normally housed within a human residence as a pet,
and not for the purpose of production or human consumption, including, but not
limited to dogs, cats, potbellied pigs, ferrets, rabbits, non-poisonous or non-
venomous reptiles, fish or birds.
ANIMALS, LARGE: An animal weighing in excess of fifty (50) pounds.
ANIMALS, MEDIUM: An animal weighing between twenty five (25) pounds and fifty
(50) pounds.
ANIMALS, OLDER OR ILL HEALTH: Animals unable to be spayed or neutered without a
high likelihood of suffering serious bodily harm or death due to age or
infirmity. Written confirmation from a licensed veterinarian is required to
meet this definition.
ANIMALS, SERVICE: Dogs trained by a professional trainer, to do work or perform
tasks for the benefit of an individual with a disability, including, but not
limited to, guiding individuals with impaired vision, alerting individuals with
impaired hearing to intruders or sounds, providing minimal protection or rescue
work, pulling a wheelchair or fetching dropped items.
ANIMALS, SMALL: An animal weighing less than twenty five (25) pounds.
ANIMALS, THERAPY: Animals trained by a professional trainer, to provide
affection and comfort to various members of the public, typically in facility
settings such as hospitals, retirement homes and schools. Therapy animals have
no special rights of access, except in those facilities where they are
welcomed.
AT LARGE OR RUNNING AT LARGE: The condition of any dog or cat or other animal
when it is off the property of the owner or persons responsible for the
animal's care and maintenance and not under the control of a competent person
which is a minimum of twelve (12) years of age.
CAT: Shall mean and include any cat, and every other animal of feline species
which is situated within the City limits.
CHICKEN: A laying hen that is commonly raised for egg production.
CHICKEN COOP: A small structure or enclosure where chickens nest, roost or
perch and may include feeding and water devices.
CHICKEN RUN: An enclosed area physically connected to a chicken coop where
chickens can walk or run about which may include feeding and watering devices.
CONFINED ON THE PREMISES: That condition in which a dog or cat or other animal
is securely and physically confined and retained on and within the premises of
the owner, keeper or harborer by means of chains, walls or fences, floors or
roofs as may be needed.
CRUELTY: To endanger the life, health, or safety of an animal.
DANGEROUS DOG: Any dog that has inflicted injury on a human being without
provocation on public or private property, or any dog that has previously been
found to be potentially dangerous, the owner having been given notice of such
by the animal control authority and the dog thereafter bites, attacks, or
endangers the safety of humans or kills or inflicts injury upon a domestic
animal.
DOG PARK: A securely fenced City owned public area designated by the City of
Grove for domestic dogs to run and play without a leash.
EXPOSED TO RABIES: A bite or physical contact with the saliva or other
potentially infectious tissues from an animal confirmed or suspected of being
infected with rabies.
FERAL CAT: Any cat which has escaped domestication and become wild.
HARBORING: Any person who allows any animal to habitually remain or lodge or to
be fed within its home, store, yard, enclosure, or place of business or any
other premises in which such person resides or controls, shall be considered as
harboring such animal. An animal shall be deemed to be harbored if it is fed or
sheltered for ten (10) consecutive days or more.
IMPOUNDMENT: Placing an animal in the animal control vehicle or unit or holding
an animal in custody at the animal control shelter.
KEEPER: Any person, acting in the capacity of the owner, at the owner's
request, who is responsible for the care, welfare and maintenance of the
animal.
KENNELS (INDOOR PENS): An establishment with indoor pens in which more than
four (4) dogs or domesticated animals more than eight (8) weeks old or older
are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained and/or sold for commercial
purposes.
KENNELS (OUTDOOR PENS): An establishment with outdoor pens in which more than
four (4) dogs or domesticated animals more than eight (8) weeks old or older
are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained and/or sold for commercial
purposes.
MINIATURE HORSE AND DONKEYS: Horse or donkey whose confirmation is such that
the animal is or would be capable of being recognized as a miniature under the
standards of a national miniature horse or miniature donkey raiser's
association.
NEUTERED MALE: Any male dog or cat which has been operated upon by a
veterinarian to render the animal sterile and unable to impregnate a female
animal.
NUISANCE: An animal is a nuisance when by loud, frequent or habitual barking,
howling, yelping or other noise or action it disturbs any person or
neighborhood within the City limits. Any animal which scratches or digs into
any flowerbed, garden, tilled soil, shrubbery, and in so doing injures the
same, or which habitually urinates or defecates in or on yards, gardens, trees
or shrubs, or prowls around or over any premises not the property of the owner,
to the annoyance of the owner or occupant of such premises, or which overturns
any garbage can or vessel for waste products, or scatters the contents of same,
or an animal which chases or kills any fowl or animal owned by another is also
declared a nuisance. A female dog or cat in season at large is declared to be a
nuisance.
Any animal is a nuisance that chases, frightens or otherwise intimidates
passersby or passing vehicles when said animal is not on its owners' property;
or attacks other animals; or trespasses; or is repeatedly at large; or inflicts
damage on the property of others, either public or private.
OWNER: Any person, firm, or corporation, owning, keeping, possessing, harboring
or having the care or custody of an animal, and shall include all persons
having joint or collective care or custody of the animal, except a kennel or
cattery proprietor as herein defined or a veterinary establishment.
PET: Any animal kept for pleasure rather than utility.
PET SHOP: A retail establishment offering small animals, fish and/or birds for
sale as pets, where such creatures are housed within the building, and which
may include the grooming of dogs, cats and similar animals.
POTBELLIED PIG: A miniature pig having a maximum weight of seventy five (75)
pounds and twenty inches (20") in height, which is kept as a pet for personal
enjoyment, and not raised for human consumption. Such animal shall be
registered through a bona fide registry firm such as American Miniature Pig
Association (AMPA).
RESTRAINT: An animal is under restraint within the meaning of this chapter if:
a) it is controlled by a leash not more than six feet (6') in length or b) at
"heel" beside a competent person and obedient to that person's command or c)
confined on the premises of its owner, keeper or harborer or d) confined in a
secure carrier or by a secure fencing or enclosure or e) confined in a vehicle.
SANITARY: Any condition of good odor and cleanliness, which precludes the
probability of disease transmission and insect breeding, and which preserves
the health of the City.
SEVERE INJURY: Any physical injury resulting in broken bones or lacerations
requiring surgery or sutures.
SPAYED FEMALE: Any female dog or cat which has had its ovaries surgically
removed by veterinarian.
STRAY: Any animal which does not appear, upon reasonable inquiry, to have an
owner.
TETHER: Restraining an animal with a chain, rope, cord, leash or similar item
to limit the perimeter access of an area; but shall not include the use of a
leash when walking an animal.
TETHER, CABLE RUN: To restrain an animal by means of a tether attached to a
pulley on a cable run.
TETHER, DIRECT POINT: To restrain an animal by tying to any stationary object
or structure, including, but not limited to, a house, tree, fence, post, garage
or shed, by any means.
VACCINATION: An injection of U.S. Department of Agriculture approved rabies
vaccine administered by a veterinarian, other licensed individual, or
individual approved by the Oklahoma Veterinarian Board.
VENOMOUS ANIMAL: Any species of animal which is venomous to human beings
whether its venom is transmitted by bite, sting, touch or other means.
VETERINARIAN: A person who holds an active license to practice veterinary
medicine in the State of Oklahoma.
VICIOUS ANIMAL: An animal which:
   A.   Has a propensity, tendency, history or disposition to attack, to cause
injury to, or to otherwise endanger the safety of humans or other domestic
animals, and the lack of knowledge of such a propensity, tendency, history or
disposition is not a defense in violation thereof; or
   B.   Approaches humans or other domestic animals in a vicious or terrorizing
manner; or
   C.   Has attacked a human being or domestic animal one or more times without
provocation; or
   D.   Has behaved in such a manner that the owner thereof knows or should
reasonably know that the animal has tendencies to attack or bite human beings
or other animals; or
   E.   Commits an attack on a person or animal without provocation; or
   F.   Threatens to attack, or terrorizes a person who is performing in a
legal means within his rights as a person.
   G.   Any animal owned or harbored for the purpose of fighting, such as a dog
trained for dogfighting which is an illegal act.
   H.   This definition shall not apply to police dogs on official duty. The
term "police dog" shall mean any dog used by a law enforcement agency of this
State or political subdivision of this State which is specially trained for law
enforcement work and is subject to the control of the dog handler. The term
"dog handler" shall mean any police officer or peace officer who has
successfully completed training in the handling of police dogs as established
by policy or standard of the law enforcement agency employing such officer.
WILD ANIMAL: Any live monkey (nonhuman primate), raccoon, skunk, fox, poisonous
snake, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx, insect or other exotic animal not
generally recognized to be domesticated or which, because of size, vicious
nature or any other characteristic, presents a danger to human beings.
All other words or phrases used herein shall be defined and interpreted
according to their common usage. (Ord. 643, 5-15-2012; amd. Ord. 649, 7-17-
2012; Ord. 658, 10-16-2012; Ord. 712, 10-20-2015; Ord. 743, 12-19-2017)
4-102: OBEDIENCE TO OFFICERS:
No person shall refuse or neglect to carry out any reasonable order made by the
animal control officer, County or State health officer or police officer,
pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 643, 5-15-2012)
4-103: KEEPING, CARE AND CONTROL:
   A.   The keeping of, or permitting the keeping of any animal within the
corporate limits of the City in such a manner that it constitutes a nuisance,
and any person maintaining such a nuisance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   B.   The keeping or permitting the keeping of any agricultural animals
within the corporate limits of the City in any area that is not zoned
Agriculture (A-1) is hereby prohibited and declared to constitute a nuisance
and any person maintaining such a nuisance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
Exceptions: Agriculture animals may be kept in an area that is not zoned
Agriculture (A-1) only under the following conditions.
      1.   Future Farmers of America (FFA) and 4-H members, and other
agricultural students may house agricultural animals in pens located on Grove
Public School property.
         a.   The enclosure where the animals are kept shall not be, at its
nearest point, closer than fifty feet (50') to any building used or occupied
for human habitation, and the barn shall not be closer than seventy-five feet
(75') at its nearest point to any building used or occupied for human
habitation.
      2.   A circus, carnival or petting zoo that has been approved and
permitted by the City of Grove may temporarily keep agriculture animals in a
designated area during the event.
      3.   Backyard Chickens:
         a.   Definitions: The following words, terms and phrases, when used in
this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
 
CHICKEN:      A laying hen commonly raised for the production of eggs.
CHICKEN COOP: A small structure or enclosure where chickens nest, roost or
              perch and may include feeding and water devices.
              A separate outside enclosure physically connected to a chicken
CHICKEN RUN:  coop where chickens can walk or run about which may include
              feeding and watering devices.
 
         b.   Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter to the contrary,
the keeping of no more than six (6) chickens, (roosters are prohibited) in the
rear yard of property zoned for residential use is allowed.
         c.   Prior to construction of a coop or run and prior to placement of
chickens, the owner/resident shall submit an application and obtain a Building
Permit.
         d.   The facilities for the keeping of such chickens shall comply with
the following requirements.
            (1)   Housing:
               (A)   Chickens must be kept in a chicken coop with an attached
chicken run. The coop shall be constructed in a manner that can be secured to
protect the chickens from predators and withstand adverse weather conditions.
               (B)   It shall provide four (4) square feet of floor space per
chicken, be well ventilated, and include roost capacity and nesting boxes
consistent with the number of chickens kept. The height of the coop shall be
less than the height of the screening and shall not be visible to adjoining or
neighboring properties.
         e.   Run:
            (1)   The run shall be of sufficient size and dimension to provide
ten (10) square feet area per chicken. The height of the run shall be less than
the height of the screening and shall not be visible to adjoining or
neighboring properties.
            (2)   The enclosure shall be constructed of metal wire or a similar
material adequate to permit the unimpeded flow of air and sunshine through the
enclosure area and of a sufficient height and density to prevent the escape of
the chickens during occupancy. The use of electric wire for this purpose is
prohibited.
         f.   Setback: The coop and run shall not be located closer than
seventy-five feet (75') at its nearest point to any building used or occupied
for human habitation, nor shall it be located closer than ten feet (10') from
any side or rear yard property line.
         g.   Screening: The owner/resident shall be responsible for screening
of the coop and run from adjoining or neighboring properties. An opaque wooden
or masonry fence along the side and rear property lines shall be deemed
sufficient under this section. The fence shall not exceed eight feet (8') in
height. The owner/resident shall be responsible for maintenance of the
screening.
         h.   Flock Maintenance: Chickens shall be confined to the coop between
dusk and dawn and shall be confined to the coop and run areas at all other
times. Adequate food and water shall be available at all times the hens are
present.
         i.   Sanitation: The coop and run shall be cleaned daily to prevent
the accumulation of unconsumed food, fecal matter, bedding or nesting material.
Property owner shall bag any waste that is not composted and dispose of waste
by placing the bag in a garbage container, or the waste may be composted by
using methods approved by the Oklahoma State University (OSU) Extension Office.
         j.   This section is not intended to be construed in derogation of or
in conflict with any restrictive covenant or lease agreement that may be
applicable.
   C.   The following animals may be kept in an area zoned Agriculture (A-1):
      1.   Cattle and horses must be kept in a pen, lot or enclosure that is
maintained in a sanitary condition not offensive or dangerous to the public
health. The enclosure where the animal is kept shall not be, at its nearest
point, closer than fifty feet (50') to any building used or occupied for human
habitation, and the barn shall not be closer than seventy five feet (75') at
its nearest point to any building used or occupied for human habitation.
The number allowed per acre are as follows:
 
Cattle/cow-calf pair 1 per acre
Horse/donkey/mule    1 per acre
 
It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to provide documents
indicating the amount of acreage that is available for pasturing should
complaints or questions be received by the City regarding the ratio of animals
per acreage.
      2.   Chickens must be kept in an attached chicken coop and chicken run
with screenings on all outside openings, and enclosure shall be of adequate
size:
         a.   Chicken coop shall be a minimum two (2) square feet, maximum four
(4) square feet per chicken.
         b.   Chicken run shall be a minimum eight (8) square feet, maximum ten
(10) square feet per chicken.
The enclosure shall not be closer than seventy five feet (75') at its nearest
point to any building used or occupied for human habitation.
The enclosure shall be routinely cleaned to remove manure, nesting materials,
accumulated food, and other items that create conditions that are offensive,
unsanitary or dangerous to the public health. Property owner shall dispose of
or create compost with the waste by using methods approved by the Oklahoma
State University (OSU) Extension Office.
A maximum of six (6) adult chickens, and fourteen (14) chicks under the age of
eight (8) weeks are allowed; roosters are prohibited.
      3.   The following animals shall be prohibited from being located within
the City limits:
         a.   Pigs or hogs.
         b.   Turkey, geese, duck or guinea.
         c.   Sheep or goat.
         d.   Rabbits.
Exceptions: Domesticated rabbits and potbellied pigs.
      4.   The following shall be prohibited within the City limits:
         a.   Commercial feeding or feeding of garbage to any animals.
         b.   Stockyards or feed lots for any type.
         c.   Operations of puppy mills or similar operation.
         d.   Outdoor slaughtering of any animal is prohibited.
      5.   At no time shall any animals be kept in a manner that creates a
public nuisance.
   D.   Any person who shall be the owner or keeper of any animal, and shall
permit the same to run at large or trespass upon the premises of another within
the corporate limits, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
   E.   It is unlawful to harbor in any one household more than two (2)
domestic potbellied pigs.
   F.   It is unlawful to harbor in any one household more than two (2)
domestic rabbits.
   G.   It is unlawful to harbor in any one household more than a combined
total of four (4) domestic animals over the age of eight (8) weeks.
   H.   No owner shall fail to provide his animals with sufficient good and
wholesome food and water, proper shelter, and protection from the weather,
veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering and with humane care and
treatment.
   I.   No person shall beat, cruelly, ill treat, overlead, overwork, or
otherwise abuse an animal, or cause, instigate, or permit any dogfight,
cockfight, bullfight or other combat between animals or between animals and
humans.
   J.   No owner of an animal shall abandon such animal.
   K.   No person shall expose any known poisonous substance, whether mixed
with food or not, so that the same shall be liable to be eaten by an animal,
provided that it shall not be unlawful for a person to expose on his own
property common rat poison mixed only with vegetable substances.
   L.   Owner, keeper, or harborer of a domesticated dog, cat or ferret in the
city, shall cause the animal to be vaccinated against rabies by a licensed
veterinarian prior to four (4) months of age. The vaccination must be kept
current during the licensing period of July 1 through June 30 of the licensing
year. The owner, keeper, or harborer shall secure, from the veterinarian, a
certificate of vaccination against rabies and a metal tag indicating the
vaccination. The metal tag shall be securely and visibly attached to the collar
of the dog or cat; tags for ferrets should be kept in a secure, readily
available location associated with the ferret.
On the demand of an authorized official, the owner, keeper, or harborer of any
dog, cat or ferret must present a certificate of vaccination showing the type
of vaccine administered, the date of the vaccination, and the name of the
veterinarian providing the vaccination.
Owner, keeper or harborer of a potbellied pig or domestic rabbit, shall cause
the animal to be examined by a licensed veterinarian for infectious diseases
prior to four (4) months of age, and annually thereafter. The certificate must
be kept current during the licensing period of July 1 through June 30 of the
licensing year. The owner, keeper or harborer shall secure an annual
certificate of examination from a licensed veterinarian certifying the animal
is free from infectious diseases.
On the demand of an authorized official, the owner, keeper, or harborer of any
potbellied pig or domestic rabbit must present a certificate of examination
showing the animal is free from infectious diseases, the date of the
examination, and the name of the veterinarian providing the examination.
   M.   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or permit to be kept on his
premises any poisonous reptile, wild, dangerous, venomous or vicious animal,
insect or other exotic animal not generally recognized to be domesticated. This
section shall not be construed to apply to zoological parks, performing animal
exhibitions or circuses.
   N.   The city shall have the power to release or order the release of any
infant wild animal kept under temporary permit which is deemed capable of
survival.
   O.   The keeping of bees whether for commercial or hobby is prohibited;
except domestic honeybees which may be kept under the circumstances hereinafter
provided:
      1.   No more than two (2) hives shall be maintained for each one- fourth
(1/4) acre;
      2.   No hives shall be maintained within twenty feet (20') of any
property line of the property on which the hive is located;
      3.   Between each hive and the neighboring property in the direction of
the hive entrance, the hive owner shall maintain the hedge or a screening fence
that is at least six feet (6') in height, to be located within twenty feet
(20') of such property line and to extend the entire length of such lot line;
      4.   A supply of clean water must be furnished within twenty feet (20')
of each hive at all times between March 1 and October 31 each year;
      5.   Hive owners shall inspect each hive not less than four (4) times
between March 1 and October 31 of each year. A written record, including the
date of each such inspection, shall be maintained by the owner and shall be
made available to the Grove animal control officers; and
      6.   The hive owner shall provide written notification to the animal
control officer as to the existence of the hive, as well as certify as to
notification of adjoining property owners of the existence of the hive. Hive
owners shall place written notification on the property in a conspicuous place
so as to inform the public of the existence of the beehives.
   P.   The owner of every animal shall be responsible for the removal of any
excreta deposited by his animal(s) on public walks, recreation areas, or
private property.
   Q.   The animal control officer will make every effort to contact the owner
of an injured animal (wearing a collar, license or identification tag, or that
appears to be a well cared for pet). If the animal control officer cannot
contact the owner in a reasonable time, the animal control officer will
determine based on the severity of the injuries whether to seek treatment from
a veterinarian, at the expense of the owner, or if the injuries are massive or
unrecoverable, as determined by the animal control officer, the animal may be
euthanized.
Animals not seriously injured or immobile (minor cuts or scrapes) may be taken
directly to the shelter for the normal holding period. Animals without
identification and in poor, uncared for condition may be euthanized after the
normal holding period; or immediately, if seriously injured or suffering as
determined by the animal control officer.
   R.   Every person owning or having any animal under his charge within the
City which he knows or suspects to be sick or injured, shall isolate the animal
from other animals and shall obtain treatment for such animal by a licensed
veterinarian as soon as possible.
   S.   Only animals trained by a professional trainer as a Service Animal as
defined herein, shall be allowed in city owned buildings, all other animals
shall be prohibited. This prohibition is intended to prevent individuals from
bringing personal pets onto city property, and is not intended to apply to
special events such as dog shows or where vendors have retained booth or show
space at a community event. Animals that are part of a special event must be
under the owner or event holder's control at all times. (Ord. 643, 5-15-2012;
amd. Ord. 666, 7-2-2013; Ord. 686, 8-5-2014, eff. retroactive to 7-1-2014; Ord.
712, 10-20-2015; Ord. 743, 12-19-2017; Ord. 788, 3-17-2020; Ord. 817, 8-2-2022)
4-104: CONFINEMENT:
   A.   Any animal confined within a fenced yard must have adequate space for
exercise. A minimum of one hundred fifty (150) square feet is required. Large
animals as defined in this chapter must have an additional fifty (50) square
feet. Seventy five (75) square feet is required for each additional animal kept
within the fenced yard.
   B.   Any animal confined on property without a fenced yard, must have an
enclosure that meets the same size requirements as a fenced yard. Such
enclosure shall be constructed of chainlink or similar type material with all
four (4) sides enclosed. The enclosure shall be of sufficient height to prevent
the animal from escaping such enclosure. The top of such enclosure shall be
covered with materials to provide the animal with shade and protection from the
elements. (Ord. 649, 7-17-2012)
   C.   No person shall leave or confine an animal in an unattended motor
vehicle under conditions that endanger the health or well-being of an animal
due to heat, cold, lack of adequate ventilation, or lack of food or water, or
other circumstances that could reasonably be expected to cause suffering,
disability or death to the animal.
The animal control officer may remove an animal from a motor vehicle if the
animal's safety appears to be in immediate danger from heat, cold, lack of
ventilation, lack of food or water, or other circumstances that could
reasonably be expected to cause suffering, disability or death to the animal.
The animal control officer is authorized to take all steps that are reasonably
necessary for the removal of an animal from a motor vehicle, only if the animal
is in immediate danger and only after making a reasonable effort to locate the
owner or other person responsible.
The animal control officer who removes an animal from a motor vehicle shall
take it to the Grove Animal Shelter, or if the officer deems necessary, to a
veterinary hospital for treatment.
The animal control officer who removes an animal from a motor vehicle shall, in
a secure and conspicuous location on or within the motor vehicle, leave written
notice bearing his/her name, title, and the address of the location where the
animal can be claimed. The animal may be claimed by the owner only after
payment of all charges that have accrued for the maintenance, care, medical
treatment or impoundment of the animal.
Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit the transportation of
horses, cattle, pigs, sheep, poultry or other agricultural animals in motor
vehicles designed to transport such animals for agricultural purposes. (Ord.
723, 5-3-2016)
4-105: TETHERING REQUIREMENTS:
The continued maintenance of an animal on a chain, rope or other kind of tether
is abnormally restrictive and stressful and often results in health and
temperament problems. In most cases, such long term confinement will cause the
animal to suffer unnecessarily. Therefore, animals under six (6) months of age
shall not be tethered, and animals over six (6) months of age shall only be
confined by tethering under the following conditions:
   A.   Direct point chaining or tethering of animals is prohibited.
   B.   Cable run tethering is allowed by the following methods and
restrictions:
      1.   Only one (1) animal shall be tethered to each cable run;
      2.   Only two (2) cable runs allowed per household;
      3.   The tether must be attached to a properly fitted buckle type collar
or a body harness made of nylon or leather, not less than one inch (1") in
width;
      4.   Choke, prong or pinch collars shall not be used to tether an animal
to a cable run;
      5.   A swivel must be on each end of the tether to prevent twisting and
tangling;
      6.   The tether shall be at least five (5) times the length of the
animal's body, as measured from the tip of the nose to the base of the tail; at
no time shall the tether be less than ten feet (10') in length;
      7.   The tether shall not weigh more than one-eighth (1/8) of the
animal's weight;
      8.   The tether shall allow the animal complete freedom to lie down or
enter shelter without strain to the neck or body;
      9.   The tether system shall not allow the animal to leave the owner or
owner's landlord's property;
      10.   Tethered animals shall have access to potable water, food, shelter
and dry ground at all times;
      11.   Overhead run/pulley lines shall be a minimum of fifteen feet (15')
in length and at least four feet (4') and not more than seven feet (7') above
ground level at all times;
      12.   Animals shall not be tethered while sick, injured or in distress;
      13.   Animals shall not be tethered when outside temperature is equal to
or greater than eighty five degrees Fahrenheit (85°F) or equal to or less than
thirty two degrees Fahrenheit (32°F);
      14.   No animal shall be tethered to a running cable line for more than
ten (10) hours in a twenty four (24) hour period;
      15.   No animal shall be tethered between the hours of ten o'clock (10:
00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.;
      16.   No animal shall be tethered within five hundred feet (500') of a
church, school or daycare. (Ord. 649, 7-17-2012)
4-106: KENNELS:
   A.   No person shall own, maintain or operate a kennel within the city
unless such kennel is licensed as herein provided. Application for such license
shall be made to the city and shall state the name and address of the owner or
operator of the kennel with the street address and legal description of the
property upon which the kennel is located. An annual license fee of fifty
dollars ($50.00) shall be assessed. License shall expire June 30 of each year.
   B.   Any person maintaining a kennel, whether for profit or not, shall
maintain such kennel in a sanitary condition and shall be subject to the
provisions of this chapter. Nonconforming kennels shall be deemed a public
nuisance.
   C.   Kennels are permitted in agriculture (A-1) and highway and recreational
commercial (C-3) districts. No kennel shall be allowed in any residentially
zoned areas.
   D.   All kennels within the city limits shall meet the following minimum
standards:
      1.   The kennel floor shall be made of concrete at least four inches (4")
thick, with a smooth surface which shall have one-fourth inch (1/4") of slope
per foot of fall for drainage. The drainage shall slope to a cleanout gutter,
and all drains shall be connected to the sanitary sewage line;
      2.   Each cage shall have sleeping quarters, a lounging area and access
to an exercise area with a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) square feet.
Sleeping quarters for the animals shall be protected from the weather, and each
lounging area shall be individually enclosed by chainlink material of at least
10- 14-gauge, and shall have the following minimum dimensions for the number of
animals to be accommodated. The cages for cats shall be completely enclosed;
 
Width  Length  Height Accommodation For
4 feet 12 feet 6 feet Lounging area for 1 large dog, or 2 medium dogs, or 3
                      small dogs or cats
4 feet 6 feet  3 feet Sleeping area for 1 large dog, or 2 medium dogs, or 3
                      small dogs or cats
 
      3.   For the purpose of this section only, small size dogs shall be
defined as any dog weighing less than twenty five (25) pounds; medium size dogs
shall be defined as any dog weighing between twenty five (25) and fifty (50)
pounds; large size dogs shall be defined as any dog weighing in excess of fifty
(50) pounds; and
      4.   There shall be at least one cage which must be completely enclosed
to house female dogs in heat.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to kennels operated and
maintained by licensed veterinarians, to commercial pet stores where all
animals are kept within the establishment, nor to animal shelters.
   E.   The city of Grove animal control officer shall be permitted to inspect,
at reasonable times all animals and kennels. Refusal by the owner or operator
of the kennel to permit such inspection shall be a cause for the revocation of
the kennel license. If the kennel owner or operator feels that the revocation
of the kennel permit is unjustified a written protest shall be presented to the
city manager within forty eight (48) hours of the notice of license being
revoked. The city manager may hold a hearing and will respond in writing to the
licensee within ten (10) working days of receipt of protest.
During the pendency of the city manager's decision, no action shall be taken or
initiated against the owner or operator of the kennel.
The decision of the city manager is final. If the license revocation is upheld
by the city manager, no refund of the license fee shall be made to the license
holder. (Ord. 643, 5-15-2012; amd. Ord. 649, 7-17-2012)
4-107: ANIMAL TRAPS:
The city of Grove animal control officer may loan a citizen residing in the
city limits of Grove the use of an animal trap.
The animal control officer shall obtain the following information from the
citizen prior to loaning of animal trap:
Name
Date of birth
Physical address (not a P.O. box)
Phone number
Copy of photo ID
All of the city of Grove's animal traps will be serviced by the animal control
officer. The person who borrows the animal trap is responsible for the security
of the trap. If the trap is damaged (not by the trapped animal) through neglect
or stolen due to the failure of the borrower, the borrower may be held
responsible for cost and shipping or replacing the trap.
All of the traps the city of Grove owns and uses are "live traps" and do not
cause harm or injury to the animals.
Persons who set privately owned traps shall notify the animal control officer
when an animal is caught. Trap owners may request the animal control officer
pick up the trap and release the animal. It shall be the responsibility of the
owner to retrieve their trap from the animal control officer within three (3)
days after pick up and release of said animal.
No person shall set or expose an open jaw type trap, leg hold trap, snare trap,
or any type trap which would likely cause physical harm or injury to any
animal. This provision shall not apply to persons who are licensed by the state
to trap animals as provided in 29 Oklahoma Statutes section 4-119.
Citizens encountering problems with wild animals other than those for which the
Grove animal control department supplies traps such as: coyotes, protected bird
species, bobcats, etc., the citizen will be advised to contact the Oklahoma
wildlife division. (Ord. 643, 5-15-2012; amd. Ord. 649, 7-17-2012)
4-108: RABIES AND ANIMAL BITES:
   A.   It is the duty of every physician, veterinarian or other practitioner
to report to the Grove animal control officer the names and addresses of
persons treated for bites inflicted by animals, together with such other
information as will be helpful in rabies control.
   B.   It is the duty of every licensed veterinarian to report to the Grove
animal control officer his diagnosis of any animal observed by him to be a
rabid suspect.
   C.   Every animal, regardless of immunization status, that has bitten a
person shall be reported within four (4) hours to the Grove police department
or an animal control officer and, except as otherwise provided herein, shall
thereupon be securely quarantined at a veterinarian hospital, within twenty
four (24) hours from the time of the bite incident, for a period of ten (10)
days from the date the person was bitten and shall not be released from such
quarantine except by permission of the animal control officer of the city and
the veterinarian in charge of the quarantined animal. Such quarantine will be
at any veterinarian hospital chosen by the owner or in the owner's home if:
      1.   Animal meets criteria of currently vaccinated against rabies and
meets the definition of "first party ownership" as defined in this code, and
      2.   Home quarantine site is approved by the animal control officer of
the city.
      3.   Dogs, cats, or ferrets involved in a first party ownership may be
allowed to be placed in a home quarantine for a ten (10) day period immediately
following the bite.
      4.   Dogs, cats, and ferrets meeting the criteria of currently vaccinated
against rabies, and not inflicting a severe injury, shall be placed in home
quarantine until the end of a ten (10) day period from the bite. In some
instances, a certification of animal health obtained after examination by a
licensed veterinarian on the tenth day may be required by the Grove animal
control authority.
      5.   Animals in service to the blind or hearing impaired, and search and
rescue dogs or other animals used for the police enforcement duties shall be
exempt from the quarantine when a bite exposure occurs and record of
immunization against rabies is presented. A certificate of animal health
obtained after examination by a licensed veterinarian at the end of ten (10)
days may be required by the Grove animal control department.
      6.   Stray or unwanted dogs, cats, or ferrets that have bitten any person
may be quarantined for ten (10) days at a veterinary facility or a recognized
animal control facility; or immediately euthanized and the brain tissue
submitted to the state department of health laboratory for rabies testing. Upon
successful completion of the ten (10) day period, a stray animal may be placed
for adoption at the discretion of the animal control authority.
      7.   In rare instances, other good and valid health reasons of the owner
of animal may be considered for justification to home quarantine (e.g., a bitch
with a litter of very young puppies, an animal with a contagious disease,
etc.). Approval for home quarantine will be determined by the department or its
designee.
Animal control officers will complete a bite report and submit it to the Grove
police chief as soon as possible. If the bite was a severe injury the animal
control officer of the city, shall make a determination of the disposition of
the biting animal after consultation with the victim's physician, and based
upon the risk of rabies in the particular animal.
   D.   In the case of a stray animal, or in the case of a dog or cat whose
ownership is not known after diligent and reasonable efforts have been made by
an animal control officer to determine ownership of such animal, such animal,
dog or cat will be impounded immediately. In the case of unclaimed dog or cat
that has bitten a person; such animals should be humanely euthanized and taken
to a veterinarian for removal of the head for submittal to the state department
of health for rabies examination. The final decision for animal destruction,
quarantine, or other disposition of any animal other than a dog, cat or ferret
that bites a person, or otherwise potentially exposes a person to rabies shall
be determined by the animal control officer of the city.
   E.   In the case of an animal that has bitten a person and the ownership of
such animal is known to an animal control officer but the owner refuses to have
the animal quarantined as required by subsection C of this section, the animal
control officer will direct the owner of such animal to have the animal
quarantined as provided in subsection C of this section. If the owner refuses
or does not have the animal quarantined within twenty four (24) hours from the
time of the bite incident the animal control officer will issue a citation for
failure to quarantine. Immediately thereafter, the animal control officer will
file a petition in municipal court for a show cause order directing the owner
of such animal to appear in municipal court and show why such animal should not
be quarantined. The show cause hearing will be held at the next available
municipal court proceedings and the court will determine the disposition of
such animal.
   F.   Payment of fees incurred for daily boarding, euthanasia, preparation
and transport of specimens for laboratory testing, or any other costs incurred
to comply with this chapter, shall be the responsibility of the person or
entity owning, keeping, or harboring the animal.
   G.   No person shall kill or cause to be killed any rabid animal, any animal
suspected of having been exposed to rabies, or any animal biting a human,
except as provided in this chapter, or remove the animal from the city limits
without written permission from the animal control officer of the city.
The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies shall upon demand be
surrendered to the animal control officer.
   H.   The animal control officer shall keep or cause to be kept:
      1.   An accurate and detailed record of the licensing, impounding and
disposition of all live animals, fowl and domestic birds coming into his
custody and all dead dogs or cats picked up that possess rabies tags, and
      2.   An accurate and detailed record of all bite cases which have been
reported to the police department or animal shelter.
   I.   Hospitals, clinics, other premises operated by licensed veterinarians
for the care and treatment of animals and animal shelters are exempt from the
provisions of this chapter, except where duties are expressly stated.
   J.   The licensing requirements of this chapter shall not apply to any dog
or cat belonging to a nonresident of the city and kept within the city for no
longer than thirty (30) days; provided all such dogs or cats shall at all
times, while in the city, be kept within a building, enclosure or vehicle, or
be under restraint by the owner. (Ord. 643, 5-15-2012; amd. Ord. 649, 7-17-
2012)
4-109: ADOPTION PROCESS AND FEES:
When adopting a pet through the city of Grove animal control department the
following process will be followed:
   A.   Fill out paperwork related to animal adoption;
   B.   If the new animal owner resides in the city limits of Grove, they must
supply within thirty (30) days proof of rabies vaccination by a licensed
veterinarian. Failure to do so will result in a citation(s) being issued;
   C.   Pay twenty dollar ($20.00) adoption fee;
   D.   If the animal has not been spayed or neutered, the new owner will be
given a twenty five dollar ($25.00) certificate to be used by a veterinarian
located within the city limits of Grove. (Ord. 643, 5-15-2012; amd. Ord. 649,
7-17-2012)
4-110: IMPOUNDMENT AND DISPOSITION:
It is the duty of the animal control officer or other authorized persons to
take into possession any animal that may be running loose upon the streets,
curbing, alleys, public places or trespassing upon the lands of any person
within the corporate limits of the city, and impound such animal; except that
domestic dogs shall be allowed to run without a leash in dog park(s) designated
by the city of Grove. (Ord. 643, 5-15-2012; amd. Ord. 649, 7-17-2012; Ord. 658,
10-16-2012)
   A.   Domestic Animals: Impounded animals shall be kept for not less than
five (5) working days.
      1.   If by a license tag or other means, the owner of an impounded animal
can be identified, the animal control officer shall immediately upon
impoundment notify the owner.
      2.   An animal so impounded shall be released to the owner or person
entitled to the possession thereof upon payment of a fifteen dollar ($15.00)
fee plus five dollars ($5.00) per day for each day of impoundment.
      3.   Any animal not reclaimed by its owner within five (5) working days
shall become the property of the local government authority, or humane society,
and shall be placed for adoption to a suitable home or humanely euthanized. No
animal shall be adopted without being vaccinated for rabies and spayed or
neutered. The only exception to being spayed or neutered shall be if the animal
is being used for breeding purposes, at which time the owner must sign an
affidavit to such effect.
   B.   Agricultural Animals:
      1.   If the owner of any agricultural animal such as horse, cow, mule,
hog, sheep, goat or other animal of similar kind does not procure the release
of such animal within twenty four (24) hours after impoundment, the animal
control officer shall cause a description to be posted at city hall or police
office, and if the owner or person entitled to the possession of such animal is
known, notice shall be given to him, notice shall give the color, sex, and
description of the animal impounded and shall state that the animal will be
sold, unless it is released from impoundment on a date not less than five (5)
days from the date the notice is posted or given as herein provided.
      2.   If the owner or person entitled to the possession of any
agricultural animal impounded under this section is unknown, or if known and he
fails, refuses, or neglects to release such animal for impoundment after the
service of notice as provided for in this section, after the expiration of the
time fixed by the notices provided herein, the police shall cause a notice of
sale of such animal to be published in the newspaper within the city for a
period of not less than ten (10) days, giving the description of the animal to
be sold and the date, time, and place of the sale. If such animal is not
released from impoundment by the owner or person entitled to the possession
thereof prior to such date, the police shall sell the animal to the highest
bidder for cash, and the buyer shall thereafter have complete title to such
animal.
      3.   From the proceeds of the sale of animals sold under this section,
there shall be first paid the cost of feeding of the animals and the cost of
publishing the notice of sale. The residue shall be paid into the office of the
city treasurer and placed to credit of the general fund.
   C.   Vicious Animals:
      1.   It shall be the duty of the animal control officer or designated
representative upon receipt of a verified complaint, to cause the animal
involved to be impounded pending a vicious animal determination as required by
this section. The owner shall immediately surrender possession of the animal
when presented with a copy of the complaint. Each day that the owner fails or
refuses to allow the animal control officer or his designated representative to
impound an animal shall be a separate offense. Any and all expenses associated
with the impoundment, including costs of shelter, food, handling, and
veterinary care, shall be borne by the owner of such animal during impoundment.
      2.   Upon receipt of a verified complaint, the animal control officer or
his designated representative shall promptly hold a hearing to determine if an
animal shall be declared vicious or dangerous. The verified complaint may be
filed by a citizen, a police officer, or an animal control officer, and shall
clearly state the facts and circumstances surrounding determinations at the
hearing:
         a.   That the animal is in fact not vicious. In that event, the animal
control officer shall cause it to be surrendered to the owner;
         b.   That the animal is in fact vicious and should be destroyed;
         c.   That the animal is vicious, but that for good cause shown, the
animal should not be destroyed. In that event, the animal control officer shall
order the animal permanently removed from the city limits.
      3.   The owner may appeal the determination of the animal control officer
to the municipal court by requesting a hearing within five (5) days of the
determination. The municipal judge shall hold a hearing de novo within ten (10)
days of the impoundment to determine if the animal is vicious as defined by
this chapter and shall be empowered to make a determination based upon this
section.
   D.   Dead Animal Disposal: Dead animals may be picked up from residences by
the animal control officer upon payment of a twenty five dollar ($25.00) fee.
If the owner of a dead animal brings the animal to the shelter and they reside
in the city limits of Grove, a fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) will be assessed.
Owners shall sign an impoundment card releasing custody of the deceased animal
to the city. Once the animal is released to the city, the animal becomes the
property of the city and may be disposed of.
If a private cremation is requested a fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for
small animals, fifty dollars ($50.00) for medium animals and a fee of seventy
five dollars ($75.00) for large animals will be assessed.
Sick, injured, aggressive, or nonadoptable animals may be humanely destroyed by
the animal control officer at the owner's request; provided the owner signs an
impoundment card releasing custody of the animal to the city, upon payment of a
twenty dollar ($20.00) destruction fee and upon proof of veterinarian treatment
and/or recommendation. (Ord. 643, 5-15-2012; amd. Ord. 649, 7-17-2012)
4-111: DOG PARKS:
   A.   The city of Grove may designate city owned property as a dog park open
to the public.
   B.   To ensure safety and a positive environment for pets and people, the
following rules shall be observed by owners/keepers of dogs utilizing the
public dog park. It shall be the responsibility of the owner/keeper of the dogs
to familiarize themselves with the rules and comply at all times.
      1.   Park hours are daylight hours (sunrise to sunset);
      2.   Only dogs are allowed, no other animals may be brought into the
park;
      3.   All dogs shall be leashed when entering and leaving the park;
      4.   Owners/keepers shall carry a leash with them at all times while in
the park;
      5.   The small dog enclosure is for dogs under thirty (30) pounds;
      6.   No dogs under four (4) months of age shall be permitted within the
park;
      7.   There is a limit of two (2) dogs per adult owner/keeper in the park
at any time;
      8.   Dogs showing any signs of aggression must be leashed and immediately
removed from the park;
      9.   Choke chains, prong, spiked or shock collars are not permitted;
      10.   Never leave dogs unattended; all dogs must be accompanied by an
adult (18 years or older) and must be in view of and within voice control of
their owner/keeper at all times;
      11.   All dogs must have current rabies and all other vaccinations as
required by the city of Grove; all dogs must wear current vaccination tags in
the park;
      12.   Contagious dogs are not allowed; dogs that have any type of
illness, fleas, mange or parasites are prohibited from the park;
      13.   Owners/keepers are liable and responsible for the actions of their
dogs at all times;
      14.   Owners/keepers are responsible for picking up and properly
disposing of their dog's waste in waste stations provided; nothing but dog's
waste shall be disposed of in the waste stations;
      15.   Littering is prohibited; trash shall be placed in designated
containers;
      16.   Dogs in heat are prohibited;
      17.   Unneutered male dogs may try to mount other dogs, if this action
continues, you must remove your dog from the park;
      18.   No food (dog or human) is allowed within the fenced area;
      19.   No alcohol is allowed in park;
      20.   No glass or metal containers are allowed in the park;
      21.   No bicycles, skateboards, rollerblades or any motorized vehicles
are allowed in the park;
Exceptions: Wheelchairs, scooters or other motorized vehicles used to assist
physically handicapped individuals.
      22.   Children under twelve (12) years of age are not allowed within the
fenced area without adult supervision;
      23.   Running and chasing dogs is prohibited;
      24.   No smoking in the fenced area;
      25.   Use of the dog park is at your own risk; owner/keeper waives
liability to the city of Grove for any injury or damage caused (by dogs or
human) while accessing or using the park;
      26.   Park is subject to closure upon determination by the city that
there is a reason deemed to be in the public's interest or safety. (Ord. 658,
10-16-2012; amd. Ord. 663, 5-7-2013, eff. 7-1-2013; Ord. 666, 7-2-2013)
4-112: SELL OR GIVE AWAY:
Persons shall obtain a permit from the city of Grove to give away domesticated
animals on any commercial parking lot or at any flea market or festival.
Persons requesting the permit must provide written authorization from the
property owner to give away animals on said property. There is no charge for
the permit.
It shall be unlawful for any persons to sell, barter, trade, lease any animal
on any commercial parking lot or at any flea market or festival.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to display, give away or offer
to give away, sell, barter, trade, lease any animal on any public right of way.
Exceptions: This section shall not apply to any nonprofit organization founded
for the purpose of providing humane sanctuary or shelter for abandoned or
unwanted animals. (Ord. 643, 5-15-2012; amd. Ord. 649, 7-17-2012; Ord. 658, 10-
16-2012; Ord. 663, 5-7-2013, eff. 7-1-2013; Ord. 666, 7-2-2013)
4-113: LICENSING REQUIRED:
It is the duty of every person owning or having in possession, within the city
limits of Grove, any dog, cat, potbellied pig, domestic rabbit or ferret over
the age of four (4) months, to obtain a license from the city clerk and to pay
the licensing fee herein provided.
   A.   The licensing requirement shall not apply to the following animals:
      1.   Animals being used by law enforcement agencies for law enforcement
purposes;
      2.   Animals belonging to visitors traveling through the city, while such
animal is with its owner or keeper.
   B.   The annual licensing fees herein provided shall be as follows:
      1.   Five dollars ($5.00) for each dog, cat, potbellied pig, domestic
rabbit or ferret which has been spayed or neutered;
      2.   Ten dollars ($10.00) for each dog, cat, potbellied pig, domestic
rabbit or ferret which has not been spayed or neutered;
         a.   If a dog, cat, potbellied pig, domestic rabbit or ferret owner
provides proof from a veterinarian that their animal has been spayed or
neutered within thirty (30) days of issuance of their license, a five dollar
($5.00) refund will be provided. (Ord. 686, 8-5-2014, eff. retroactive to 7-1-
2014)
      3.   No charge for the following animals:
         a.   Service Animal:
            (1)   Service animal as defined herein shall be exempt from the
license fee upon owner providing an affidavit that certifies the dog is a
qualified service animal.
         b.   Therapy Animal:
            (1)   Therapy animal as defined herein shall be exempt from the
license fee upon owner providing an affidavit that certifies the animal is a
qualified therapy animal. (Ord. 712, 10-20-2015)
         c.   Older Or Ill Health Animals:
            (1)   Animals unable to be spayed or neutered without a high
likelihood of suffering serious bodily harm or death due to age or infirmity.
Written confirmation from a licensed veterinarian is required to qualify for
this exception.
   C.   Prior to licensing, the owner, keeper or harborer of each dog, cat or
ferret must provide:
      1.   Proof of current rabies vaccination by a licensed veterinarian
(vaccination must remain current during the licensing period of July 1 through
June 30 of the licensing year);
      2.   Proof of animal being spayed or neutered by a licensed veterinarian
(to be allowed to pay the reduced fee);
      3.   Proof of documentation of qualifying intact animal (to be allowed to
pay the reduced fee).
   D.   Prior to licensing, the owner, keeper, or harborer of each potbellied
pig or domestic rabbit must provide:
      1.   Proof of current certificate of examination from a licensed
veterinarian certifying the animal is free from infectious diseases
(certificate must remain current during the licensing period of July 1 through
June 30 of the licensing year);
      2.   Proof of animal being spayed or neutered by a licensed veterinarian
(to be allowed to pay the reduced fee).
   E.   The City Clerk shall furnish the registrant, at the time of
registration, with a tag which shall be securely and visibly attached to the
collar of the dog, cat, potbellied pig or domestic rabbit. Tags for ferrets
should be kept in a secure, readily available location associated with the
ferret.
   F.   The license shall be renewed/purchased and the license fee shall be
paid annually on or before July 1 for each dog, cat, ferret, potbellied pig or
domestic rabbit; for any animal which first becomes subject to licensing on or
after December 1, the license fee shall be reduced to one-half (1/2) of the
annual fee as hereto established by Council.
   G.   If a valid license tag is lost or destroyed, a new tag will be issued
for one dollar ($1.00). (Ord. 686, 8-5-2014, eff. retroactive to 7-1-2014)
4-114: ENFORCEMENT:
The civil and criminal provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by those
persons or agencies designated by Municipal authority. It shall be a violation
of this chapter to interfere with a humane officer in the performance of his
duties. (Ord. 643, 5-15-2012; amd. Ord. 649, 7-17-2012; Ord. 658, 10-16-2012;
Ord. 663, 5-7-2013, eff. 7-1-2013)
4-115: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter, or
who violates, refuses or neglects to carry out any reasonable order made by the
animal control officer or City police, pursuant to this chapter, shall upon
conviction thereof, be punished by fine not to exceed five hundred dollars
($500.00) per day, plus court costs. Each day or any portion of a day during
which a violation of this chapter shall continue shall constitute a separate
offense. (Ord. 643, 5-15-2012; amd. Ord. 649, 7-17-2012; Ord. 658, 10-16-2012;
Ord. 663, 5-7-2013, eff. 7-1-2013)
CHAPTER 2
BIRD SANCTUARY
SECTION:
4-201: Bird Sanctuary
4-202: Acts Prohibited
4-203: Nuisance
4-204: Abating Nuisance
4-205: Penalties
4-201: BIRD SANCTUARY:
The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of the City be and the
same is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary. (Ord. 354, 12-3-1991)
4-202: ACTS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, shoot, or attempt to shoot or molest in any
manner any bird or wild fowl or to rob bird nests or wild fowl nests. (Ord.
354, 12-3-1991)
4-203: NUISANCE:
Provided however, if starlings or any similar birds are found to be
congregating in such numbers in a particular locality that they constitute a
nuisance or a menace to health or property in the opinion of the proper health
authorities of the City then in such event said health authorities shall meet
with representatives of the Audubon Society, Bird Club, Garden Club, or Humane
Society, or as many of said clubs as are found to exist in the City after
having given at least three (3) days' actual notice of the time and place of
said meeting to the representatives of said clubs. (Ord. 354, 12-3-1991)
4-204: ABATING NUISANCE:
If, as a result of said meeting, no satisfactory alternative is found to abate
such nuisance, then said birds may be destroyed in such numbers and in such
manner as is deemed advisable by said health authorities under the supervision
of the Chief of Police of the City. (Ord. 354, 12-3-1991)
4-205: PENALTIES:
Anyone violating the provisions of this Chapter shall be punished by a fine of
not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or imprisonment not exceeding
thirty (30) days. (Ord. 354, 12-3-1991)
CHAPTER 3
DEER HUNTING
SECTION:
4-301: Purpose
4-302: Bow And Arrow Hunting
4-303: Deer Hunting Rules, Regulations And Permitting Requirements
4-304: Penalties For Violation
4-301: PURPOSE:
The city of Grove has determined that whitetail deer management within the
corporate limits is a necessary duty of the city to ensure that the health of
the whitetail deer herd is maintained, that plant and animal life which makes
up the ecosystems of the natural areas of the city are not irreparably damaged
or destroyed, and to ensure the safety and welfare of the residents of Grove
and prevent major damage to their property by whitetail deer. (Ord. 604, 9-21-
2010)
4-302: BOW AND ARROW HUNTING:
No person shall use or discharge any slingshot, bow or similar apparatus
designed to shoot or propel stones, sticks, arrows or projectiles, or wilfully
or carelessly throw or propel any stone, stick, arrow, projectile or other
missile in such a manner as to hit, injure, or endanger any person, animal or
property, within the corporate limits of the city of Grove, except for purposes
of hunting whitetail deer with a bow and arrow during those periods designated
annually by the Oklahoma department of wildlife conservation. Any person
hunting whitetail deer with a bow and arrow within the corporate limits of the
city of Grove, Oklahoma, must comply in all respects with the following rules,
regulations and permitting requirements. (Ord. 604, 9-21-2010)
4-303: DEER HUNTING RULES, REGULATIONS AND PERMITTING REQUIREMENTS:
Any individual desiring to hunt whitetail deer with a bow and arrow within the
city limits of Grove, Oklahoma, shall comply with the following rules,
regulations and permitting requirements:
   A.   Each individual must be at least eighteen (18) years of age, possess a
current state of Oklahoma hunting license and a current city of Grove whitetail
deer hunting permit. The number of permits will be limited in number. The city
of Grove may issue as many or as few permits as it deems necessary or desirable
in any given year.
   B.   In order to obtain a City of Grove whitetail deer hunting permit, each
individual must:
      1.   Show proof of a valid and current State of Oklahoma hunting license
and compliance with all other licensing and permitting requirements of the
State of Oklahoma and the Department of Wildlife Conservation;
      2.   Show proof of having taken and passed the International Bow Hunting
Education Program or the Oklahoma Hunter Education Course as per State of
Oklahoma regulations;
      3.   Take and pass a Shooting Proficiency Test which consists of three
(3) out of five (5) shots to a nine-inch (9") target from a distance of twenty
(20) yards. The test is valid for three (3) years from the date of passage.
      The Shooting Proficiency Test shall be taken at a City licensed archery
facility. For the purpose of this section, a City licensed archery facility is
defined as an:
         a.   Archery facility that has been inspected and approved as a
testing facility by the Grove Police Chief or his designee; and
         b.   Archery facility that has a current and valid City of Grove
business license; and
         c.   Archery facility that complies with the regulations set forth in
City Code.
      4.   Provide a plat or map identifying the location of property upon
which the individual intends to conduct hunting activities
      5.   Show proof of ownership of the land or written permission from the
owner of the land on which the individual intends to hunt; and
      6.   Pay an annual permit fee of twenty dollars ($20.00).
      Whitetail deer hunting permits will only be available in person at the
Grove Police Department during regular business hours. The City of Grove may
refuse to grant any applicant a City of Grove whitetail deer hunting permit in
its sole discretion.
   C.   Individuals shall maintain a distance of one hundred fifty feet (150')
from any structure while hunting, unless the hunter has previously received
express written authority from the property owner to discharge the archery
device within one hundred fifty feet (150') of the structure.
   D.   Hunters must comply with the Oklahoma Department of Wildlife
Conservation season dates and bag limits for deer archery. Failure to comply
will result in the immediate revocation of the hunter's current permit and
hunter will not be allowed to make application for any future whitetail deer
hunting permit. Furthermore, hunter violation of this section will be in
violation of section
1-108 of this code.
   E.   Bow hunting permits shall be issued to hunt deer on private property
only. No hunting shall be allowed on city of Grove property.
   F.   Individuals shall take shots at the least amount of distance to the
whitetail deer in order to maximize safety.
   G.   Individuals shall report to or call the Grove police department with
the following information: date, time and place of the whitetail deer
harvested, number of arrows shot, and any complaints received from citizens or
landowners, within twenty four (24) hours of harvesting a whitetail deer.
   H.   Individuals shall obtain written permission from private property
owners before hunting on private property and shall carry a copy of the written
permission with the Grove hunting permit. The Grove license consists of two (2)
parts. One is to be left visible in the hunter's parked vehicle at all times
that the hunter is actively engaged in whitetail deer hunting. The other
portion of the license is to be carried by the hunter whenever hunting.
   I.   Individuals on private property shall abide by the rules of the
property owner, in addition to the rules of the Oklahoma department of wildlife
conservation, and rules contained herein.
   J.   Hunters are required to use all available means to ensure that all
arrow-hit deer are recovered, properly tagged and transported. Hunters are
required to remove the entire deer. Hunters shall use proper field dressing
techniques and shall not leave entrails in any conspicuous location.
   K.   Individuals shall report any problems with locating any wounded
whitetail deer to the Grove police department.
   L.   All hunting in accordance with these regulations shall be conducted
from an elevated stand only, which shall be at least ten feet (10') off the
ground.
   M.   Longbows, recurve bows, crossbows or compound bows must be at least
forty five (45) pounds draw weight, and arrow points must be at least seven-
eighths inch (7/8") broadhead with mechanicals allowed.
   N.   Applications for permits will be taken beginning August 1 of each year.
To the extent there are more applications than permits to be granted, permits
will be issued on a random draw at least one week prior to commencement of bow
season. After the season begins, permits will be granted on a first come/first
serve basis until allotment of permits for that year have been issued. (Ord.
621, 8-16-2011; amd. Ord. 793, 9-15-2020)
4-304: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION:
Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). Each rule
violated and each occurrence shall constitute a separate violation of this
chapter. (Ord. 604, 9-21-2010)
PART 5
BUILDING REGULATIONS AND CODES
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
5-101: Electrical, Plumbing And Building Inspector; Office Created
5-102: Codes On File In City Engineer/Building Inspector's Office
5-103: Permit Required
5-104: Building Permits; Fees; How Computed
5-105: Violation; How Punishable
5-101: ELECTRICAL, PLUMBING AND BUILDING INSPECTOR; OFFICE CREATED:
There is hereby created the office of electrical, plumbing and building
inspector. The inspector shall be named by the city manager and shall be a
person who has had such experience in the electrical, plumbing and building
trades as the manager shall, in his sole discretion, deem suitable as
qualifications for such inspections as may be necessary to inspect and
determine compliance or noncompliance with the provisions and standards of the
city's electrical, plumbing and building codes and the provisions of the
various chapters of this part. (Prior code § 4-5)
5-102: CODES ON FILE IN CITY ENGINEER/BUILDING INSPECTOR'S OFFICE:
A copy of each of the codes adopted in the various chapters of this code shall
be kept in the office of the city engineer/building inspector of the city and
be made available to the public for use in the office. The copies may not be
removed from the office. (Prior code § 4-4)
5-103: PERMIT REQUIRED:
All permits issued under any of the provisions of this part shall be valid for
a period of one year from the date of the issuance of the permit except if the
job, be it remodeling or the construction of residential or commercial or
industrial buildings, has begun, at which time the permit shall be extended for
an additional six (6) months. (Ord. 242, 11-4-1980)
   A.   Prior to the issuance of a building permit the contractor shall provide
a certificate of insurance from an appropriate insurer that the contractor has
general liability insurance in an amount required by the Construction
Industries Board and a copy of the contractor's workers' compensation insurance
or a workers' compensation exemption verification document.
This provision shall not apply to a person or persons performing the
construction or remodeling to his, her or their own existing single-family or
duplex structure on their own property, unless the modifications are being
performed by and the permit acquired by a general contractor or subcontractor,
in which case the general contractor and subcontractor shall meet the
requirements set forth in this section. (Ord. 591, 1-5-2010)
5-104: BUILDING PERMITS; FEES; HOW COMPUTED:
There should be levied and taxed as charged for the building permits based upon
and according to those recommendations of the building inspector hereto
submitted in the attached Permit Fee Schedule and approved by the City Council.
Such recommendations and amendments to the Permit Fee Schedule may be submitted
to the City Council for approval in the future.
Copies of the Fee Schedule shall be on file in the office of the City Clerk and
are to be available for public inspection. (Ord. 459, 6-6-2000; amd. Ord. 829,
5-2-2023; Ord. 842, 12-5-2023; Ord. 849, 7-2-2024)
5-105: VIOLATION; HOW PUNISHABLE:
For violation of this chapter upon conviction the fine shall be three (3) times
the amount of the required Permit Fees, plus court costs. Subsequent or
continuing offences shall cause an injunction to be issued halting the
offender's work until such time as compliance with this chapter is
accomplished.
Exhibit A attached to Ord. 849 shall be hereby adopted by reference as if laid
out here in its entirety. (Prior code § 4-9; amd. Ord. 290, 2-21-1984; Ord.
842, 12-5-2023; Ord. 849, 7-2-2024)
CHAPTER 2
CONTRACTOR LICENSING
SECTION:
5-201: General.
5-202: License, how obtained; fee
5-203: Electrical contractor defined.
5-204: Plumbing contractor defined.
5-205: Heating and air conditioning contractor defined.
5-206: General contractor defined.
5-207: Journeyman defined.
5-208: License issuance; denial and expiration.
5-209: Tests.
5-210: Insurance.
5-211: Violations.
5-212: Violation; how punishable.
5-213: Board of review.
5-214: Reciprocity.
5-201: GENERAL:
All persons, natural or corporate, engaged in any one or more contractual
activities as outlined in the following sections of this part shall have a
license to perform such activities for each separate classification for which
they are engaged to work within the city limits. (Prior Code, Sec. 4-10)
5-202: LICENSE; HOW OBTAINED; FEE:
   A.   License may be obtained by making application to the office of the city
engineer/building inspector. Application forms are available in the same
office, and may be obtained in person or by mail. All applications submitted
must be accompanied by proof of public liability insurance in the minimum
amount of One Hundred Thousand Dollars ($100,000.00); and worker's compensation
insurance as required by law.
   B.   Applications shall be made at the office of the city engineer/building
inspector in writing. The application shall be accompanied by a Fifty Dollar
($50.00) check or money order payable to the city. (Prior Code, Secs. 4-11, 4-
24 as amended)
5-203: ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR DEFINED:
Any person, natural or corporate, engaged in electrical wiring, placing of
fixtures and electrical installations installed in, about or upon any building,
residential or commercial or otherwise in the city shall be deemed to be an
electrical contractor, and shall be licensed in compliance with, as required by
and according to methods outlined and set forth in the provisions of this
chapter. (Prior Code, Sec. 4-12)
State Law Reference: State electrical licenses and requirements, cities may
require registration, 59 O.S. Sections 1680 to 1696.
5-204: PLUMBING CONTRACTOR DEFINED:
Any person, natural or corporate, engaged in the installation of plumbing,
pipes, conduits, fixtures and related items and equipment installed in, about
or upon any building, residential or commercial or otherwise in the city, shall
be deemed to be a plumbing contractor, and shall be licensed in compliance with
and as required by and according to methods outlined and set forth in the
provisions of this chapter. (Prior Code, Sec. 4-13)
State Law Reference; State plumbing licenses and requirements, cities may
require registration, 59 O.S. Sections 1001 et seq.
5-205: HEATING AND AIR CONDITIONING CONTRACTOR DEFINED:
Any person, natural or corporate, installing pipe, conduits, duct work and
other related items and equipment installed in or about any building,
residential, commercial or otherwise, in the city, for the purpose of heating
and/or cooling shall be deemed to be a heating and air conditioning contractor,
and shall be licensed in compliance with and as required by and according to
methods outlined and set forth in the provisions of this chapter. (Prior Code,
Sec. 4-14)
5-206: GENERAL CONTRACTOR DEFINED:
Repealed by Ordinance Number 332, 6/7/88.
5-207: JOURNEYMAN DEFINED:
Repealed by Ordinance Number 332, 6/7/88.
5-208: LICENSE ISSUANCE; DENIAL AND EXPIRATION:
   A.   Licenses will be issued, if practicable, on the same date that
application is submitted, and not longer than five (5) working days from the
date of application, if applicant meets all requirements.
   B.   Licenses will be for a period of one year from the date of issuance.
   C.   All denials shall be in writing stating the exact reason and nature of
the denial. The office of the city building inspector will be the issuing
agency and any person, natural or corporate, who receives a denial shall have
the right of appeal to the board of review upon notifying the city clerk in
writing, and the city clerk shall notify the board of review to set a certain
day to hear the appeal within five (5) days from the date of the notification
thereof.
   D.   Expired licenses can be renewed within a period of two (2) months of
expiration date upon the payment of the normal license fee plus a penalty of
Five Dollars ($5.00). Licenses which have been expired for over two (2) months
will require the applicant to be licensed as though it is a new application.
(Ord. No. 261, 1/5/82)
5-209: TESTS:
Repealed by Ordinance Number 332, 6/7/88.
5-210: INSURANCE:
All licensed contractors in all categories shall carry public liability
insurance and worker's compensation for any classification and shall not need
to furnish more than one bond nor carry more than one liability insurance
coverage. All licensed contractors shall furnish proof of the insurance and
state license by delivering to the city a copy of the license and insurance.
(Ord. 327, 6/16/87; Ord. No. 332, 6/7/88)
5-211: VIOLATIONS:
All persons, natural or corporate, shall have a license to perform contractual
work under any of the classifications defined in this chapter. Any persons,
natural or corporate, who do work in any of the classifications in this chapter
without a license shall be held in violation. Any contractor licensed under
this chapter who performs work within the town limits of the city upon a
residence, commercial or other building, whether new construction or whether
in, about or on an already existing building for which a building permit has
not been issued or procured, shall be held in violation of this chapter. (Prior
Code, Sec. 4-21)
5-212: VIOLATION; HOW PUNISHABLE:
For a first offense of violation of this chapter, upon conviction the fine
shall be One Hundred Dollars ($100.00), plus court costs. Subsequent or
continued offense shall cause an injunction to issue halting the offending work
until such time as compliance with this chapter is accomplished and/or
revocation of license. Each day of continuing violation shall constitute a
separate offense. (Prior Code, Sec. 4-22; Ord. No. 290, 2/21/84)
5-213: BOARD OF REVIEW:
   A.   There is hereby created a board of review composed of nine (9) members,
one of whom shall be a member of the city council, designated by the mayor,
with the approval of the city council and the other eight (8) shall be members
of the building or construction trades who will be appointed by the mayor with
the approval of the city council. The function of the board of review shall be
to hear appeals from findings and rulings of the city engineer/building
inspector. The board shall also review all other special cases not covered in
this chapter. The board of review members shall be appointed for periods of one
to five (5) years and may be removed by a majority vote of the city council.
   B.   Any person who is aggrieved by a finding or ruling of this chapter
shall have the right of appeal of such grievance to the board of review. Such
aggrieved person shall notify the city clerk in writing of such grievance,
whereupon the city clerk shall notify the board of review which shall set a
certain date for the hearing of such grievance within five (5) days of the date
of notification thereof. The city clerk shall then notify the aggrieved person
of the date, place and time of the hearing. The board of review shall hear the
grievance, and make its recommendation to the city council. All appeals from
the decision of the city council shall be to the municipal court of the city.
(Prior Code, Sec. 4-23)
5-214: RECIPROCITY:
City license in any classification will be issued to out-of-town licensed
contractors whose license is current in their normal place of business, and a
reciprocal agreement exists between the city and their city, and upon payment
of the yearly license fee. Special cases are to be determined on an individual
basis by the board of review. (Prior Code, Sec. 4-25)
CHAPTER 3
BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
SECTION:
5-301: International Building Code
5-302: International Residential Code
5-303: International Property Maintenance Code
5-304: International Existing Building Code
5-305: International Energy Conservation Code
5-306: Conflict Of Codes
5-301: INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE:
   A.   The regulations of the latest edition of the International Building
Code and its appendices as adopted by the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code
Commission pursuant to 59 Oklahoma Statutes 1000.23 are hereby adopted by the
City for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing construction,
alteration, and remodel of buildings and structures, one copy of which has been
filed in the Office of the City Clerk and the same and any future amendments
thereto, is hereby adopted and incorporated as though fully set out at length
herein, and from the effective date, the provisions thereof shall be
controlling within the limits of the City. (Ord. 754, 9-4-2018)
5-302: INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE:
   A.   The regulations of the latest edition of the International Residential
Code and its appendices as adopted by the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code
Commission pursuant to 59 Oklahoma Statutes 1000.23 are hereby adopted by the
City for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing construction,
alteration, and remodel of residential buildings and structures, one copy of
which has been filed in the Office of the City Clerk and the same and any
future amendments thereto is hereby adopted and incorporated as though fully
set out at length herein and from the effective date, the provisions thereof
shall be controlling within the limits of the City. (Ord. 754, 9-4-2018)
5-303: INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE:
   A.   The regulations of the latest edition of the International Property
Maintenance Code and its appendices are hereby adopted by the City for the
purpose of prescribing regulations for the minimum maintenance of buildings,
structures, and premises, one copy of which has been filed in the Office of the
City Clerk and the same and any future amendments thereto, is hereby adopted
and incorporated as though fully set out at length herein and from the
effective date, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits
of the City. (Ord. 754, 9-4-2018)
5-304: INTERNATIONAL EXISTING BUILDING CODE:
   A.   The regulations of the latest edition of the International Existing
Building Code and its appendices as adopted by the Oklahoma Uniform Building
Code Commission pursuant to 59 Oklahoma Statutes 1000.23 are hereby adopted by
the City for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing construction,
alteration, and remodel of existing buildings and structures, one copy of which
has been filed in the Office of the City Clerk and the same and any future
amendments thereto, is hereby adopted and incorporated as though fully set out
at length herein, and from the effective date, the provisions thereof shall be
controlling within the limits of the City. (Ord. 754, 9-4-2018)
5-305: INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE:
   A.   The regulations of the latest edition of the International Energy
Conservation Code and its appendices as adopted by the Oklahoma Uniform
Building Code Commission pursuant to 59 Oklahoma Statutes 1000.23 are hereby
adopted by the City for the purpose of incorporating energy saving provisions
into the construction, alteration, and remodel of buildings and structures, one
copy of which has been filed in the Office of the City Clerk and the same and
any future amendments thereto, is hereby adopted and incorporated as though
fully set out at length herein and from the effective date, the provisions
thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the City. (Ord. 754, 9-4-
2018)
5-306: CONFLICT OF CODES:
   A.   Where any provisions contained within the international codes and its
appendices are in conflict with the provisions contained within this Code, the
most stringent provision shall prevail. (Ord. 754, 9-4-2018)
CHAPTER 4
PLUMBING AND MECHANICAL CODES
SECTION:
5-401: International Plumbing Code
5-402: International Mechanical Code
5-403: Conflict Of Codes
5-401: INTERNATIONAL PLUMBING CODE:
   A.   The regulations of the latest edition of the International Plumbing
Code and its appendices as adopted by the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code
Commission pursuant to 59 Oklahoma Statutes 1000.23 are hereby adopted by the
City as the minimum standard for the purpose of prescribing regulations
governing the installation and repair of plumbing fixtures in buildings and
structures, one copy of which has been filed in the Office of the City Clerk
and the same and any future amendments thereto is hereby referred to, adopted
and incorporated as though fully set out at length herein and from the
effective date, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits
of the City.
   B.   The building inspector has the authority to enforce the International
Plumbing Code on individuals approved by Grove Municipal Services Authority
(GMSA) to tap into or be serviced by the GMSA utilities. (Ord. 755, 9-4-2018)
5-402: INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE:
   A.   The regulations of the latest edition of the International Mechanical
Code and its appendices as adopted by the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code
Commission pursuant to 59 Oklahoma Statutes 1000.23 are hereby adopted by the
City as the minimum standard for the installation of all mechanical devices and
equipment, one copy of which has been filed in the Office of the City Clerk.
Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of
the International Mechanical Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a
part of this Code as fully and to the same extent as if copied here in full,
with additions, insertions and changes, if any prescribed in this chapter.
(Ord. 755, 9-4-2018)
5-403: CONFLICT OF CODES:
   A.   Where any provision contained within the International Plumbing Code or
the International Mechanical Code and its appendices is in conflict with the
provisions contained within this Code, the most stringent provisions shall
prevail. (Ord. 755, 9-4-2018)
CHAPTER 5
ELECTRICAL CODE
SECTION:
5-501: National Electrical Code
5-502: Wiring To Be In Conduit
5-503: Service Entrance Conductors; Disconnecting Means
5-504: Conflict Of Codes
5-501: NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE:
   A.   The regulations of the latest edition of the National Electrical Code
and its appendices and any revisions or amendments as adopted by the Oklahoma
Uniform Building Code Commission pursuant to 59 Oklahoma Statutes 1000.23 are
hereby adopted by the City for the purpose of establishing rules and
regulations for the installation of electrical wiring, devices and equipment.
Each and all of the regulations of the National Electrical Code are hereby
referred to, one copy of which shall be filed with the Office of the City
Clerk, adopted and made a part of this Code as fully and to the same extent as
if copied here in full, with additions, insertions and changes, if any
prescribed in this chapter. (Ord. 756, 9-4-2018)
5-502: WIRING TO BE IN CONDUIT:
   A.   Any person, natural or corporate, building, erecting, remodeling or
constructing any commercial building as defined in the City's zoning ordinance,
within the corporate limits of the City must enclose all the electrical wiring
in conduit. (Ord. 756, 9-4-2018)
5-503: SERVICE ENTRANCE CONDUCTORS; DISCONNECTING MEANS:
   A.   General: All new residential and commercial service entrance conductors
shall have a lockable outside service entrance disconnect (guarded against live
parts) between the service meter and the power panel to the building/structure.
The service meter from the provider shall not be considered an approved outside
service disconnect.
   B.   Readily Accessible Location: A maximum distance of service conductor's
length, type and location of a lockable service entrance disconnect "is"
specified from the point of entrance of service conductors to a readily
accessible location for the installation of a service entrance disconnecting
means.
Service entrance conductors not protected by an approved over current
protective device "shall not" enter a structure or crawl space above ground
level.
All above ground service entrance conductors shall be installed in an approved
rigid conduit.
All over current protected service disconnecting means will be located outside
of the building/structure and labeled as such in a readily accessible location.
A maximum distance of service entrance conductors from the electrical utility
power provider to the over current service entrance disconnecting means will be
ten feet (10') of wire length or less. (Ord. 756, 9-4-2018)
5-504: CONFLICT OF CODES:
   A.   Where any provisions contained within the National Electrical Code and
its appendices are in conflict with the provisions contained within this Code,
the most stringent provision shall prevail. (Ord. 756, 9-4-2018)
CHAPTER 6
FUEL GAS CODE
SECTION:
5-601: International Fuel Gas Code
5-602: Gas Plumbing To Be Under Grove Municipal Services Authority And City
Supervision
5-603: Conflict Of Codes
5-601: INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE:
   A.   The regulations of the latest edition of the International Fuel Gas
Code and its appendices as adopted by the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code
Commission pursuant to 59 Oklahoma Statutes 1000.23 are hereby adopted by the
City for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing the installation of
fuel gas appliances within buildings and structures, one copy of which has been
filed in the Office of the City Clerk and the same and any future amendments
thereto are hereby adopted and incorporated as though fully set out at length
herein and, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of
the City. (Ord. 757, 9-4-2018)
5-602: GAS PLUMBING TO BE UNDER GROVE MUNICIPAL SERVICES AUTHORITY AND CITY
SUPERVISION:
   A.   The fittings and plumbing of houses and structures in the City for
natural or manufactured gas is hereby declared to be under the supervision of
Grove Municipal Services Authority (GMSA) and the City. (Ord. 757, 9-4-2018)
5-603: CONFLICT OF CODES:
   A.   Where any provisions contained within the International Fuel Gas Code
and its appendices is in conflict with the provisions contained in this Code,
the most stringent provision shall prevail. (Ord. 757, 9-4-2018)
CHAPTER 7
LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS CODE
SECTION:
5-701: Liquefied Petroleum Gas Act Adopted
5-701: LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS ACT ADOPTED:
The regulations of the latest version thereof, and any revisions or amendments
thereto, of the Oklahoma state liquefied petroleum gas regulations act are
hereby adopted as the minimum standards to fabricate, assemble, install or
repair any system, container, apparatus, or appliance to be used for the
transportation, storage, dispensing or utilization of liquidized petroleum gas,
or to transport, handle or store such gas. (Ord. 657, 10-16-2012)
CHAPTER 8
FENCE, RETAINING WALL, AND PLANTINGS CODE
SECTION:
5-801: Barbed Wire Fencing Prohibited
5-802: Electrical Barriers
5-803: Location Of Fences, Retaining Walls And Plantings
5-804: Permit Required
5-805: Non-conforming Structures
5-806: Conflict Of Codes
5-801: BARBED WIRE FENCING PROHIBITED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain, or for any
property owner or occupant to allow to be erected or maintained on any property
within the city, any fence equipped with or having barbed wire, spikes or any
similar device.
   B.   No person shall erect or maintain any fence composed in whole or in
part of barbed wire, along or adjacent to any public street, park, cemetery,
sidewalk or other public place.
   EXCEPTION: A fence equipped with or having barbed wire, spikes or similar
device that is a minimum of six feet (6') above the ground and is located
within the minimum set back requirements may be exempt under the following
conditions:
      1.   A fence located within an Industrial zoned district used for
security purposes; AND
      2.   A fence located within an Agricultural zoned district used
exclusively for agricultural purposes; AND
      3.   A fence located within any zoned district that is used for security
purposes of any public utility franchise. (Ord. 787, 3-3-2020)
5-802: ELECTRICAL BARRIER:
Any fence or barrier conducting electrical current shall be erected only in
compliance with the following:
   A.   Agricultural Use: If serving as the primary means for deterring entry
or escape, be erected on land utilized exclusively for agriculture purposes and
be a minimum of fifty feet (50') distance from any building occupied as a place
of residence by any person other than the property owner and his/her family; or
   B.   Enclosure Required: Be wholly enclosed within another fence or barrier
at least four feet (4') in height such as a wooden fence or chain link fence
which is designed in such a manner as to exclude entry except by one scaling
its height.
   C.   Transformer Control Mechanism: In either of the above established
lawful uses, the electrical barrier must consist of a transformer control
mechanism which provides for short intervals of electrification followed by
intervals wherein the conductor is not electrically charged and, if using
alternation current as a power source, the mechanism has been approved by
Underwriters’ Laboratories or similar testing service. (Ord. 787, 3-3-2020)
5-803: FENCES, RETAINING WALLS OR PLANTINGS:
Location of fences, retaining walls and plantings must comply with the set-back
requirements set-forth in Chapter 4 of the City of Grove Zoning Regulations and
the following:
   A.   In rear and side yards, no fences, walls or plantings shall exceed
eight feet (8') in height above ground level.
   B.   In front yards, no fences, walls or plantings shall exceed four feet
(4') in height above ground level.
   C.   No fences, walls, plantings or structures more than three feet (3') in
height above curb level may be erected, placed or maintained within the
Triangular Area.
   D.   No fences, walls, planting or other structures shall be located within
any area including the Parkway, when such would create a traffic hazard by
obstructing the view or when such fence or planting would obstruct or hinder
future development or use of said area or Parkway.
   E.   No fences, wall, or planting shall be placed upon or about any fire
hydrant.
   F.   Construction: A fence shall be constructed to be in harmony with and
conform to surrounding buildings and uses within the district where it is
located. Materials used to construct a fence in a residential or commercial
zoned district must be aesthetically appealing and may be wood, vinyl,
composite, chain-link or other similar materials as approved by the Building
Inspector. Tin or metal panels are prohibited.
      Displaying advertising signs or letters on a fence is prohibited. The
fence must be always maintained in a proper state of repair.
   G.   Temporary Fence: A temporary fence shall be installed for safety
purposes during construction. A Temporary Fence shall be removed within
fourteen (14) days of the completion of construction.
      Temporary Fence may also be installed during public events, emergency
situations to secure hazardous areas, direct traffic, designate relief zones
and other situations as deemed necessary by public officials.
   H.   Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following terms are
defined as follows:
      FENCE: A structure erected to provide privacy or security, which encloses
a private space. A wall or similar barrier shall be deemed a fence.
      PARKWAY: The area between the street curb and the front property line.
      TEMPORARY FENCE: Portable fencing designed for temporary use that can be
easily installed, moved or removed as needed.
      TRIANGULAR AREA: An area formed by the intersection street lines and a
straight line joining said street lines at points which distance from the point
of intersection is twenty-five feet (25')
   I.   On, over or across a utility easement subject to the following:
      1.   Where the fence or wall encloses an easement, a gate will be
provided at each end of said easement which said gate will be unlocked at all
times and shall be the full width of said easement to afford access to the full
width of the easement to the city or other utility franchise owner or any
service individual or company requiring access to service utilities.
      2.   Erecting any structures or making any plantings in the easement
which will restrict access on and across said easement by any individual or
corporation entitled to use the same shall be prohibited.
      3.   Where damage to plantings or structures in an easement does occur
because of emergency or utility vehicle traffic, the city or utility companies
causing said same shall be held harmless and absolved of any and all
responsibility for repair or replacements of said structures of plantings.(Ord.
787, 3-3-2020; amd. Ord. 808, 1-18-2022; Ord. 858, 3-4-2025)
5-804: PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   Any person, firm or corporation desiring to construct a fence or wall
shall, prior to construction make an application for a permit. Said application
shall contain the following information:
      1.   The name and permanent address of the applicant.
      2.   The legal description of the property upon which the fence or wall
will be constructed.
      3.   A plat of the property showing where the fence or wall will be
constructed.
      4.   Type of fence or wall to be constructed and height of fence or wall.
      5.   Any other data as may be required
   B.   Any such permit issued for construction of a fence or wall in any
street, alley, parking, utility easement or any other public way shall be
revocable by the city with a thirty (30) day written notice to the record owner
of said property.
   C.   Fee: The application will be accompanied by a fee, in such amount as
set by city council. (Ord. 787, 3-3-2020)
5-805: NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURE:
   A.    A fence, retaining wall or planting that was in place prior to passage
of this Ordinance shall be considered a Non-Conforming structure, and may
continue only if said structure does not become a threat or danger to the
health, safety or welfare of the general public, in a dilapidated condition or
a nuisance, and shall comply with Chapter 6, Section 6-1 Non-Conforming Uses,
of the City of Grove Zoning Ordinances. (Ord. 787, 3-3-2020)
5-806: CONFLICT OF CODES:
   A.   Where any provisions contained within International Building Code and
its appendices are in conflict with the provisions contained within this City
code, the most stringent provision shall prevail. (Ord. 787, 3-3-2020)
CHAPTER 9
FAIR HOUSING
SECTION:
5-901: Purposes and construction.
5-902: Housing discrimination acts prohibited.
5-903: Exemptions.
5-904: Fair housing board created.
5-905: Duties of fair housing board.
5-906: Procedure for complaints.
5-907: Notices.
5-908: Penalty.
5-901: PURPOSES AND CONSTRUCTION:
The general purposes of this chapter are:
   1.   To secure for all people equal access to housing in all neighborhoods;
and
   2.   To preserve the public safety, health and welfare. (Ord. No. 241, 11/4/
80)
5-902: HOUSING DISCRIMINATION ACTS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person, real estate broker, real estate salesperson, or
corporation:
      1.   To refuse to sell, lease, rent, assign or otherwise transfer the
title or other interest in any housing, or real property upon which residential
housing is to be constructed to any person, or to discriminate in the terms or
conditions of the sale, rental or leasing of any residential housing unit,
because of race, sex, religion or national origin;
      2.   To refuse to negotiate with any person for the sale, rental, or
leasing of any residential property, or to represent that such property is not
available for inspection, sale, rental or lease when in fact it is so
available, because of such person's race, sex, religion or national origin;
      3.   To solicit or induce, or attempt to solicit or induce, any person
owning any interest in any residential housing to sell, rent or lease, or not
to sell, rent or lease such housing to any person on the ground of loss of
value due to the present or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person
or persons of another race, sex, religion, or national origin, either by direct
solicitation or inducement or by the purchase of other property in the
neighborhood for the purpose of such inducement, or to distribute, or cause to
be distributed material or making statements designed to induce a residential
property owner to sell or lease his property due to such change in
neighborhood; or
      4.   To file a complaint alleging a violation of this chapter, with
knowledge that such complaint is false in any material respect, or to file such
complaint for the sole purpose of harassment. (Ord. No. 241, 11/4/80)
5-903: EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   Nothing herein shall apply to any religious organization, association,
society or private club; a religious nonprofit organization, operated,
supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization,
association, or society from limiting the sale or rental of dwelling units
owned and operated for other than a commercial purpose.
   B.   Nothing herein shall apply to:
      1.   Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner, provided that
such private individual owner does not own more than three (3) such single
family houses and was not the most recent resident of such house prior to such
sale with the exception granted to one such sale within a twenty-four (24)
month period; provided further that such owner does not own or retain in his
behalf title to a portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than
three (3) such single family houses at any one time; provided further that such
sale or rental of such single family house shall be excepted if such house is
sold or rented without the use in any manner of a sale or rental facilities or
employee thereof; or
      2.   Any dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be
occupied by no more than four (4) families living independent of each other and
the owner actually occupies one such living quarter as his residence. (Ord. No.
241, 11/4/80)
5-904: FAIR HOUSING BOARD CREATED:
There is hereby created a Fair Housing Board of the city, hereinafter referred
to as "board," composed of five (5) members to be appointed by the city for
terms of three (3) years. Of the members initially appointed, however, two (2)
shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years; and one shall be appointed
for a term of one year. (Ord. 241, 11/4/80)
5-905: DUTIES OF FAIR HOUSING BOARD:
It is the duty of the Fair Housing Board to:
      1.   Initiate, receive, and investigate complaints, charging unlawful
housing practices;
      2.   Seek conciliation of such complaints, hold hearings, make findings
of fact, and publish its findings of fact; and
      3.   Adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary within the
limits of this chapter, and carry out the purposes and provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. No. 241, 11/4/80)
5-906: PROCEDURE FOR COMPLAINTS:
   A.   Any person aggrieved by discriminatory practice prohibited by this
chapter may file with the fair housing board a complaint in writing, under
oath. The complaint shall be signed by the person claiming to be aggrieved, and
shall state the name and address of the person alleged to have violated the
provisions of this chapter, and shall further set forth the particulars of the
violation, and may include such other information as may be required by the
board. Complaints filed under this section must be filed within thirty (30)
days after the alleged violation, and failure to file within that time, shall
be considered a waiver of the application of this chapter. The board may issue
a complaint on its own initiative, at any time it is within the knowledge of
the board that a person has violated any of the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   The board shall investigate each complaint filed with the board, and
shall attempt an adjustment of the complaint by means of conference and
conciliation. Sixty (60) days shall be allowed for the purpose of
investigation, conference and conciliation. Upon determination that a complaint
is not well-founded, the board shall dismiss the complaint and notify the
complainant and respondent in writing of the dismissal. If the board takes no
action within ninety (90) days of the filing of the complaint, it shall be
considered as dismissed.
   C.   If conference or conciliation does not result in compliance with this
chapter, the board shall cause to be issued and served in the name of the city
a written notice, together with a copy of the complaint requiring the person
named in the complaint, hereinafter referred to as respondent, to answer
charges of the complaint at a hearing before the board at a time and place to
be specified in the notice.
   D.   At the hearing, provided for in subsection C of this section, the
complaint shall be heard by the board. At the hearing, the complainant or
person aggrieved may appear in person or by counsel, and the respondent may
file a written answer to the complaint and may appear in person or by legal
counsel. The board, when conducting any hearing, pursuant to this section, may
permit amendments to any complaint or answer, and the testimony taken at the
hearing shall be under oath, and shall be transcribed at the request of either
party, or at the direction of the board. If the board finds at the hearing that
the respondent has engaged in any discriminatory practice or practices
prohibited by this chapter, it shall state its findings of fact, and shall so
certify the matter to the city attorney for appropriate action. No prosecution
shall be brought under this chapter except upon such certification. If the
board, upon hearing, finds that respondent has not engaged in any
discriminatory practice, it shall state its findings of fact, and shall issue
and file an order, dismissing the complaint. The board shall establish rules
and regulations to govern and expedite and effectuate the foregoing procedure,
and shall maintain the files provided for herein. (Ord. 241, 11-4-1980)
5-907: NOTICES:
Any and all notices required under the provisions of this chapter to be served
upon any person, may be served personally on such person, or by mailing a copy
thereof by certified or registered mail, with return receipt requested, to the
most current business or residence address of such person. (Ord. 241, 11-4-
1980)
5-908: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section
1-108 of this code. (Ord. 454, 5-16-2000)
CHAPTER 10
MOBILE HOMES AND MANUFACTURED HOMES
SECTION:
5-1001: Standards
5-1002: Location
5-1003: Manufactured Home Parks
5-1001: STANDARDS:
All mobile homes and manufactured homes located within the City limits shall
comply with the general provisions set forth in the City of Grove zoning
regulations. (Ord. 732, 2-7-2017)
5-1002: LOCATION:
Placement or replacement of mobile homes or manufactured homes within the City
limits shall comply with the designated location of mobile homes and
manufactured homes set forth in the City of Grove zoning regulations. (Ord.
732, 2-7-2017)
5-1003: MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS:
Development of a manufactured home park within the City limits shall comply
with the requirements set forth in the City of Grove zoning regulations. (Ord.
732, 2-7-2017)
CHAPTER 11
PENALTY
SECTION:
5-1101: Violation; Penalty
5-1101: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating any provisions of this part shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section
1-108 of this code. (Ord. 657, 10-16-2012)
CHAPTER 12
EXISTING BUILDING CODE 1
(Rep. by Ord. 754, 9-4-2018)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  5-304 of this part.
CHAPTER 13
SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODES
SECTION:
5-1301: International Swimming Pool And Spa Codes
5-1302: Location
5-1303: Fence Required
5-1304: Permit Required
5-1305: Conflict Of Codes
5-1301: INTERNATIONAL SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODES:
   A.   The regulations of the latest edition of the International Swimming
Pool and Spa Code and its appendices are hereby adopted by the City as the
minimum standard for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing the
construction and installation of swimming pools and spas to include but not
limited to hot tubs and other similar devices, one copy of which has been filed
in the Office of the City Clerk and the same and any future amendments thereto
is hereby referred to, adopted and incorporated as though fully set out at
length herein and from the effective date, the provisions thereof shall be
controlling within the limits of the City. (Ord. 758, 9-4-2018)
5-1302: LOCATION:
   A.   Swimming pools, spas, hot tubs and other similar devices shall be
located a minimum of ten feet (10') from the nearest property line.
   B.   No swimming pool shall be permitted in any Residential District unless
such pool is:
      1.   Owned and operated by a public agency or a residential group from
within the area in which the pool is located;
      2.   Accessory to a residential unit, and is intended for the use of, and
is used by only occupants and their guests of the principal use of the property
on which it is located;
      3.   Accessory to a non-residential use, which is permitted in such
zoning district. (Ord. 758, 9-4-2018)
5-1303: FENCE REQUIRED:
   A.   Swimming pools, spas, hot tubs and other similar devices shall be
fenced and secured in a manner that will prevent uncontrolled access as set
forth in the latest edition of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code and
its appendices. (Ord. 758, 9-4-2018)
5-1304: PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   Application: Any person, firm or corporation desiring to construct or
install a swimming pool, spa, hot tub or similar device shall, prior to
construction or installation make an application for a permit. Said application
shall contain the following information:
      1.   The name, street and mailing address of the property owner.
      2.   A drawing of the property indicating where the pool or spa will be
located.
      3.   Any other data as may be required.
   B.   Fee: The application will be accompanied by a fee, in such amount as
set by City Council. (Ord. 758, 9-4-2018)
5-1305: CONFLICT OF CODES:
   A.   Where any provision contained within the International Swimming Pool
and Spa Code and its appendices is in conflict with the provisions contained
within this Code, the most stringent provisions shall prevail. (Ord. 758, 9-4-
2018)
CHAPTER 14
BUILDING ADDRESSES
SECTION:
5-1401: Buildings Shall Be Addressed
5-1402: 911 Coordinator To Designate Address
5-1403: Responsibility Of Owner
5-1404: Unlawful To Conceal Address
5-1405: Penalty
5-1401: BUILDINGS SHALL BE ADDRESSED:
   A.   All businesses and residential structures including single- family,
duplex and multi-family housing located within the City of Grove shall be
addressed at the property owner's expense.
   B.   The address numbers and letters shall be made of durable weather
resistance material and placed on the building in a location that is visible
from the street. Numbers and letters may be placed on the mailbox, only if the
mailbox is located directly in front of the building.
   C.   Address numbers and letters shall be of such a color that will contrast
with the color of the building to assure clear visibility. Perishable materials
such as wood, paper, cardboard, and marking of pen, pencil or other easily
displaced substances shall not be used.
   D.   The address numbers and letters shall not be less than four inches (4")
in height and two inches (2") in width.
   E.   If businesses or residential houses cannot be seen from the street, the
address numbers and letters must be posted on a pole or similar device located
on the driveway leading to the building in a manner that is visible from the
street. If the driveway is shared by two (2) or more businesses or residential
houses, the address numbers and letters shall be posted at the driveway and
placed on the building. (Ord. 763, 11-6-2018)
5-1402: 911 COORDINATOR TO DESIGNATE ADDRESS:
   A.   The 911 Coordinator shall have the authority to designate the address
of all businesses and residential structures in conformity with the National
Emergency Numbering Association (NENA) standards.
   B.   When any such business or residential house is not correctly addressed,
or not addressed at all, the 911 Coordinator shall provide the proper address
and shall notify the property owner to place address numbers and letters on the
building in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 763, 11-6-2018)
5-1403: RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER:
   A.   It is the duty of the property owner of the business or residential
house to properly and correctly address buildings as follows:
      1.   Existing building - within sixty (60) days from the date of written
notice given by the City of Grove;
      2.   New construction - within ten (10) days of completion of new
construction; a Certificate of Occupancy will not be issued by the City of
Grove until the property is properly addressed in accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. 763, 11-6-2018)
5-1404: UNLAWFUL TO CONCEAL ADDRESS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to obliterate, conceal or obscure
any address numbers or letters by paint or other means. (Ord. 763, 11-6-2018)
5-1405: PENALTY:
   A.   Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section
1-108 of this Code. (Ord. 763, 11-6-2018)
PART 6
COURT
CHAPTER 1
MUNICIPAL COURT
SECTION:
6-101: Organization of municipal court.
6-102: Definitions.
6-103: Jurisdiction of court.
6-104: Judge; qualifications.
6-105: Term of judge.
6-106: Alternate judge.
6-107: Acting judge.
6-108: Appointment of judge and alternate judge.
6-109: Salary and payments to judges.
6-110: Removal of judge.
6-111: Vacancy in office of judge.
6-112: Disqualification of judge.
6-113: Court marshal.
6-114: Clerk of the court; duties.
6-115: Prosecuting attorney, duties; conflict of interest.
6-116: Bond of clerk.
6-117: Rules of court.
6-118: Enforcement of rules.
6-119: Written complaints to prosecute ordinance violations.
6-120: Ordinance violations; procedures for issuing citation; custody, arrest,
bail.
6-121: Creation of traffic violations bureau.
6-122: Summons for arrest.
6-123: Form of arrest warrant.
6-124: Procedures for bail or bond.
6-125: Deposit of driver's license as bail for traffic violations.
6-126: Arraignment and pleadings by defendant.
6-127: Trials and judgments.
6-128: Trial by jury and waiver.
6-129: Jurors and jury trial procedures.
6-130: Witness fees.
6-131: Compensation of jurors.
6-132: Suspension of sentence.
6-133: Imprisonment, work by prisoners.
6-134: Fines and costs; nonpayment, installments, imprisonment.
6-135: Conduct of sessions of court; notice.
6-136: Penalty assessments.
6-101: ORGANIZATION OF MUNICIPAL COURT:
This chapter shall govern the organization and operation of the municipal
criminal court of the City of Grove, as put into operation by Resolution Number
185, duly passed and filed in accordance with law, as authorized by Sections
27-101 and 27-102 of Title 11 of the Oklahoma Statutes. To the extent of
conflict between any provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any
ordinance of this city, the provisions of this chapter shall control. (Prior
Code, Sec. 12-1)
State Law Reference: Municipal courts not of record, organization, rules and
procedures, 11 O.S. Sections 27-101 to 27-131.
6-102: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context requires a different meaning, the
following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
      1.   "Court" means the municipal court of the City of Grove;
      2.   "Judge" means the judge of the municipal court, including any acting
judge or alternate judge thereof as provided for by the statutes of this state
and this chapter;
      3.   "Municipality" or "this municipality" means the City of Grove,
Oklahoma;
      4.   "Clerk" means the clerk of this municipality, including any deputy
or member of the office staff of the clerk while performing duties of the
clerk's office;
      5.   "Governing body" means the city council of the City of Grove;
      6.   "Chief of police" means the peace officer in charge of the police
force of the municipality; and
      7.   "This judicial district" means the district court judicial district
of the State of Oklahoma wherein the government of this municipality is
situated.
(Prior Code, Sec. 12-2)
6-103: JURISDICTION OF COURT:
The court shall exercise original jurisdiction to hear and determine all
prosecutions wherein a violation of any ordinance of this municipality is
charged, including any such prosecutions transferred to the court in accordance
with applicable law. (Prior Code, Sec. 12-3)
6-104: JUDGE; QUALIFICATIONS:
There shall be one judge of the court. A judge shall be a licensed attorney at
law. The judge may engage in the practice of law in other courts, but he shall
not accept employment inconsistent with his duties as judge, or arising out of
facts which gives rise to or are connected with cases within the jurisdiction
of the court, pending therein or which might become the subject of proceedings
therein. (Prior Code, Sec. 12-4)
6-105: TERM OF JUDGE:
The official term of the judge shall be two (2) years expiring on the 30th day
of June. Each judge, unless sooner removed for proper cause, shall serve until
his successor is appointed and qualified. (Prior Code, Sec. 12-5; Ord. No. 303,
6/4/85)
6-106: ALTERNATE JUDGE:
There shall be appointed for each judge of the court an alternate judge
possessed of the same qualifications as the judge. His appointment shall be for
the same term and made in the same manner as the judge. He shall sit as acting
judge of the court in any case if the judge is:
      1.   Absent from the court;
      2.   Unable to act as judge; or
      3.   Disqualified from acting as judge in the case.
(Prior Code, Sec. 12-6)
6-107: ACTING JUDGE:
If at any time there is no judge or alternate judge, duly appointed and
qualified, available to sit as judge, the mayor shall appoint some person,
possessing the qualifications required by this chapter for the judge, who shall
preside as acting judge over the court in the disposition of pending matters
until such time as a judge or alternate judge shall be available. (Prior Code,
Sec. 12-7)
6-108: APPOINTMENT OF JUDGE AND ALTERNATE JUDGE:
Judges and alternate judges shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of
the governing body. A proposed appointment shall be submitted in writing to the
governing body at the next to the last regularly scheduled meeting prior to the
day upon which the appointment is to take effect, and shall be acted upon at
the next regularly scheduled meeting. The governing body may decide upon the
proposed appointment by a majority vote of a quorum present and acting. Failure
of decision upon a proposed appointment shall not prevent action thereon at a
later regularly scheduled meeting of the governing body unless the mayor, in
writing, withdraws the proposed appointment. (Prior Code, Sec. 12-8)
6-109: SALARY AND PAYMENTS TO JUDGES:
   A.   A judge, other than an alternate judge or an acting judge, shall
receive a salary as set by the governing body by motion or resolution, paid in
the same manner as the salaries of other officials of this municipality.
   B.   An alternate judge or an acting judge shall be paid an amount as set by
motion or resolution of the governing body. (Prior Code, Sec. 12-9)
6-110: REMOVAL OF JUDGE:
Judges are subject to removal from office by the governing body for the causes
prescribed by the constitution and laws of this state for the removal of public
officers. Proceedings for removal shall be instituted by the filing of a
verified written petition setting forth facts sufficient to constitute one or
more legal grounds for removal. Petitions may be signed and filed by:
      1.   The mayor; or
      2.   Twenty-five (25) or more qualified electors of this municipality.
Verification of the number or qualifications of electors shall be executed by
one or more of the petitioners.
The governing body shall set a date for hearing the matter and shall cause
notice thereof, together with a copy of the petition, to be served personally
upon the judge at least ten (10) days before the hearing. At the hearing, the
judge shall be entitled to:
      1.   Representation by counsel;
      2.   To present testimony and to cross-examine the witnesses against him;
and
      3.   Have all evidence against him presented in open hearing.
So far as they can be applicable, the provisions of the Oklahoma Administrative
Procedures Act governing individual proceedings (Sections 309 to 317 of Title
75 of the Oklahoma Statutes as amended) shall govern removal proceedings
hereunder. Judgment of removal shall be entered only upon individual votes, by
a majority of all members of the governing body, in favor of such removal.
(Prior Code, Sec. 12-10)
6-111: VACANCY IN OFFICE OF JUDGE:
A vacancy in the office of judge shall occur if the incumbent:
      1.   Dies;
      2.   Resigns;
      3.   Ceases to possess the qualifications for the office; or
      4.   Is removed, and the removal proceedings have been affirmed finally
in judicial proceedings or are no longer subject to judicial review.
Upon the occurrence of a vacancy in the office of judge, the mayor shall
appoint a successor to complete the unexpired term in the same manner as an
original appointment is made. (Prior Code, Sec. 12-11)
6-112: DISQUALIFICATION OF JUDGE:
In prosecutions before the court no change of venue shall be allowed; but the
judge before whom the case is pending may certify his disqualification or he
may be disqualified from sitting under the terms, conditions and procedure
provided by law for courts of record. If a judge is disqualified, the matter
shall be heard by an alternate or acting judge appointed as provided in this
chapter. (Prior Code, Sec. 12-12)
6-113: COURT MARSHAL:
All writs or process of the court shall be directed, in his official title, to
the chief of police of this municipality, who shall be the principal officer of
the court. (Prior Code, Sec. 12-12)
6-114: CLERK OF THE COURT; DUTIES:
The clerk, or a deputy designated by him, shall be the clerk of the court. He
shall assist the judge in recording the proceedings of the court and in
preparing writs, processes and other papers. He shall administer oaths required
in proceedings before the court. He shall enter all pleadings, processes, and
proceedings in the dockets of the court. He shall perform such other clerical
duties relating to the proceedings of the court as the judge shall direct. He
shall receive and receipt for forfeitures, fines, deposits, and sums of money
payable to the court. He shall pay to the treasurer of this municipality at
least weekly all money so received by him, except such special deposits or fees
as shall be received to be disbursed by him for special purposes. All money
paid to the treasurer shall be placed in the general fund of the municipality,
or in such other funds as the governing body may direct, and it shall be used
in the operation of the municipal government in accordance with budgetary
arrangements governing the fund in which it is placed. (Prior Code, Sec. 12-14)
6-115: PROSECUTING ATTORNEY; DUTIES; CONFLICT OF INTEREST:
The attorney for this municipality, or his duly designated assistant, shall be
the prosecuting officer of the court. He shall also prosecute all alleged
violations of the ordinances of the city. He shall be authorized, in his
discretion, to prosecute and resist appeal, proceedings in error and review
from this court to any other court of the state, and to represent this
municipality in all proceedings arising out of matters in this court. (Prior
Code, Sec. 12-15)
6-116: BOND OF CLERK:
The court clerk of the court shall give bond, in the form provided by Section
27-111 of Title 11 of the Oklahoma Statutes, in the sum of One Thousand Dollars
($1,000.00). When executed, the bond shall be submitted to the governing body
for approval. When approved, it shall be filed with the clerk of this
municipality and retained in the municipal archives. (Prior Code, Sec. 12-16)
6-117: RULES OF COURT:
The judge may prescribe rules, consistent with the laws of the state and with
the ordinances of this municipality for the proper conduct of the business of
the court. (Prior Code, Sec. 12-17)
6-118: ENFORCEMENT OF RULES:
Obedience to the orders, rules and judgments made by the judge or by the court
may be enforced by the judge, who may fine or imprison for contempt committed
as to him while holding court, or committed against process issued by him, in
the same manner and to the same extent as the district courts of this state.
(Prior Code, Sec. 12-18)
6-119: WRITTEN COMPLAINTS TO PROSECUTE ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS:
All prosecutions for violations of ordinances of this municipality shall be
styled "The City of Grove vs. (naming defendant or defendants)". Except as
provided hereinafter, prosecution shall be initiated by the filing of a written
complaint, subscribed and verified by the person making complaint, and setting
forth concisely the offense charged and approved for filing by the city
attorney. (Prior Code, Sec. 12-19)
6-120: ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS; PROCEDURES FOR ISSUING CITATION; CUSTODY, ARREST,
BAIL:
   A.   Whenever a person is arrested for violation of an ordinance of the city
by a law enforcement officer, the officer shall immediately release such person
if he acknowledges receipt of a citation by signing it unless there is probable
cause to believe that the person will not appear in response to the citation
because that person has previously failed to appear pursuant to a citation and
a warrant has issued for that reason, or the person is arrested for an offense
against a person or property.
   B.   If the officer reasonably believes that the person will cause injury to
himself or others if released, the officer shall comply with the following
procedures:
      1.   The person under arrest shall be advised of:
         a.   The reason for the arrest;
         b.   The reason for refusing release;
         c.   The right to be released under the conditions set forth in
paragraph 4 below;
         d.   The right to respond to the arresting officer's reasons for
believing he will cause injury to himself or others if released; and
         e.   The right to contact an attorney or other persons in order to
advise them of the arrest and to request assistance in obtaining release. In
addition to advising the person under arrest with a written notice;
      2.   The officer, considering all the attendant circumstances, shall make
a determination regarding the existence of probable cause to believe that the
person will cause injury to himself or others if released;
      3.   If the officer determines that there is not probable cause to
believe that the person will cause injury to himself or others if released, the
person shall be released upon acknowledging receipt of a citation by signing it
or as otherwise provided hereunder;
      4.   If the officer determines that there is probable cause to believe
that the person will cause injury to himself or others if released upon signing
a citation, the person shall be entitled to release upon conditions which can
reasonably be expected to abate the danger, including release to a third person
under circumstances which abate the danger of injury to the person under arrest
or others;
      5.   In the event that the person cannot be released upon conditions
which can reasonably be expected to abate the danger of injury, the person
shall be detained only so long as the conditions creating the danger of injury
continue to exist; provided that if the condition creating the danger of injury
is intoxication, the person shall not be held longer than six (6) hours;
      6.   If the person is detained because of intoxication, the officer shall
file a written report setting forth the circumstances under which he took the
person into custody, the basis for his belief that the person is a danger to
himself or others, and the reason for refusing release to a third party. The
report shall contain the time of arrest and release; or
      7.   If circumstances other than intoxication exist which require
detention to prevent injury to person or others, the officer shall prepare a
written report setting forth the circumstances under which he took the person
into custody and the basis for his belief that the person is a danger to
himself or others and shall comply with the provisions of Section 52.1 of Title
43A of the Oklahoma Statutes regarding taking a person into protective custody.
   C.   In the event the person is not released upon acknowledging receipt of a
citation other than probable cause to believe the person will cause injury to
himself or others, the officer shall:
      1.   File a written report containing the reasons for denying release,
including the source of information relied upon to make the determination that
the person should not be released upon acknowledging receipt of a citation;
      2.   Admit the person to bail, which in the case of a traffic offense may
be a deposit of the person's driver's license, or release on his/her
recognizance in accordance with rules for the receipt of bail and release by
recognizance prescribed by the city judge; or take the person without delay
before the city judge for arraignment; and
      3.   In the event the person is not released and the city judge is not
available, the person shall be taken before the chief of police or a designated
representative other than the arresting officer and given an opportunity to be
admitted to bail or released on recognizance in accordance with rules and
procedures prescribed by the city judge.
   D.   In the event the person is unable to post bail because of poverty, but
would otherwise qualify for release as hereinabove set forth and the city judge
is not available, the person shall be given a citation to appear at a later
time and shall be released on his or her own recognizance. (Prior Code, Sec.
12-20; Ord. No. 334, 7/5/88)
6-121: CREATION OF TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU:
   A.   The judge may establish by prescribing rules, consistent with the laws
of the state and with the ordinances of this municipality, a traffic violations
bureau.
   B.   The traffic violations bureau shall be staffed by court personnel and
be physically separate and apart from the police department.
   C.   The traffic violations bureau shall accept fines which may be paid in
lieu of a court appearance, for such traffic offenses as may be designated by
the judge under the court's rules.
   D.   All such fines shall be the minimum penalty prescribed for such
violation, and no costs shall be assessed.
   E.   In no event shall payment of a fine without court appearance be
accepted for a second or subsequent offense of the same violation or driving
under the influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs, actual physical control of
a vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs, leaving
the scene of an accident, driving while license to operate a motor vehicle is
suspended or revoked, reckless driving, careless driving, or any charge made
because of a motor vehicle accident in which personal injury or death occurred.
   F.   Payment of any fine to the traffic violations bureau shall be deemed a
final determination of the cause against the defendant. In no event shall any
such payment be introduced as evidence in any civil cause arising out of the
offense charged. (Ord. No. 2 51, 6/2/81)
6-122: SUMMONS FOR ARREST:
   A.   Upon the filing of a complaint charging violation of any ordinance, the
judge, unless he determines to issue a warrant of arrest, or unless the
defendant previously has been issued a citation or has been arrested and has
given bond for appearance, he shall issue a summons, naming the person charged,
specifying his address or place of residence, if known, stating the offense
with which he is charged and giving him notice to answer the charge in the
court on a certain day, five (5) days (Sundays and holidays excepted) after the
summons is served upon him, and including such other pertinent information as
may be necessary.
   B.   The summons shall be served by delivering a copy to the defendant
personally. If he fails to appear and to answer the summons within the
prescribed period, a warrant shall be issued for his arrest, as provided by
this chapter.
6-123: FORM OF ARREST WARRANT:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided in the ordinances of this municipality,
upon the filing of a complaint approved by the endorsement of the attorney of
this municipality or by the judge, there shall be issued a warrant of arrest,
in substantially the following form:
The City of Grove to the Marshal of the Municipal Court of Grove, Oklahoma.
Complaint upon oath having this day been made by (naming complainant) that the
offense (naming the offense in particular but general terms) has been committed
and accusing (name of defendant) thereof, you are commanded therefor forthwith
to arrest the above named defendant and bring the above named (name of
defendant) before me, at the municipal courtroom,
Witness my hand this       day of           , 19   .
Judge of the Municipal Court
Grove, Oklahoma.
   B.   It is the duty of the marshal, personally, or through a duly
constituted member of the police force of this municipality, or through any
other person lawfully authorized so to act, to execute a warrant as promptly as
possible. (Prior Code, Sec. 12-22)
6-124: PROCEDURES FOR BAIL OR BOND:
Upon arrest, or upon appearance without arrest in response to citation or
summons, or at any time before trial, before or after arraignment, the
defendant shall be eligible to be released upon giving bail for his appearance
in an amount and upon conditions fixed by this chapter or the judge, who shall
prescribe appropriate rules of court for the receipt of bail. In case of
arrests made at night or under other conditions or emergency or when the judge
is not available, the rules shall authorize the chief of police, or his
designated representative, to accept a temporary cash bond of not less than Ten
Dollars ($10.00) nor more than the maximum monetary penalty provided by
ordinance for the offense charged. (Prior Code, Sec. 12-23)
6-125: DEPOSIT OF DRIVER'S LICENSE AS BAIL FOR TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS:
Repealed by Ordinance Number 334 7/5/88.
6-126: ARRAIGNMENT AND PLEADINGS BY DEFENDANT:
Upon making his appearance before the court, the defendant shall be arraigned.
The judge, or the attorney of the municipality, shall read the complaint to the
defendant, inform him of his legal rights, including the right of trial by
jury, if available, and of the consequences of conviction, and ask him whether
he pleads guilty or not guilty. If the defendant pleads guilty, the court may
proceed to judgment and sentence or may continue the matter for subsequent
disposition. If the plea is not guilty, and the case is not for jury trial, the
court may proceed to try the case, or may set it for hearing at a later date.
(Prior Code, Sec. 12-24)
6-127: TRIALS AND JUDGMENTS:
   A.   Before trial commences, either party, upon good cause shown, may obtain
a reasonable postponement thereof.
   B.   The defendant must be present in person at the trial.
   C.   In all trials, as to matters not covered in this chapter, or by the
statutes relating to municipal criminal courts, or by rules duly promulgated by
the supreme court of Oklahoma, the procedure applicable in trials of
misdemeanors in the district courts shall apply to the extent that they can be
made effective.
   D.   If the defendant pleads guilty or is convicted after the trial, the
court must render judgment thereon, fixing the penalty within the limits
prescribed by the applicable ordinance and imposing sentence accordingly.
   E.   At the close of trial, judgment must be rendered immediately by the
judge who shall cause it to be entered in his docket.
   F.   If judgment is of acquittal, and the defendant is not to be detained
for any other legal cause, he must be discharged at once.
   G.   A judgment that the defendant pay a fine may also direct that he be
imprisoned until the fine is satisfied at the rate of one day imprisonment for
each five dollars ($5.00) of fine. If the defendant is without means to pay the
fine or costs, the municipal judge may direct the total amount due to be
entered upon the court minutes and to be certified to the district court of the
county wherein the status of government is situated where it shall be entered
upon the district court judgment docket and shall have the full force and
effect of a district court judgment. Thereupon the same remedies shall be
available for the enforcement of the judgment as are available to any other
judgment creditor. (Prior Code, Secs. 12-25–12-29, 12-31, 12-32)
6-128: TRIAL BY JURY AND WAIVER:
   A.   In all prosecutions for violations of ordinances punishable by fine of
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) plus costs and penalties or by
imprisonment, or by fine and imprisonment, trial shall be by jury, unless
waived by the defendant. If trial by jury is waived, trial shall be to the
court. (Ord. 454, 5-16-2000)
   B.   At arraignment, the defendant shall be asked whether he demands or
waives trial by jury. His election shall be recorded in the minutes of the
arraignment and entered on the docket of the court respecting proceedings in
the case.
   C.   An election waiving jury trial, made at arraignment, may be changed by
the defendant at any time prior to the day for which trial by the court is set;
an election demanding jury trial may be changed at any time prior to the
commencement of proceedings to impanel the jury for the trial, but if that
change occurs after the case has been set for jury trial, it may not thereafter
be rechanged so as again to demand trial by jury. (Ord. 290, 2-21-1984)
6-129: JURORS AND JURY TRIAL PROCEDURES:
   A.   Whenever a calendar has been made up for the trial of cases by jury,
the judge shall request, in writing, the presiding judge of the district court
for this judicial district to cause the names of a stated number of jurors,
deemed sufficient to dispose of the cases on the calendar, to be drawn from the
jury wheel in accordance with the governing statutes of the state, and to be
certified by the clerk of the district court to the judge of the municipal
court. The request shall be made in time for the list to be certified and the
jurors to be summoned legally before the trial of the calendar begins. If it is
anticipated that the completion of the calendar will require more than two (2)
weeks, the request for jurors shall specify the number required for each two
(2) week period, as provided by law for the drawing of jurors for the district
court. Additional drawing of other names also may be requested by the judge,
when necessary, in accordance with the law for such additional drawings in the
district court. If, in the future, provisions of the law respecting the drawing
of jury lists for the district court are changed, the judge shall take such
steps, in requesting jury lists for the court, as are necessary to comply with
the state law.
   B.   Upon receipt of the jury list, the clerk of the court shall cause a
summons substantially in the following form to be issued and served upon each
person on the list:
   STATE OF OKLAHOMA   )
               ) SS:
   COUNTY OF DELAWARE   )
TO                           , GREETING: you hereby are summoned to appear in
the Municipal Court for the City of Grove, Oklahoma, to be held at
                     on the                 as day of                 19      
, at the hour of                 o'clock       .M., to serve as a juror in said
court, and to continue in such service until discharged by the court.
Hereof fail not, under penalty of law.
Issued under the authority of said court, this            day of
                , 19       .
         Clerk of the Municipal Court
         Grove, Oklahoma.
   (Seal)
   C.   Service shall be made, as the judge may prescribe by rule or direct by
order, either in person upon the juror by the marshal of the court or by any
member of the police force of this municipality, or by the clerk of the court,
through certified mail, directed to the juror at his address as given in the
jury list with request for a personally signed return receipt. In any
proceeding wherein service of summons by mail is in issue, evidence of the due
mailing of the summons by the clerk or a member of his staff and the
presentation of an official postal return receipt purportedly signed by the
addressee shall be prima facie evidence that the summons was duly received by
the addressee and therefore, that he was properly served therewith.
   D.   A jury in the court shall consist of six (6) jurors, good and lawful
men or women, citizens of the county of Delaware, possessing the qualifications
of jurors in district court.
   E.   After the jurors are sworn, they must sit together and hear the proofs
and oral arguments of the parties, which must be delivered in public and in the
presence of the defendant.
   F.   A verdict of the jury may be rendered by the vote of five (5) jurors.
   G.   In all actions tried before a jury, the judge shall determine all
questions of law, including questions as to the introduction of evidence,
arising during the trial. He also shall instruct the jury as to the law.
   H.   The verdict of the jury, in all cases, must be general. When the jury
has arrived at its verdict, it must deliver the verdict publicly to the court.
The judge must enter the verdict in the docket or cause it to be so entered.
   I.   The jury must not be discharged after the cause is submitted to it
until a verdict is rendered, unless the judge, for good cause, discharges it
sooner, in which event the court may proceed again to trial, and so on, until a
verdict is rendered. (1983 Code)
6-130: WITNESS FEES:
   A.   Witnesses in any proceeding in the court other than the police officers
or peace officers shall be entitled to a fee per each day of attendance, as set
by the city, plus mileage for each mile actually and necessarily traveled in
going to and returning from the place of attendance if their residence is
outside the limits of the municipality. However, no witness shall receive fees
or mileage in more than one case for the same period of time or the same
travel. A defendant seeking to subpoena witnesses must deposit with the clerk a
sum sufficient to cover fees and mileage for one day of attendance for each
witness to be summoned, but such deposit shall not be required from an indigent
defendant who files an affidavit setting out:
      1.   The names of no more than three (3) witnesses;
      2.   That the defendant, by reason of his poverty, is unable to provide
the fees and mileage allowed by law;
      3.   That the testimony of the witnesses is material; and
      4.   That their attendance at the trial is necessary for his proper
defense.
The fees of such witnesses shall be paid by the Municipality. (Prior Code § 12-
30)
6-131: COMPENSATION OF JURORS:
Jurors shall receive for their services a sum as set by the Governing Body. The
claims for such compensation shall show the location of the juror's residence
and the route and miles traveled, and must be verified as other claims against
the Municipality are verified. Jurors shall be paid out of the General Funds of
the Municipality. (1983 Code)
6-132: SUSPENSION OF SENTENCE:
After conviction and sentence, the judge may suspend sentence, in accordance
with the provisions of, and subject to the conditions and procedures imposed
by, sections 27-123 and 27-124 of title 11 of the Oklahoma Statutes. (Prior
Code § 12-33)
6-133: IMPRISONMENT, WORK BY PRISONERS:
   A.   If, after conviction, judgment of imprisonment is entered, a copy
thereof, certified by the Clerk, shall be delivered to the Chief of Police, the
Sheriff of the County or other appropriate police officer. Such copy shall be
sufficient warrant for execution of the sentence.
   B.   All prisoners confined to jail on conviction or on plea of guilty may
be compelled, if their health permits, to work on the public streets, avenues,
alleys, parks, buildings, or other public premises or property. For each day of
such work, the prisoner shall be credited for serving two (2) days of
imprisonment under his sentence.
   C.   The Chief of Police, subject to the direction of the City Manager,
shall direct where the work shall be performed. The head of the department in
charge of the place where the work is to be performed, himself, or by some
person designated by him, shall oversee the work. If a guard is necessary, the
Chief of Police shall make provision therefor. (1983 Code)
6-134: FINES AND COSTS; NONPAYMENT, INSTALLMENTS, IMPRISONMENT:
   A.   If judgment of conviction is entered, the Clerk of the Court shall tax
the costs to the defendant plus the fees and mileage of witnesses and jurors,
which said fine shall not exceed eight hundred dollars ($800.00) plus court
costs and penalties and up to thirty (30) days in jail.
   B.   When the judgment and sentence of the City Court imposes a fine or
costs upon a defendant, a judicial hearing shall be conducted and judicial
determination made as to the defendant's ability to immediately satisfy the
fine and costs.
   C.   If the defendant, by judicial finding, is able to immediately satisfy
fine or costs, but refuses or neglects to do so, he may be immediately
confined. If the defendant does immediately satisfy the fine or the costs, no
determination need be made.
   D.   If the court conducting the hearing judicially determines that
defendant is immediately unable to pay the fine or costs, a judicial
determination shall be made as to defendant's ability to satisfy fine or costs
by making payments in installments.
   E.   After a judicial finding that the defendant may be able to pay the fine
or costs in installments, the court may order the defendant to make payment of
installments in reasonable amounts and fix the due date of each payment, and
may order the defendant to appear before the court on each due date.
   F.   If the defendant fails to make an installment payment when due, he must
be given an opportunity to be heard as to his refusal or neglect to pay the
installment when due. If no satisfactory explanation is given, the defendant
may then be imprisoned. If, because of exigent circumstances or misfortune,
defendant is unable to make payment of a particular installment when due, he
should be given further opportunity to satisfy the fine or costs, this being
within the discretion of the court, to be governed by the facts and
circumstances of each particular case.
   G.   In the event the defendant, because of physical disability or poverty,
is unable to pay fine or costs either immediately or in installment payments,
he must be relieved of the fine or costs; or, in the alternative, be required
to report back to the court at time fixed by the court to determine if a change
of condition has made it possible for the defendant to commence making
installment payments toward the satisfaction of fine or costs.
   H.   A reporter should be present and report all such judicial hearings
above referred to and any order of the court, whether there be a court reporter
in attendance or not, should be reduced to writing and filed of record in the
case. Such order should set forth the findings of the court regarding
defendant's ability or inability to pay fine or costs, his refusal or neglect
to do so, if that be the case, the amount of the installments and due dates, if
such be the order of the court, and all other findings of fact and conclusions
of law necessary to support the order of the court. (Ord. 742, 12-5-2017)
6-135: CONDUCT OF SESSIONS OF COURT; NOTICE:
The Judge of the Municipal Court shall conduct regular sessions of the
Municipal Court. Notice of the sessions shall be given as prescribed in the
Oklahoma Open Meetings Law, 25 Oklahoma Statutes section 301 et seq. (1983
Code)
6-136: PENALTY ASSESSMENTS:
   A.   Any person:
      1.   Convicted of an offense punishable by a fine of ten dollars ($10.00)
or more or by imprisonment, excluding parking and standing violations; or
      2.   Forfeiting bond when charged with such an offense under subsection
A1 of this section, shall pay a sum as set by State law as a separate penalty
assessment, which shall be in addition to and not in substitution for any and
all fines and penalties and costs otherwise provided for such offense. The
court shall provide for separate bail for the assessments; however, a defendant
admitted to bail on an undertaking by a surety may include the amount of the
assessment in the undertaking.
   B.   Upon conviction or bond forfeiture, the court shall collect the
assessment and deposit the monies for payment as required by State law.
   C.   At the end of every quarter the City shall deposit with the Oklahoma
State Treasury the funds deposited in the Law Enforcement Training Fund and for
public safety technology, to include but not be limited to, software and the
AFIS (automated fingerprint identification) Fund, as required by State Statute.
The Court Clerk shall also furnish to the State Treasury reports required on
the funds collected and penalty assessments imposed each quarter.
   D.   For the purpose of this section, "conviction" means any final
adjudication of guilt, whether pursuant to a plea of guilty or nolo contendere
or otherwise, and any deferred or suspended sentence or judgment.
   E.   In addition to any fines and costs imposed herein there shall be added
a forensic science improvement assessment fee to be collected at the same time
and in the same manner as the penalty assessment and AFIS fees. The Municipal
Court of Grove is authorized to retain five percent (5%) of the amount
collected as an administrative fee.
   F.   In addition to any fines and costs imposed herein there shall be a
CLEET penalty assessment fee as set forth by State Statute.
   G.   An independent fund shall be created for the deposit of the collected
police technology fees and the funds shall be used to maintain and upgrade
technology within the Police Department. (Ord. 742, 12-5-2017)
CHAPTER 2
PROSECUTION OF MINORS
SECTION:
6-201: Interlocal Cooperation Agreement
6-202: Fines
6-201: INTERLOCAL COOPERATION AGREEMENT:
   A.   A municipality may enter into an interlocal cooperation agreement with
the District Court pursuant to the Interlocal Cooperation Act, sections 1001
through 1008 of title 74 of the Oklahoma Statutes, to assume jurisdiction of
cases involving children under eighteen (18) years of age charged with
violating municipal ordinances relating to possession of firearms, vandalism,
shoplifting, low-point beer, as defined in section 163.2 of title 37 of the
Oklahoma Statutes, possession of alcoholic beverages as defined in section 506
of title 37 of the Oklahoma Statutes, disorderly conduct, public intoxication
and failure to appear for a court appearance or comply with a court order and
any other municipal ordinances as agreed by the District Court, the District
Attorney, and the Municipality. For the purposes of this subsection, "District
Court" shall mean the District Court judicial district or districts in which
the contracting municipality is situated. The Chief Juvenile Judge of the
District Court judicial district is hereby authorized to enter into the
interlocal cooperation agreement as provided for in this Section for and on
behalf of said judicial district if the Judge determines that the agreement is
constitutional and complies with State and Federal laws. Provided, if there is
no Chief Juvenile Judge in the judicial district, then the presiding judge of
the judicial administrative district that includes the contracting judicial
district may enter into the agreement for and on behalf of said judicial
district if the judge determines that the agreement is constitutional and
complies with State and Federal laws.
   B.   A child under eighteen (18) years of age who is taken into custody for
the alleged violation of a municipal ordinance relating to truancy may be held
pursuant to section 10-109 of title 70 of the Oklahoma Statutes.
   C.   A child under eighteen (18) years of age who is taken into custody for
the alleged violation of municipal ordinance relating to curfews may be held
temporarily under the custodial care of a peace officer or other person
employed by the Police Department only until the child's parent, legal
guardian, legal custodian, attorney or other responsible adult assumes custody
or, if such a person cannot be located within a reasonable time of the taking
of the child into custody or if such a person refuses to assume custody, until
temporary shelter is found for the child. In no event shall the child be placed
in a jail, lockup, or detention facility. The temporary custody provided for by
this subsection shall be utilized as a means of returning the child to the
child's home or other place of shelter.
   D.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, a child less than
eighteen (18) years of age, who is taken into custody for the alleged violation
of a municipal ordinance relating to one or more of the offenses listed in
subsection A of this Section other than truancy or curfew violation, and who
can be prosecuted in Municipal Court for such offense pursuant to jurisdiction
assumed by the Municipal Court to the provisions of subsection A of this
Section, may be temporarily detained by the municipality in a "municipal
juvenile facility", as defined by this subsection, but only pursuant to the
following conditions:
      1.   The municipality shall immediately take all reasonable steps to
attempt to locate the child's parent, legal guardian, legal custodian, attorney
or another responsible adult and determine if said parent, legal guardian,
legal custodian, attorney or other responsible adult is willing to appear at
the municipal juvenile facility and assume personal custody of the child upon
the child's release from such facility;
      2.   The child shall be released to the personal custody of the child's
parent, legal guardian, legal custodian, attorney or other responsible adult as
soon as practical and upon the written promise of such person to return the
child to Municipal Court to answer to the municipal charges on the date and at
the time set by the Municipal Court and to assume damages while committing any
acts in violation of municipal ordinances listed in this Section after being
released. Municipalities may enact ordinances providing penalties for failure
to comply with the written promise and for refusal to assume custody of a child
in a timely manner.
      3.   The child shall be detained in the municipal juvenile facility for
no longer than twenty four (24) hours; provided, if the child's parent, legal
guardian, legal custodian, attorney or other responsible adult fails to appear
at the municipal juvenile facility and assume personal custody of the child
within said twenty four (24) hour period, then custody or release of the child
shall be determined pursuant to the provisions of section 7303-1.1 of title 10,
Oklahoma Statutes.
      4.   The child shall be provided with adequate fresh drinking water.
      5.   The child shall be provided with adequate food not less than three
(3) times in a twenty four (24) hour period.
      6.   The child shall be provided with adequate bathroom facilities and
bedding, and
      7.   The child shall be provided with any necessary medical care and
treatment.
Prior to the temporary detention of any child pursuant to the authority of this
subsection, the municipal juvenile facility shall be certified by the Office of
Juvenile Affairs pursuant to the applicable certification standards set by the
Board of Juvenile Affairs, and each member of the staff of the municipal
juvenile facility shall have satisfactorily completed a training program
provided or approved by the Department of Juvenile Justice. In furtherance of
this subsection, the Office of Juvenile Affairs is directed to and shall
establish standards for the certification of municipal juvenile facilities,
with said standards to include, but not be limited to, the conditions set forth
in subsections D1 through D7 of this Section, and the Department of Juvenile
Justice is directed to and shall provide or approve an appropriate training
program for staff members of such facilities. In lieu of operating a municipal
juvenile facility with trained municipal employees, the municipality may
contract with an independent public or private facility properly certified by
the Office of Juvenile Affairs for performance of the detention services
authorized by the provisions of this subsection. For the purposes of this
Section, a "municipal juvenile facility" shall mean a secure facility which is
entirely separate from any jail, adult lockup, or other adult facility, or
other adult facility which is certified by the Office of Juvenile Affairs for
use for the temporary detention of juveniles as authorized by the provisions of
this subsection. The provisions of this subsection shall not restrict or limit
the use of municipal juvenile facilities for detention of juveniles who are
detained pursuant to other provisions of law. In no event shall a juvenile be
held in an adult facility that does not meet the definition of a "municipal
juvenile facility".
   E.   Pursuant to an interlocal cooperation agreement between a municipality
and the District Court, as authorized by the provisions of subsection A of this
Section, a child less than eighteen (18) years of age may be charged,
prosecuted and, if convicted, fined for violating a municipal ordinance
relating to one or more of the offenses listed in subsection A of this Section;
provided that the maximum fine which may be imposed shall not exceed ninety
(90) hours, in lieu of a fine if the product of multiplying the number of hours
of community service work by the prevailing minimum wage does not result in a
number which exceeds the maximum fine authorized by law, or restitution, or
both community service work and restitution. In addition, during any calendar
year that any child:
      1.   Fails to appear for a court date on more than one occasion,
      2.   Is convicted of two (2) or more of the offenses listed in subsection
A of this Section, which offenses occurred on different days, or
      3.   Fails to pay any fine or cost properly assessed by a Municipal
Court.
and after the expiration of ninety (90) days, the Court clerk shall mail notice
of such occurrence to the Department of Public Safety, which Department shall
thereafter suspend or deny driving privileges for such child for six (6)
months. The suspension may be modified as provided in section 6-107.2 of title
47 of the Oklahoma Statutes. In addition, the Court may require the child to
receive counseling or other community-based services, as necessary.
If a child is prosecuted for an offense in a Municipal Court, the child shall
not be prosecuted for the offense in the District Court. The Municipal Court
may also impose costs as authorized by law.
   F.   Any fines and costs properly assessed against any child and which
remain unpaid after three (3) months may be assessed by the Municipal Judge
against the child's parent, parents, legal guardian or legal custodian and
collected and paid as provided in section 27-122 of title 11 of the Oklahoma
Statutes. Provided, however, prior to such latter assessment, the Court clerk
shall give such child's parent, parents, legal guardian, or legal custodian
notice by certified mail to their place of residence or personal service of
such action proposed to be taken.
   G.   All municipal arrest records, prosecution records, court records, and
court proceedings for cases involving children less than eighteen (18) years of
age charged with violating municipal ordinances relating to one or more of the
offenses listed in subsection A of this Section shall be kept confidential and
shall not be open to public inspection except by order of the Municipal Court
or as otherwise provided by section 620.6 of title 10, Oklahoma Statutes. (Ord.
406, 12-17-1996)
6-202: FINES:
   A.   Funds generated from fines paid pursuant to an interlocal cooperation
agreement between a municipality and the District Court pursuant to the
provisions of Section
6-201 of this Chapter shall be earmarked and used by the municipality only for
the following purposes:
      1.   To fund local programs which address problems of juvenile crime;
      2.   To fund the costs of prosecutions authorized pursuant to the
provisions of Section
6-201 of this Chapter;
      3.   To fund the costs of detention authorized pursuant to the provisions
of Section
6-201 of this Chapter; and
      4.   To fund administrative costs related to local programs that address
problems of juvenile crime or related to the prosecution, detention, or
punishment other than the purposes set forth in subsections A1 through A3 of
this Section. (Ord. 406, 12-17-1996)
PART 7
FINANCE AND TAXATION
CHAPTER 1
PURCHASING
SECTION:
7-101: Citation And Codification
7-102: Definitions
7-103: City Manager
7-104: Encumbrance Of Funds
7-105: Conflict Of Interest
7-106: Bidding Requirements
7-107: Competitive Bidding Procedures
7-108: Open Market Purchases
7-109: Emergency Procedures
7-110: Pre-authorized Payments By City To Certain Vendors
7-111: Petty Cash
7-112: Transfers
7-113: Purchasing Procedures And Approval Authorizations
7-114: Authorizations
7-115: Request For Proposals And Request For Qualifications Procedures
7-101: CITATION AND CODIFICATION:
This chapter shall be known and cited as the City of Grove Purchasing
Ordinance. (Ord. 807, 10-19-2021; amd. Ord. 862, 6-3-2025)
7-102: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
CITY: The City of Grove, Oklahoma, and means the City government in all its
forms, including not only all City departments but also any other person or
entity acting for or on behalf of the City of Grove, provided, however, that
any improvement district created pursuant to 11 O.S. 2001, §§39-101, et seq.,
shall not be included in this definition thereby exempting such improvement
districts from the provisions of this chapter.
CITY MANAGER: The chief executive officer and the purchasing agent of the City
or his or her designee.
CONTRACTUAL SERVICES: Services performed for the City by persons not in the
employment of the City, and may include the use of equipment or the furnishing
of commodities in connection with the services under express or implied
contract. Contractual Services includes services of a person, agency or group
that are not a Professional Service (as herein defined). Contractual Services
shall not include services or maintenance authorized and provided for an
improvement district pursuant to 11 O.S. 2001, §39-103.1.
CONSTRUCTION MANAGEMENT TRADE CONTRACT OR SUBCONTRACT: Any construction
contract exceeding $50,000.00 in an amount that is awarded as a trade contract
in an agency construction management contract or awarded as a subcontract in an
at-risk management contract.
COOPERATIVE PURCHASING PLAN: An agreement entered into between two or more
entities of government for acquisitions pursuant to a single or joint contract
obtained through a competitive bidding process or issued in accordance with the
authority granted to governmental entity.
COUNCIL: Governing body of the City.
DEPARTMENT HEAD: The person that is the head of a major function of the City
and reports directly to the City Manager.
FINANCIAL INTEREST: Ownership of more than five percent (5%) of the business or
of the common stock therein.
ITEM: Anything that is one (1) each, i.e., one (1) backhoe, one (1) car, one
(1) radio, one (1) total project, one (1) service contract. An Item cannot be
subdivided to avoid the requirements of this Chapter.
PROFESSIONAL SERVICE: Services as defined in Section 803 of Title 18 of the
Oklahoma Statutes.
PUBLIC CONSTRUCTION PROJECT OR CONTRACT: Any contract awarded by the City for
the purpose of making any Public Improvements (as hereinafter defined) and the
cost exceeds the amount set by the Oklahoma Public Competitive Bidding Act (as
amended from time to time).
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT: Any beneficial or valuable change or addition, betterment,
enhancement or amelioration of or upon any real property, or interest therein,
belonging to the City, intended to enhance its value, beauty, or utility or to
adapt it to new or further purposes. The term does not include the direct
purchase of equipment, materials, or supplies provided that the equipment,
materials or supplies are not purchased increments for an amount of less than
the amount set by the Oklahoma Public Competitive Bidding Act and used for the
purposes of completing a Construction Project, or any personal property as
defined in paragraphs 1 and 4 of subsection B of Section 430.1 of Title 62 of
the Oklahoma Statutes.
PURCHASING COOPERATIVE: An association of public entities working together to
provide leverage in achieving best value and/or the best terms in contracts
awarded through a competitive bidding process. (Ord. 807, 10-19-2021; amd. Ord.
862, 6-3-2025)
7-103: CITY MANAGER:
The City Manager shall have the powers and duties prescribed herein.
   A.   Subject to the terms hereof and limitations imposed herein, the City
Manager shall have the power to purchase or contract for all equipment,
materials, and supplies and Contractual Services in the best interest of the
City.
   B.   The City Manager shall purchase or contract for those supplies,
materials, and equipment, and Contractual Services set forth herein in
accordance with:
      1.   Purchasing procedures as prescribed by this Chapter;
      2.   Such written rules and regulations as the City Manager may adopt for
the internal management and operation of the City;
      3.   Such other written rules and regulations as shall be prescribed by
the Ordinances of the City of Grove and all applicable State and Federal laws.
   C.   All rules and regulations adopted by the City Manager for the internal
management and operation of the City shall be approved by the Council and filed
in the office of the City Clerk.
   D.   Except as herein provided, it shall be unlawful for any City officer or
employee to order the purchase of any supplies or make any contract without
expressly complying with the terms of this chapter. Any such purchase ordered
or any contract made contrary to the provisions herein shall be voidable by the
City. (Ord. 807, 10-19-2021; amd. Ord. 862, 6-3-2025)
7-104: ENCUMBRANCE OF FUNDS:
Except in cases of emergency, the City Manager shall not issue any order for
delivery on a contract or open market purchase until the City Treasurer or his/
her designee shall have certified that there is to the credit of the using
department a sufficient unencumbered appropriation balance in excess of all
unpaid obligations to defray the amount of such order for such purposes.
No purchase will be authorized which would overdraft a department budget. A
Department Head may petition a redistribution of a line item appropriation by
completing an APPROPRIATION TRANSFER FORM. Department Heads who are
contemplating a purchase that will exceed their budget should obtain written
approval from the City Manager to insure that provision is made for the
necessary budget allocation. (Ord. 807, 10-19-2021; amd. Ord. 862, 6-3-2025)
7-105: CONFLICT OF INTEREST:
   A.   Conflict of Interest. Except as otherwise allowed by law, all municipal
officers and employees, or any business in which the officer, employee, or
spouse of the officer or employee has a Financial Interest, shall comply with
the Oklahoma Competitive Bid Act Title 61 O.S. Section 101 et seq (as amended
from time to time) regarding Conflict of Interest.
   B.   Gifts and Rebates. Officers and employees of the City or entity are
expressly prohibited from accepting, directly or indirectly, from any person,
company, firm or corporation to which any purchase order or contract is, or
might be awarded, any rebate, gift, money or object which could be construed as
such in excess of fifty dollars ($50.00), aggregate, in any one fiscal year,
except where given for the use and benefit of the City. Payment of meal
expenses in conjunction with occasional social gatherings shall not be
considered a gift under this chapter. (Ord. 807, 10-19-2021; amd. Ord. 862, 6-
3-2025)
7-106: BIDDING REQUIREMENTS:
Except as otherwise required by law, the bidding requirements of the City shall
be as follows:
   A.   Contractual Service Purchases. Contractual Services shall be purchased
by formal written contract.
      1.   Contractual Services, when the estimated cost exceeds the amount
set-forth by the Oklahoma Competitive Bid Act Title 61 O.S. Section 101 et seq.
(as amended from time to time) shall be purchased using the competitive bidding
procedure described herein from the lowest and best bidder or from the best
value bidder, after due notice inviting bids.
      2.   Contractual Services, when the estimated cost thereof is less than
the amount set-forth by the Oklahoma Competitive Act Title 61 O.S. Section 101
et seq. (as amended from time to time), may be purchased using the open market
procedure as provided for herein.
      3.   The City of Grove may enter into Contractual Services with another
public entity to exchange or trade equipment or supplies only when the value
received equals the value given. The contract must include enforceable promises
and benefits, plus accountability that assure the City of Grove is receiving
equal value for value given. Contractual Services between the City of Grove and
other public entities shall follow the City of Grove Purchasing Ordinance and
the State of Oklahoma Interlocal Cooperative Act (as amended from time to
time).
   B.   Supplies, Material and Equipment Purchases. Supplies, materials, and
equipment shall be purchased as follows:
      1.   All purchases of any Item of supplies, materials, and equipment when
the estimated cost of such Item exceeds the amount set-forth by the Oklahoma
Competitive Bid Act Title 61 O.S. Section 101 et seq. (as amended from time to
time), shall be purchased by formal written contract or by purchase order from
the lowest and best bidder or from the best value bidder, after due notice
inviting bids.
      2.   All purchases of any Item or supplies, materials, and equipment,
when the estimated cost of such Item is less than the amount set-forth by the
Oklahoma Competitive Bid Act Title 61 O.S. Section 101 et seq. (as amended from
time to time) that requires competitive bidding, shall be purchased using the
open market procedure provided for herein.
   C.   Construction Projects. Construction Projects shall be purchased as
follows:
      1.   All Construction Projects whereby the cost thereof exceeds the
amount set-forth by the Oklahoma Competitive Bid Act Title 61 O.S. Section 101
et seq. (as amended from time to time), or construction management trade
contracts or subcontract cost exceeds the amount set-forth by the Oklahoma
Competitive Bid Act Title 61 O.S. Section 101 et seq. (as amended from time to
time), shall be bid in accordance with the requirements of that statute,
specifically including that no work shall be commenced until a written contract
is executed and all required bonds and insurance have been provided by the
contractor.
      2.   All Construction Projects whereby the cost is less than the amount
set-forth by the Oklahoma Competitive Bid Act Title 61 O.S. Section 101 et seq.
(as amended from time to time), that requires competitive bidding may be
awarded by receipt of written bids or on the basis of competitive quotes from
the lowest and best bid or from the best value bidder, using the open market
procedure provided for herein.
      3.   The City of Grove shall not let or award a public construction
contract exceeding the amount set-forth by the Oklahoma Competitive Bid Act
Title 61 O.S. Section 101 et seq. (as amended from time to time) or a
construction management contract or subcontract exceeding the amount set-forth
by the Oklahoma Competitive Bid Act Title 61 O.S. Section 101 et seq. (as
amended from time to time) to any contractor affiliated with a Purchasing
Cooperative unless the Purchasing Cooperative and the contractor have complied
with all of the provisions of the Public Competitive Bidding Act of 1974
including submission of a written notice of competitive bidding.
      4.   In addition, the City of Grove may create a purchasing cooperative
or contract with a Purchasing Cooperative to provide leverage in achieving best
value or the best terms in contracts. To encourage intergovernmental
collaboration, any Purchasing Cooperative or interlocal cooperative entity may
utilized any single legal newspaper of this state to serve as sufficient
compliance for bid notice requirements of competitive bidding or solicitation
of bids. If the Purchasing Cooperative or interlocal cooperative entity is
engaging in a project exclusive to a county or group of counties of this state,
and not open to all governmental units or public trusts that wish to
participate statewide, the bid notice shall be published in a legal newspaper
located with the county or group of counties. Any local governmental unit or
public trust that enters into a membership of contracts with a Purchasing
Cooperative or interlocal cooperative entity may enter into purchases or
contracts under the terms negotiated by the Purchasing Cooperative or
interlocal cooperative entity. If the Purchasing Cooperative or interlocal
cooperative entity complies with the requirements of this section of law, all
local governmental units shall be deemed in compliance with the requirements
set forth for bid notices.
      5.   Other construction contracts for less than ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) may be negotiated with a qualified contractor.
   D.   State Contracts. Notwithstanding the foregoing limitations, competitive
bidding shall not be required and the City Manager shall have the authority,
instead, to make purchases under contracts let by the State of Oklahoma, when
the best interests of the City would be served.
   E.   Surplus Property. No surplus or obsolete supplies, materials, or
equipment of a value of more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) may be sold
until the council shall have declared them obsolete or surplus. Before the City
Manager sells any surplus or obsolete supplies, materials, or equipment, except
as otherwise provided herein, he or she shall advertise them for sale in a
newspaper of general circulation in the county or give notice in such other
manner as he or she deems necessary adequately to reach prospective buyers to
give them an opportunity to make bids. All bids shall be sealed and shall be
opened in public at a designated time and place, except when the sale is by
public auction. The City Manager may repeatedly reject all bids and advertise
or give notice again. He or she may sell such supplies, materials, or equipment
only to the highest responsible bidder for cash. In case of a tie, he or she
may sell to either of the bidders tying, or may divide the sale among the two
or more tying, always selling to the highest responsible bidder or bidders for
cash.
      The City Manager shall have the authority to determine the value of
surplus, obsolete and unusable properties. The City Manager shall have the
authority to dispose of such items that have an estimated individual value of
less than five-hundred dollars ($500.00) without taking bids or following the
Open Market Sales and Purchases set-forth in this Chapter, Section
7-108.
   F.   Council Approval. For all purchases required to be made pursuant to the
competitive bidding procedure herein, the Council shall determine which is the
lowest and best bidder or the best value bidder. (Ord. 807, 10-19-2021; amd.
Ord. 862, 6-3-2025)
7-107: COMPETITIVE BIDDING PROCEDURES:
Except as otherwise provided by law, the bidding procedures of the City of
Grove shall follow the Oklahoma Competitive Bidding Act Title 61 O.S. Section
101 et seq. (as amended from time to time).
   A.   Notice Inviting Bids.
      1.   Newspaper. Notice shall be given by publication in a newspaper of
general circulation and published in Delaware County. Such notice by
publication to be published in two (2) consecutive weekly issues of said
newspaper, with the first publication thereof to be at least twenty-one (21)
days prior to the date set for opening bids. The newspaper notice required
herein shall include a general description of the services required or the
articles to be purchased or sold and shall state where bid forms and
specifications may be obtained and the time and place for opening bids or the
public auction.
      2.   Bidders' List. The City Manager shall also solicit sealed bids from
all responsible prospective suppliers who have requested their names to be
added to a "Bidders' List" maintained by the City Manager by sending a copy of
such newspaper notice or such other notice as will acquaint them with the
proposed purchase or sale. In any case, invitations sent to the vendors on the
Bidders' List shall be limited to commodities that are similar in character and
ordinarily handled by the trade group to which the invitations are sent.
      3.   Trade or Construction Publication. Notice shall be sent to at least
one (1) trade or construction publication dealing with projects related to the
City public construction project, whenever the estimated cost of the public
construction contract exceeds one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), or
the cost of the subcontract exceeds fifty thousand dollars ($50,000), as set
forth in the Oklahoma Competitive Bid Act. However, actual publication in such
journal is not required.
   B.   Bid Deposits. When deemed necessary by the City Manager, bid deposits
shall be prescribed in the public notices inviting bids. Unsuccessful bidders
shall be entitled to return of surety where it has been required. A successful
bidder shall forfeit any surety required upon failure on his part to enter a
contract within the time specified in the bid notice.
   C.   Bid Opening Procedures.
      1.   Sealed. Except in the case of public auctions, bids shall be
submitted sealed to the office of the City Clerk and shall be identified on the
envelopes as bids.
      2.   Opening. Bids for supplies, materials, equipment or Contractual
Services shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the public
notices.
      3.   Tabulation. A tabulation of all bids received shall be made by the
City Manager and the tabulation shall be available for public inspection in the
office of the City Clerk at all reasonable times.
   D.   Rejection of Bids.
      1.   Public Interest. The City shall have the authority to reject all
bids, parts of any or all bids, or all bids for any one or more materials,
supplies, equipment, or Contractual Services included in the proposed contract
when the public interest will be served thereby. The Council shall have the
authority to reject all bids, parts of any or all bids, for Construction
Projects in accordance with the Oklahoma Public Competitive Bidding Act, as
amended from time to time.
      2.   Undue Influence. Bids shall be rejected if any bidder has attempted
to exert undue influence over the results of the bid including:
         a.   The bidder or anyone subject to the bidder's direction or control
attempts to pay, give or donate to any officer or employee of the City any
money or other thing of value, either directly or indirectly, in procuring the
bid; or
         b.   The bidder or anyone subject to the bidder's direction or control
attempts to influence the award of the bid by threat, force or intimidation; or
         c.   Any other contact by bidder to any officer or employee of the
City other than the designated agent, which in the opinion of the City Manager
was an attempt to unduly influence the award of the bid.
   E.   Bidders in Default to the City. The City shall not accept the bids of a
contractor who is in default on the payment of taxes, licenses, utility
payments, or other monies due the City.
   F.   Award of Contract. Lowest and Best Bidder and Best Value Bidder.
Contracts shall be awarded to the lowest and best bidder or the best value
bidder meeting specifications within the period of time set forth in the bid
notice. Bid Specifications may include a point system for evaluating the bid
(s). In addition to those factors established by state law, the following
factors may be considered:
      1.   Price,
      2.   The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the
contract or provide the service required,
      3.   Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service
promptly or within the time specified, without delay or interference,
      4.   The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and
efficiency of the bidder,
      5.   The quality of performance of previous contracts or services,
      6.   The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and
ordinances relating to the contract or service,
      7.   The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the bidder
to perform the contract or provide the service,
      8.   The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies,
materials, equipment or Contractual Services to the particular use required,
      9.   The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service
for the use of the subject of the contract,
      10.   Where an earlier delivery date would be of great benefit to the
City, the date and terms of delivery may be considered in the bid award,
      11.   The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid, and
      12.   If a point system has been utilized in the bid specifications, the
number of points earned by the bidder.
   G.   Award to Other than Lowest Secure Bidder. When the award is not given
to the lowest secure bidder meeting specifications, a full and complete
statement of reasons for placing the order with one other than the lowest
secure bidder shall be entered in the minutes of the Council.
   H.   Tie Bids.
      1.   Local Bidders. If two or more bids received are for the same total
amount of unit price, quality and service being equal, the contract shall be
awarded to the local bidder (as defined by the City Business License
Ordinance).
      2.   Bidders of Equal Status. Where paragraph 8.a. of this section is not
determinative, the City Manager shall award the contract to one of the tie
bidders by drawing lots in public.
   I.   Change Orders. City Manager may approve change orders of contracts for
supplies, materials, equipment or Contractual Services as long as change orders
do not exceed ten percent (10%) of total costs or time of contract, not to
exceed, in aggregate, twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000). Any change orders
of contracts for supplies, materials, equipment, or Contractual Services in
excess of the aggregate amount set forth in the preceding sentence shall
require Council approval. Any change order for Construction Projects requires
the approval of the Council in accordance with the Oklahoma Competitive Bidding
Act as amended from time to time.
   J.   Performance Bonds. Before entering a contract, the City Manager shall
have the authority to require a performance bond in such amount as he shall
find reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the City. The City
Manager shall also have the authority to require the contractor to maintain a
reasonable public liability and workers' compensation insurance during
construction.
   K.   Prohibition Against Subdivision. No contract or purchase shall be
subdivided to avoid the requirements of this section.
   L.   Sole Source. Council may waive the requirement for competitive bidding
for the purchase of supplies, materials, equipment or Contractual Services when
some material feature or characteristic of the item or service sought to be
purchased is unique and the City Manager has certified that to the best of his
knowledge, after diligent inquiry, the item or service is available from only
one source. The City Manager may require the department head or official
request the bid waiver to submit an affidavit identifying the unique and
material features or characteristics of the item or service.
      Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, and bid
submission received by the City of Grove pursuant to authorized sole source
bidding of the Oklahoma State Statutes, which substitute an item with one that
is alike in quality and design or which meets the required specifications of
the bid shall be considered and shall not be prohibited.
      In terms of public construction contract, with exception to specific
products submitted and approved prior to release for bidding for matching pre-
existing materials, at least three equivalent items from more than one
manufacturer and more than one supplier or representative shall be included in
the required specifications.
      No sole source bid proposal shall require any limitation that materials
must be supplied from a vendor within any specific geographical area.
Geographic preference for vendors in the geographical boundaries may be given,
but only when the cost is the same or less. (Ord. 807, 10-19-2021; amd. Ord.
862, 6-3-2025)
7-108: OPEN MARKET PURCHASES:
   A.   Sales or Purchases Allowed: The following sales or purchases may be
made utilizing the open market procedure set-forth in the Oklahoma Competitive
Bidding Act (as amended from time to time), without newspaper advertising and
without observing the procedures prescribed in this chapter for competitive
bidding:
      1.   all Construction Projects for an amount less than the amount set
forth in the Oklahoma Public Competitive Bidding Act Title 61 O.S. Section 101
et seq. (as amended from time to time) that requires competitive bidding;
      2.   all purchases of an Item of supplies, materials, equipment or
contracts for Contractual Services having an estimated cost less than the
amount set-forth in the Oklahoma Public Competitive Bid Act Title 61 O.S.
Section 101 et seq. (as amended from time to time) that requires competitive
bidding; and
      3.   all sales of property which has become obsolete and unusable that
has an estimated individual minimal value less than the amount set-forth in the
Oklahoma Competitive Bid Act Title 61 O.S. Section 101 et seq. (as amended from
time to time) that requires competitive bidding.
   B.   Open Market Procedure. Buyer shall obtain at least three (3) written
price quotations from qualified suppliers/vendors. The purchase shall be made
from the lowest and best price quotation or best value quotation. The
Department Head shall keep a record of all open market orders and the written
price quotations received for each open market purchase, and such records shall
be open to public inspection at reasonable times.
      Open Market Procedure may also be defined as contracting with an
auctioneer or an auctioneering firm licensed by the State of Oklahoma for the
purpose of auctioning supplies. (Ord. 807, 10-19-2021; amd. Ord. 862, 6-3-2025)
7-109: EMERGENCY PROCEDURES:
   A.   By City Manager. The City Manager shall have the authority to declare
an emergency whereby the provisions of the Competitive Bidding Act of 1974 with
reference to notice and bids shall not apply to supplies, materials, equipment
or Contractual Services for the amount set-forth in the Competitive Bid Act
Title 61 O.S. Section 101 et seq. (as amended from time to time).
      A full report of the circumstances of the emergency purchase shall be
reported to the Council, filed by the City Manager with the City Clerk, and
shall be open to public inspection.
   B.   By Department Head. In case of actual emergency occurring during normal
office hours the head of any using agency may, with written approval of the
City Manager, purchase directly any supplies, material, equipment or contract
for services whose immediate procurement is essential to prevent delays in the
work of the using agency which may vitally affect the life, health or
convenience of the citizens. (Ord. 807, 10-19-2021; amd. Ord. 862, 6-3-2025)
7-110: PREAUTHORIZED PAYMENTS BY CITY TO CERTAIN VENDORS:
   A.   City Treasurer shall have authority to pay bills mentioned within this
section in the time required by the provider, but shall review said bill for
accuracy and determine as to whether or not said bill is lawfully owed. The
pre-authorized payments shall be presented to the Council at the time other
monthly bills are presented - such presentment shall be for purposes of
inspection and review. If the Council determines that said bill was in anyway
overpaid, then it shall order that a credit be taken on the next month's
payment.
   City Treasurer shall have the authority to pay vendors upon receipt of bill
or invoice from any entity which:
      1.   Supplies utilities (including but not limited to electric,
telephone, and natural gas) and solid waste removal to the City, or
      2.   Supplies employee insurance services (including but not limited to
major medical, pharmacy, dental, and life insurance), or
      3.   Supplies monthly recurring payments (including but not limited to
postage, natural gas transportation, natural gas purchase and credit cards), or
      4.   Requires payment of debt service for issued general obligation or
revenue bonds on behalf of the City. (Ord. 807, 10-19-2021; amd. Ord. 862, 6-3-
2025)
7-111: PETTY CASH:
Pre-approved petty cash purchases shall be limited to a maximum of two hundred
dollars ($200.00). Petty cash reimbursements shall be limited to a maximum of
seventy-five dollars ($75.00). (Ord. 807, 10-19-2021; amd. Ord. 862, 6-3-2025)
7-112: TRANSFERS:
   A.   The City Manager, in his or her discretion, may make intra-fund
transfers. City Manager shall report all intra-fund transfers exceeding five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00).
   B.   Inter-fund transfers shall require approval of the Council.
   C.   The City Manager shall be authorized to make administrative transfers
to correct accounting procedures such as classification errors. (Ord. 807, 10-
19-2021; amd. Ord. 862, 6-3-2025)
7-113: PURCHASING PROCEDURES AND APPROVAL AUTHORIZATIONS:
Except as otherwise provided by law, all City of Grove purchases, procedures
and authorizations shall comply with the Oklahoma Competitive Bid Act Title 61
O.S. Section 101 et seq. (as amended from time to time).
A person desiring to order supplies, materials, or equipment or Contractual
Services shall initiate the procedure by filling out a purchase order
requisition, providing the vendor's name, address, the quantity, the
description and the cost of the item or items being ordered.
   A.   Department Head Approval: The Department Head may approve each purchase
of budgeted operating supplies, materials, equipment or Contractual Services
not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1000.00).
   B.   City Manager Approval: Upon compliance with the open market procedures,
the Department Head with written approval by the City Manager may approve the
purchase of any one Item of budgeted operating supplies, materials, equipment
or Contractual Services up to twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00).
   C.   Unbudgeted Items: Unbudgeted items shall require written approval of
the City Manager, pursuant to Section
7-113 Subsection G.
   D.   Construction Projects: The Council shall pre-authorize all Construction
Projects either through the budget process or by motion in an official meeting
before the purchasing process will begin. The City Manager may approve budgeted
Construction Projects if the purchase does not exceed the amount set by the
Oklahoma Public Competitive Bidding Act. All Construction Projects over the
amount set by the Oklahoma Public Competitive Bidding Act shall require the
final approval of the Council before the project is let for bid.
   E.   Contractual Services. The Mayor will approve and sign all agreements
for Contractual Services above twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00)
pursuant to authorization by the Council and the contracts will be filed with
the City Clerk.
   F.   Professional Services. Contracts for professional services shall
require authorization and approval by Council. A contract, signed by the Mayor
pursuant to authorization by Council shall be filed with the City Clerk and a
purchase order for encumbrance of funds sent to City Manager before services
begin.
      1.   Professional Services, when the estimated cost thereof of any Item
exceeds twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), shall require authorization
and approval by Council. A contract, signed by the Mayor pursuant to
authorization by Council shall be filed with the City Clerk and a purchase
order for encumbrances of funds sent to City Manager before services begin.
      2.   Professional Services, when the estimated cost thereof of any items
is twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or less may be authorized by the
City Manager.
   G.   Unbudgeted Items and Items Exceeding Budget: The City Manager may
approve unbudgeted items or items exceeding budget up to an aggregate amount of
twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) per fund, per fiscal year. Unbudgeted
expenses over aggregate amount of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) per
fund, per fiscal year, shall require Council approval. Unbudgeted approvals
over one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) will be included in the report to the
Council as an informational item. (Ord. 807, 10-19-2021; amd. Ord. 862, 6-3-
2025)
7-114: AUTHORIZATIONS:
Authorization shall be by the person in the described position or the person
delegated by that position in their absence or non-availability, either by
written authorization or the chain of command, as presented in the
organizational chart contained in the annual budget. (Ord. 807, 10-19-2021;
amd. Ord. 862, 6-3-2025)
7-115: REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS AND REQUEST FOR QUALIFICATIONS PROCEDURES:
The City Manager shall submit notice of request for proposals (RFPs) and notice
if request for qualifications (RFQs) to prospective providers as needed. Such
notice shall be mailed certified through the U.S. Postal Service with a return
receipt. (Ord. 807, 10-19-2021; amd. Ord. 862, 6-3-2025)
CHAPTER 2
SALES TAX
SECTION:
7-201: Adoption; Amendments
7-202: Definitions
7-203: Tax Collector Defined
7-204: Classification Of Taxpayers
7-205: Subsisting State Permits
7-206: Effective Date
7-207: Purpose Of Revenues
7-208: Tax Rate; Sales Subject To Tax
7-209: Exemptions; Sales Subject To Other Tax
7-210: Exemptions; Governmental And Nonprofit Entities
7-211: Exemptions; General
7-212: Exemptions; Agriculture
7-213: Exemptions; Manufacturers
7-214: Exemptions; Corporations And Partnerships
7-215: Tax Due When; Returns; Records
7-216: Payment Of Tax; Brackets
7-217: Tax Constitutes Debt
7-218: Vendor's Duty To Collect Tax; Penalties
7-219: Returns And Remittances; Discounts
7-220: Interest And Penalties; Delinquency
7-221: Waiver Of Interest And Penalties
7-222: Erroneous Payments; Claim For Refund
7-223: Fraudulent Returns
7-224: Records Confidential
7-225: Amendments
7-226: Provisions Cumulative
7-201: ADOPTION; AMENDMENTS 1 :
   A.   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as CITY OF GROVE SALES TAX
ORDINANCE. (Prior Code ch. 7; amd. Ord. 256, 11-3-1981)
   B.   Following are the Sales Tax ordinances passed by the City:
 
Ord.   Date                               Description/Purpose
149    Effective 8-22-1967                1 cent tax levy
       Adopted 4-17-1979
225                                      1 cent tax levy
       Passed 2-19-1981
       Effective for 2 months expiring 7-
245    31-1981                            1 cent tax levy
        
       Passed 11-3-1981
       Effective 2-1-1982
256  2                                   1 cent tax levy
       Passed 12-5-2000
       Effective 7-1-2001                 4/10 of 1 percent tax levy for
                                         capital expenditures including
474    Estimated termination 6-30-2021    expansion of the existing City water
                                         treatment plant and to the new
       Actual termination 8-28-2018       wastewater treatment plant located at
                                          a new site
                                          4/10 of 1 percent tax levy for
       Effective 8-28-2018                improvements to streets and roads
751                                      within the City, improvements to the
       Terminate 6-30-2041                City's utility systems, and
                                          acquisition of equipment for City
                                          purposes
 
 
Notes
1 1. 68 OS §§ 2701, 1350 et seq.
2 1. Ordinances 149, 225 and 256 have been amended to reflect 1981 legislative
  changes in Sales Law.
7-202: DEFINITIONS:
   A.   The definitions of words, terms and phrases contained in the Oklahoma
Sales Tax Code, section 1352 of title 68 of the Oklahoma Statutes, are hereby
adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter.
   B.   The total retail sale price received for the sale, preparation or
service of mixed beverages, ice and nonalcoholic beverages to be mixed with
alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises where such sale,
preparation and service occurs shall constitute the gross receipts from such
transaction. (Prior Code ch. 7; amd. Ord. 256, 11-3-1981; Ord. 304, 6-18-1985)
7-203: TAX COLLECTOR DEFINED:
The term "tax collector" as used in this chapter means the department of the
City or the official agency of the State duly designated according to law or
contract, and authorized by law to administer the collection of the tax levied
in this chapter. (Prior Code ch. 7; amd. Ord. 256, 11-3-1981)
7-204: CLASSIFICATION OF TAXPAYERS:
For the purpose of this chapter the classification of taxpayers hereunder shall
be as prescribed by State law for purposes of the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code.
(Prior Code ch. 7; amd. Ord. 256, 11-3-1981)
7-205: SUBSISTING STATE PERMITS:
All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the Oklahoma Tax
Commission pursuant to the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code are, for the purpose of this
chapter, hereby ratified, confirmed and adopted in lieu of any requirement for
an additional City permit for the same purpose. (Prior Code ch. 7; amd. Ord.
256, 11-3-1981)
7-206: EFFECTIVE DATE 1 :
This chapter became effective as to each cent tax at least thirty (30) days
after approval of a majority of the registered voters of the City voting on the
ordinance in the manner prescribed by section
16-112 of title 11 of the Oklahoma Statutes. (Prior Code ch. 7; amd. Ord. 256,
11-3-1981)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection 7-201B of this chapter.
7-207: PURPOSE OF REVENUES 1 :
   A.   It is the purpose of the first and second cent Sales Tax to provide
revenues for the support of the functions of the Municipal government of the
City.
   B.   The proceeds of the third one cent ($0.01) tax shall be used as
follows: The initial six hundred fifty thousand dollars ($650,000.00) in
revenues generated by such Sales Tax shall be transferred to the Grove
Municipal Services Authority, to be used first for the payment of the debt
service, including payment of interest and principal and premium, if any, as
the same become due, whether at the stated maturity thereof by acceleration,
call for redemption or otherwise, on indebtedness incurred by the authority;
for financing the project hereinafter described: the project being the
construction, installation and upgrading of existing sewage treatment plant,
sewer lines, pump stations, force mains and related appurtenances necessary for
their operation and use within the corporate limits of the City of Grove, in
accordance with applications on file with the United States of America,
Environmental Protection Agency: provided that following the payment of the
debt service above stated, and upon completion of the six hundred fifty
thousand dollars ($650,000.00) transfer, then the remaining revenue generated
by such Sales Tax shall be transferred to the City of Grove, Capital
Improvement Fund for the purpose of purchasing, constructing or repairing
capital improvements to be located and used within the corporate limits of the
City of Grove, the capital improvements authorized by majority vote of the
Grove City Council, provided, that capital improvements are to be considered
synonymous with and defined as those improvements authorized by article 10,
section 27, of the constitution of the state of Oklahoma. (Prior Code, Chapter
7; amd. Ord. 256, 11-3-1981)
 
Notes
1 2. See subsection 7-201B of this chapter.
7-208: TAX RATE; SALES SUBJECT TO TAX:
   A.   There is hereby levied an excise tax of three percent (3%) upon the
gross proceeds or gross receipts derived from all sales taxable under the
Oklahoma sales tax code including, but not exclusive of, the following:
      1.   Tangible personal property.
      2.   Natural or artificial gas, electricity, ice, steam, or any other
utility or public service except water and those specifically exempt by this
chapter.
      3.   Transportation for hire of persons by common carriers, including
railroads, both steam and electric, motor transportation companies, taxicab
companies, pullman car companies, airlines and all other means of
transportation for hire.
      4.   Service by telephone and telegraph companies to subscribers or
users, including transmission of messages, whether local or long distance. This
shall include all services and rental charges having any connection with
transmission of any message.
      5.   Printing or printed matter of all types, kinds, and characters and
the service of printing or overprinting, including the copying of information
by mimeograph or multigraph or by otherwise duplicating written or printed
matter in any manner, or the production of microfiche containing information on
magnetic tapes furnished by customers.
      6.   Service of furnishing rooms by hotel, apartment hotel, public
rooming house, motel, public lodging house or tourist camps.
      7.   Service of furnishing storage or parking privileges by auto hotels
and parking lots.
      8.   Selling, renting or otherwise furnishing computer hardware or
software or coding sheets, cards or magnetic tapes on which prewritten programs
have been coded, punched or otherwise recorded.
      9.   Food, confections and all drinks sold or dispensed by hotels,
restaurants, or other dispensers, and sold for immediate consumption upon the
premises or delivered or carried away from the premises for consumption
elsewhere.
      10.   Advertising of all kinds, types and character, including any and
all devices used for advertising purposes and the servicing of any advertising
devices, except those specifically exempt by this chapter.
      11.   Dues or fees to clubs including free or complimentary dues or fees
which shall have the value equivalent to the charge that would have otherwise
been made, including any fees paid for the use of facilities or services
rendered at a health spa or club or any similar facility or business.
      12.   Sales of tickets, fees or other charges made for admission to or
voluntary contributions made to places of amusement, sports, entertainment,
exhibition, display or other recreational events or activities, including free
or complimentary admissions which shall have the value equivalent to the charge
that would have otherwise been made.
      13.   Charges made for the privilege of entering or engaging in any kind
of activity, when no admission is charged spectators, such as tennis,
racquetball or handball courts.
      14.   Charges made for the privilege of using items for amusement,
sports, entertainment or recreational activity such as trampolines or golf
carts.
      15.   The rental of equipment for amusement, sports, entertainment or
other recreational activities, such as bowling shoes, skates, golf carts, or
other sports and athletic equipment.
      16.   The gross receipts from sales through any vending machine, without
any deduction for rental to locate the vending machine on the premises of a
person who is not the owner or any other deductions therefrom.
      17.   Gross receipts or gross proceeds from the rental or lease of
tangible personal property, including rental or lease of personal property when
the rental or lease agreement requires the vendor to launder, clean, repair or
otherwise service the rented or leased property on a regular basis, without any
deduction for the cost of the service rendered. Provided if the rental or lease
charge is based on the retail value of the property at the time of making the
rental or lease agreement and the expected life of the property, and the rental
or lease charge is separately stated from the service cost in the statement,
bill or invoice delivered to the consumer, the cost of services rendered shall
be deducted from the gross receipts or gross proceeds.
      18.   Any licensing agreement, rental, lease or other device or
instrument whereby rights to possess or exhibit motion pictures or filmed
performances or rights to receive images, pictures or performances for telecast
by any method are transferred. Provided, persons regularly engaged in the
business of exhibiting motion pictures for which the sale of tickets or
admissions is taxed under this chapter shall not be deemed to be consumers or
users in respect to the licensing or exhibiting of copyrighted motion picture
features, shorts, cartoons and scenes from copyrighted features and the sale or
licensing of such films shall not be considered a sale within the purview of
this chapter.
      19.   Flowers, plants, shrubs, trees and other floral items, whether or
not same was produced by the vendor, sold by persons engaged in florist or
nursery business in this state, including all orders taken by an Oklahoma
business for delivery in another state. Provided, all orders taken outside this
state for delivery within this state shall not be subject to the tax levied by
this chapter.
      20.   Tangible personal property sold to persons, peddlers, solicitors or
other salesmen, for resale where there is likelihood that this state will lose
tax revenue due to the difficulty of enforcing this chapter because of:
         a.   The operation of the business.
         b.   The nature of the business.
         c.   The turnover of independent contractors.
         d.   The lack of place of business in which to display a permit or
keep records.
         e.   Lack of adequate records.
         f.   The persons are minors or transients.
         g.   The persons are engaged in service businesses.
         h.   Any other reasonable reason.
      21.   Any taxable services and tangible personal property including
materials, supplies and equipment sold to contractors for the purpose of
developing and improving real estate even though such real estate is intended
for resale as real property are hereby declared to be sales to consumers or
users and taxable.
      22.   Any taxable services and tangible personal property sold to persons
who are primarily engaged in selling their services, such as repairmen, are
hereby declared to be sales to consumers or users and taxable. (Prior Code,
Chapter 7; amd. Ord. 256, 11-3-1981)
7-209: EXEMPTIONS; SALES SUBJECT TO OTHER TAX:
   A.   There is hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this
chapter the gross receipts or gross proceeds exempted from the Oklahoma sales
tax code inclusive, but not exclusive of, and derived from the:
      1.   Sale of nonintoxicating beverages on which the tax levied by state
law has been paid;
      2.   Sale of cigarettes and such tobacco products on which the tax levied
by state law has been paid;
      3.   Sale of gasoline or motor fuel on which the motor fuel tax, gasoline
excise tax or special fuels tax levied by state law has been paid;
      4.   Sale of motor vehicles or any optional equipment or accessories
attached to motor vehicles on which the Oklahoma motor vehicle excise tax
levied by state law has been paid; and
      5.   Sale of crude petroleum or natural or casinghead gas and other
products subject to gross production tax under state law. This exemption shall
not apply when such products are sold to consumer or user for consumption or
use, except when used for injection into the earth for the purpose of promoting
or facilitating the production of oil or gas. This paragraph shall not operate
to increase or repeal the gross production tax levied by the laws of this
state. (Prior Code, Chapter 7; amd. Ord. 256, 11-3-1981)
7-210: EXEMPTIONS; GOVERNMENTAL AND NONPROFIT ENTITIES:
   A.   There are hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this
chapter:
      1.   Sale of tangible personal property or services to the United States
government or to the state of Oklahoma, any political subdivision of this state
or any agency of a political subdivision of the state; provided, all sales to
contractors in connection with the performance of any contract with the United
States government, state of Oklahoma or any of its political subdivisions shall
not be exempted from the tax levied by this chapter, except as hereinafter
provided;
      2.   Sales made directly by county, district or state fair authorities of
this state, upon the premises of the fair authority, for the sole benefit of
the fair authority;
      3.   Sale of food in cafeterias or lunchrooms of elementary schools, high
schools, colleges or universities which are operated primarily for teachers and
pupils and are not operated primarily for the public or for profit;
      4.   Dues paid to fraternal, religious, civic, charitable or educational
societies or organizations by regular members thereof, provided, such societies
or organizations operate under what is commonly termed the lodge plan or
system, and provided such societies or organizations do not operate for a
profit which inures to the benefit of any individual member or members thereof
to the exclusion of other members;
      5.   Sale of tangible personal property or services to or by churches,
except sales made in the course of business for profit or savings, competing
with other persons engaged in the same or similar business;
      6.   The amount of proceeds received from the sale of admission tickets
which is separately stated on the ticket of admission for the repayment of
money borrowed by any accredited state-supported college or university for the
purpose of constructing or enlarging any facility to be used for the staging of
an athletic event, a theatrical production, or any other form of entertainment,
edification or cultural cultivation to which entry is gained with a paid
admission ticket. Such facilities include, but are not limited to, athletic
fields, athletic stadiums, field houses, amphitheaters and theaters. To be
eligible for this sales tax exemption, the amount separately stated on the
admission ticket shall be a surcharge which is imposed, collected and used for
the sole purpose of servicing or aiding in the servicing of debt incurred by
the college or university to effect the capital improvements hereinbefore
described;
      7.   Sales of tangible personal property or services to the council
organizations or similar state supervisory organizations of the Boy Scouts of
America, Girl Scouts of U.S.A. and the Camp Fire Girls shall be exempt from
sales tax; or
      8.   Sale of tangible personal property or services to any county,
municipality, public school district, the institutions of the Oklahoma system
of higher education and the Grand River dam authority, or to any person with
whom any of the above named subdivisions or agencies of this state has duly
entered into a public contract pursuant to law, necessary for carrying out such
public contract. Any person making purchases on behalf of such subdivision or
agency of this state shall certify, in writing, on the copy of the invoice or
sales ticket to be retained by the vendor that the purchases are made for and
on behalf of such subdivision or agency of this state and set out the name of
such public subdivision or agency. Any person who wrongfully or erroneously
certifies that purchases are for any of the above named subdivision or agencies
of this state or who otherwise violates this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined an amount equal to
double the amount of the sales tax involved or incarcerated for not more than
sixty (60) days or both. (Prior Code, Chapter 7; amd. Ord. 256, 11-3-1981)
7-211: EXEMPTIONS; GENERAL:
There are hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this chapter:
      1.   Transportation of school pupils to and from elementary schools or
high schools in motor or other vehicles;
      2.   Transportation of persons where the fare of each person does not
exceed One Dollar ($1.00), or local transportation of persons within the
corporate limits of a municipality except by taxicab;
      3.   Carrier sales of newspapers and periodicals made directly to
consumers. Other sales of newspapers and periodicals where any individual
transaction does not exceed seventy-five cents ($0.15). A carrier is a person
who regularly delivers newspapers or periodicals to subscribers on an assigned
route;
      4.   Sales for resale to persons engaged in the business of reselling the
articles purchased, whether within or without the state, provided that such
sales to residents of this state are made to persons to whom sales tax permits
have been issued as provided in this chapter. This exemption shall not apply to
the sales of articles made to persons holding permits when such persons
purchase items for their use and which they are not regularly engaged in the
business of reselling; neither shall this exemption apply to sales of tangible
personal property to peddlers, solicitors and other salesmen who do not have an
established place of business and a sales tax permit;
      5.   Sales of advertising space in newspapers and periodicals and
billboard advertising service, and any advertising through the electronic
media, including radio, television and cable television;
      6.   Eggs, feed, supplies, machinery and equipment purchased by persons
regularly engaged in the business of raising worms, fish, any insect or any
other form of terrestrial or aquatic animal life and used for the purpose of
raising same for marketing. This exemption shall only be granted and extended
to the purchaser when the items are to be used and in fact are used in the
raising of animal life as set out above. Each purchaser shall certify, in
writing, on the invoice or sales ticket retained by the vendor that he is
regularly engaged in the business of raising such animal life and that the
items purchased will be used only in such business. The vendor shall certify to
the Oklahoma Tax Commission that the price of the items has been reduced to
grant the full benefit of the exemption. Violation hereof by the purchaser or
vendor shall be a misdemeanor;
      7.   Sales of medicine or drugs prescribed for the treatment of human
being by a person licensed to prescribe the medicine or drugs. This exemption
shall not apply to proprietary or patent medicines as defined by Section 353.1
of Title 59 of the Oklahoma Statutes; and
      8.   Nothing herein shall be construed as limiting or prohibiting the
city from levying and collecting taxes on the sale of natural or artificial gas
and electricity, whether sold for residential or other use. The sales tax
levied by the city on natural or artificial gas and electricity shall be in
effect regardless of ordinance or contractual provisions referring to
previously imposed state sales tax on such items.
(Prior Code, Chapter 7; Ord. No. 256, 11/3/81)
7-212: EXEMPTIONS; AGRICULTURE:
There are hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this chapter:
      1.   Sales of agricultural products produced in this state by the
producer thereof directly to the consumer or user when such articles are sold
at or from a farm and not from some other place of business, as follows:
         a.   Farm, orchard or garden products;
         b.   Dairy products sold by a dairyman or farmer who owns all the cows
from which the dairy products offered for sale are produced;
         c.   Livestock sold by the producer at a special livestock sale; and
         d.   The provisions of this paragraph shall not be construed as
exempting sales by florists, nurserymen or chicken hatcheries, or sales of
dairy products by any other business except as set out herein;
      2.   Sale of baby chicks, turkey poults and starter pullets used in the
commercial production of chickens, turkeys and eggs, provided that the
purchaser certifies, in writing, on the copy of the invoice or sales ticket to
be retained by the vendor that the pullets will be used primarily for egg
production;
      3.   Sale of salt, grains, tankage, oyster shells, mineral supplements,
limestone and other generally recognized animal feeds for the following
purposes and subject to the following limitations:
         a.   Feed which is fed to poultry and livestock, including breeding
stock and wool-bearing stock, for the purpose of producing eggs, poultry, milk
or meat for human consumption;
         b.   Feed purchased in Oklahoma for the purpose of being fed to and
which is fed by the purchaser to horses, mules or other domestic or draft
animals used directly in the producing and marketing of agricultural products;
         c.   Any stock tonics, water purifying products, stock sprays,
disinfectants or other such agricultural supplies;
         d.   Poultry shall not be construed to include any fowl other than
domestic fowl kept and raised for the market or production of eggs;
         e.   Livestock shall not be construed to include any pet animals such
as dogs, cats, birds or such other fur-bearing animals; and
         f.   This exemption shall only be granted and extended where the
purchaser of feed that is to be used and in fact is used for a purpose that
would bring about an exemption hereunder executes an invoice or sales ticket in
duplicate on a form to be prescribed by the Tax Commission. The purchaser may
demand and receive a copy of the invoice or sales ticket and the vendor shall
retain a copy;
      4.   Sales of items to be and in fact used in the production of
agricultural products. Sale of the following items shall be subject to the
following limitations:
         a.   Sales of agricultural fertilizer to any person regularly engaged,
for profit, in the business of farming and/or ranching. Each such purchaser
shall certify, in writing, on the copy of the invoice or sales ticket to be
retained by the vendor, that he is so engaged in farming and/or ranching and
that the material purchased will be used only in such business;
         b.   Sales of agricultural fertilizer to any person engaged in the
business of applying such materials on a contract or custom basis to land owned
or leased and operated by persons regularly engaged, for profit, in the
business of farming and/or ranching. Each such purchaser shall certify, in
writing, on the copy of the invoice or sales ticket to be retained by the
vendor that he is engaged in the business of applying such materials to lands
owned or leased and operated by persons regularly engaged, for profit, in the
business of farming and/or ranching, and shall show in said certificate the
name or names of such owner or lessee and operator, the location of the lands
on which said materials are to be applied to each such land, and he shall
further certify that his contract price has been reduced so as to give the
farmer or rancher the full benefit of this exemption;
         c.   Sales of agricultural fertilizer to persons engaged in the
business of applying such materials on a contract or custom basis shall not be
considered to be sales to contractors under this chapter, and said sales shall
not be considered to be taxable sales within the meaning of the Oklahoma Sales
Tax Code. As used in this section, "agricultural fertilizer" means any
substance sold and used for soil enrichment or soil corrective purposes or for
promoting the growth and productivity of plants;
         d.   Sales of agricultural seed or plants to any person regularly
engaged, for profit, in the business of farming and/or ranching. This section
shall not be construed as exempting from sales tax, seed which is packaged and
sold for use in noncommercial flower and vegetable gardens;
         e.   Sales of agricultural chemical pesticides to any person regularly
engaged, for profit, in the business of farming and/or ranching. For the
purposes of this act, agricultural chemical pesticides shall include any
substance or mixture of substances intended for preventing, destroying,
repelling or mitigating any insect, snail, slug, rodent, bird, nematode,
fungus, weed or any other form of terrestrial or aquatic plant or animal life
or virus, bacteria or other microorganism, except viruses, bacterial or other
microorganisms on or in living man, or any substance or mixture of substances
intended for use as a plant regulator, defoliant or desiccant; and
         f.   This exemption shall only be granted and extended to the
purchaser where the items are to be used and in fact are used in the production
of agricultural products. Each purchaser shall certify, in writing, on the copy
of the invoice or sales ticket to be retained by the vendor, that the material
purchased will only be used in his farming occupation. The vendor shall certify
to the Oklahoma Tax Commission that the contract price of the items has been
reduced to grant the full benefit of the exemption. Violation hereof by the
purchaser or vendor shall be a misdemeanor, and, upon violation and conviction
for a second offense the Oklahoma Tax Commission shall revoke the vendor's
sales tax permit;
      5.   Sale of farm machinery, repair parts thereto or fuel, oil,
lubricants and other substances used for operation and maintenance of the farm
machinery to be used directly on a farm or ranch in the production,
cultivation, planting, sowing, harvesting, processing, spraying, preservation
or irrigation of any livestock, poultry, agricultural or dairy products
produced from such lands. Each purchaser of farm machinery, repair parts
thereto or fuel must certify, in writing, on the copy of the invoice or sales
ticket to be retained by the vendor, that he is engaged in farming or ranching
and that the farm machinery, repair parts thereto or fuel will be used only in
farming and/or ranching. The exemption provided for herein shall not apply to
motor vehicles. Each purchaser shall certify, in writing, on the copy of the
invoice or sales ticket to be retained by the vendor, that the material
purchased will only be used in his farming occupation. The vendor shall certify
to the Oklahoma Tax Commission that the price of the items has been reduced to
grant the full benefit of the exemption. Violation hereof by the purchaser or
vendor shall be a misdemeanor, and, upon violation and conviction for a second
offense the Oklahoma Tax Commission shall revoke the vendor's sales tax permit.
(Prior Code, Chapter 7; Ord. No. 256, 11/3/81)
7-213: EXEMPTIONS; MANUFACTURERS:
There are hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this chapter:
      1.   Goods, wares, merchandise and property purchased for the purpose of
being used or consumed in the process of manufacturing, compounding,
processing, assembling or preparing for sale a finished article and such goods,
wares, merchandise or property become integral parts of the manufactured,
compounded, processed, assembled or prepared products or are consumed in the
process of manufacturing, compounding, processing, assembling or preparing
products for resale. The term "manufacturing plants" shall mean those
establishments primarily engaged in manufacturing or processing operations, and
generally recognized as such;
      2.   Ethyl alcohol when sold and used for the purpose of blending same
with motor foe on which motor fuel tax is levied by state law;
      3.   Sale of machinery and equipment purchased and used by persons
establishing new manufacturing plants in Oklahoma, and machinery and equipment
purchased and used by persons in the operation of manufacturing plants already
established in Oklahoma. This exemption shall not apply unless such machinery
and equipment is incorporated into, and is directly used in, the process of
manufacturing property subject to taxation under this chapter. The term
"manufacturing plants" shall mean those establishments primarily engaged in
manufacturing or processing operations, and generally recognized as such;
      4.   Sales of containers when sold to a person regularly engaged in the
business of reselling empty or filled containers or when purchased for the
purpose of packaging raw products of farm, garden or orchard for resale to the
consumer or processor. This exemption shall not apply to the sale of any
containers used more than once and which are ordinarily known as returnable
containers, except returnable soft drink bottles. Each and every transfer of
title or possession of such returnable containers in this state to any person
who is not regularly engaged in the business of selling, reselling or otherwise
transferring empty or filled containers shall be taxable under this code. And,
this exemption shall not apply to the sale of labels or other materials
delivered along with items sold but which are not necessary or absolutely
essential to the sale of the sold merchandise; or
      5.   Sale of tangible personal property manufactured in Oklahoma when
sold by the manufacturer to a person who transports it to another state for
immediate and exclusive use in some other state.
(Prior Code, Chapter 7; Ord. No. 256, 11/3/81)
7-214: EXEMPTIONS; CORPORATIONS AND PARTNERSHIPS:
There are hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied in this chapter:
      1.   The transfer of tangible personal property, as follows:
         a.   From one corporation to another corporation pursuant to a
reorganization. As used in this subparagraph the term "reorganization" means a
statutory merger or consolidation or the acquisition by a corporation of
substantially all of the properties of another corporation when the
consideration is solely all or a part of the voting stock of the acquiring
corporation, or of its parent or subsidiary corporation;
         b.   In connection with the winding up, dissolution or liquidation of
a corporation only when there is a distribution in kind to the shareholders of
the property of such corporation;
         c.   To a corporation for the purpose of organization of such
corporation where the former owners of the property transferred are immediately
after the transfer in control of the corporation, and the stock or securities
received by each is substantially in proportion to his interest in the property
prior to the transfer;
         d.   To a partnership in the organization of such partnership if the
former owners of the property transferred are immediately after the transfer,
members of such partnership and the interest in the partnership, received by
each, is substantially in proportion to his interest in the property prior to
the transfer; or
         e.   From a partnership to the members thereof when made in kind in
the dissolution of such partnership;
      2.   Sale of an interest in tangible personal property to a partner or
other person who after such sale owns a joint interest in such tangible
personal property where the state sales or use tax has previously been paid on
such tangible personal property.
(Prior Code, Chapter 7; Ord. No. 256, 11/3/81)
7-215: TAX DUE WHEN; RETURNS; RECORDS:
The tax levied hereunder is due and payable at the time and in the manner and
form prescribed for payment of the state sales tax under the Oklahoma Sales Tax
Code. (Prior Code, Chapter 7; Ord. No. 256, 11/3/81)
7-216: PAYMENT OF TAX; BRACKETS:
   A.   The tax herein levied shall be paid to the tax collector at the time
and in the form and manner provided for payment of state sales tax.
   B.   The bracket system for the collection of the city sales tax by the tax
collector shall be the same. as is hereafter adopted by the agreement of the
City of Grove and the tax collector, in the collection of both the city sales
tax and the two percent (2%) state sales tax. (Prior Code, Chapter 7; Ord. No.
256, 11/3/81)
7-217: TAX CONSTITUTES DEBT:
The taxes, penalty and interest due under this chapter shall at all times
constitute a prior, superior and paramount claim as against the claims of
unsecured creditors, and may be collected by suit as any other debt. (Prior
Code, Chapter 7; Ord. No. 256, 11/3/81)
7-218: VENDOR'S DUTY TO COLLECT TAX; PENALTIES:
   A.   The tax levied hereunder shall be paid by the consumer or user to the
vendor. It shall be the duty of each and every vendor in this city to collect
from the consumer or user the full amount of the tax levied by this chapter, or
an amount equal as nearly as possible or practicable to the average equivalent
thereof.
   B.   Vendors shall add the tax imposed hereunder, or the average equivalent
thereof, to the sales price or charge, and when added such tax shall constitute
a part of such price or charge, shall be a debt from the consumer or user to
vendor until paid, and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as other
debts.
   C.   A vendor, as defined hereunder, who willfully or intentionally fails,
neglects or refuses to collect the full amount of the tax levied by this
chapter, or willfully or intentionally fails, neglects or refuses to comply
with the provisions or remits or rebates to a consumer or user, either directly
or indirectly, and by whatsoever means, all or any part of the tax herein
levied, or makes in any form of advertising, verbally or otherwise, any
statement which infers that he is absorbing the tax, or paying the tax for the
consumer or user by an adjustment of prices or at a price including the tax, or
in any manner whatsoever, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction thereof shall be fined as provided in Section
1-108 of this code.
   D.   Any sum or sums collected or required to be collected in accordance
with ,this chapter shall be deemed to be held in trust for the city. Any
person, firm, corporation, joint venture or association that willfully or
intentionally fails, neglects or refuses to collect the sums required to be
collected or paid shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction
thereof shall be fined as provided in Section
1-108 of this code. (Prior Code, Chapter 7; Ord. No. 256, 11/3/81)
7-219: RETURNS AND REMITTANCES; DISCOUNTS:
Returns and remittances of the tax herein levied and collected shall be made to
the tax collector at the time and in the manner, form and amount as prescribed
for returns and remittances of tax collected hereunder and shall be subject to
the same discount as may be allowed by the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code for
collection of state sales taxes. (Prior Code, Chapter 7; Ord. No. 256, 11/3/81)
7-220: INTEREST AND PENALTIES; DELINQUENCY:
Section 217 of Title 68 of the Oklahoma Statutes is hereby adopted and made a
part of this chapter, and interest and penalties at the rates and in amounts as
therein specified are hereby levied and shall be applicable in cases of
delinquency in reporting and paying the tax levied by this chapter. The failure
or refusal of any taxpayer to make and transmit the reports and remittances of
tax in the time and manner required by this chapter shall cause such tax to be
delinquent. In addition, if the delinquency continues for a period of five (5)
days, the taxpayer shall forfeit his claim to any discount allowed under this
chapter. (Prior Code, Chapter 7; Ord. No. 256, 11/3/81)
7-221: WAIVER OF INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
The interest or penalty or any portion thereof accruing by reason of a
taxpayer's failure to pay the city tax herein levied may be waived or remitted
in the same manner as provided for the waiver or as applied in administration
of the state sales tax provided in Section 220 of Title 68 of the Oklahoma
Statutes. To accomplish the purposes of this section, the applicable provisions
of Section 220 of Title 68 are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of
this chapter. (Prior Code, Chapter 7; Ord. No. 256, 11/3/81)
7-222: ERRONEOUS PAYMENTS; CLAIM FOR REFUND:
Refund of erroneous payment of the city sales tax herein levied may be made to
any taxpayer making the erroneous payment in the same manner and procedure, and
under the same limitations of time, as provided for administration of the state
sales tax as set forth in Section 227 of Title 68 of the Oklahoma Statutes. To
accomplish the purpose of this section, the applicable provisions of Section
221 of Title 68 are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this
chapter. (Prior Code, Chapter 7; Ord. No. 256, 11/3/81)
7-223: FRAUDULENT RETURNS:
In addition to all civil penalties provided by this chapter, the wilful failure
or refusal of any taxpayer to make reports and remittances herein required, or
the making of any false and fraudulent report for the purpose of avoiding or
escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof rightfully due under this
chapter shall be an offense, and upon conviction thereof the offending taxpayer
shall be subject to a fine and imprisonment as provided in Section
1-108 of this code. (Prior Code, Chapter 7; Ord. No. 256, 11/3/81)
7-224: RECORDS CONFIDENTIAL:
The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning the
administration of the city sales tax is legislatively recognized and declared,
and to protect the same the provisions of the State Sales Tax Code, Section 205
of Title 68 of the Oklahoma Statutes, and each subsection thereof, are hereby
adopted by reference and made fully effective and applicable to administration
of the city sales tax as if here set forth in full. (Prior Code, Chapter 7;
Ord. No. 256, 11/3/81)
7-225: AMENDMENTS:
The people of the city, by their approval of the sales tax ordinance hereby
authorize the city council, by ordinance duly enacted, to make such
administrative and technical changes or additions in the method and manner of
administering and enforcing this chapter as may be necessary or proper for
efficiency and fairness. Neither the rate of the tax herein provided nor the
use to which the revenue is put shall be changed without approval of the
qualified electors of the city as provided by law. (Prior Code, Chapter 7; Ord.
No. 256, 11/3/81)
7-226: PROVISIONS CUMULATIVE:
The provisions of this chapter shall be cumulative and in addition to any or
all other taxing provisions of city ordinances. (Prior Code, Chapter 7; Ord.
No. 256, 11/3/81)
CHAPTER 3
UTILITY TAX
SECTION:
7-301: Utility tax levied on gross receipts.
7-302: Application, utilities operating under franchise excepted.
7-303: One year term.
7-304: Actions against persons not paying tax.
7-305: Tax constitutes lien.
7-301: UTILITY TAX LEVIED ON GROSS RECEIPTS:
Pursuant to Sections 2601 through 2605 of Title 68 of the Oklahoma Statutes,
the city council, being vested with the power so to do, does hereby levy and
assess an annual tax upon the gross receipts from residential and commercial
sales of power, light or electricity in the city in an amount of two percent
(2%) of the gross receipts for residential and commercial sales, which tax
shall be in lieu of any other franchise, license, occupation or excise tax,
levied by the city. (Ord. No. 239, 8/5/80)
State Law Reference: City authority to levy utility tax of 2%, 68 O.S. Sections
2601 et seq.
7-302: APPLICATION, UTILITIES OPERATING UNDER FRANCHISE EXCEPTED:
The tax authorized to be levied under this chapter shall be levied at the time
this chapter shall take effect, August 5, 1980, and shall apply to all persons,
firms, associations or corporations engaged in the business of furnishing
power, light or electricity in the city, except it shall not apply to any
person, firm, association or corporation operating under a valid franchise from
the city, and this exception is so stated therein. (Ord. No. 239, 8/5/80)
7-303: ONE YEAR TERM:
The tax that is hereby levied shall be levied for a term of not less than one
year shall be payable quarterly to the city clerk and placed in the utility
cash fund of the city. (Ord. No. 239, 8/5/80)
7-304: ACTIONS AGAINST PERSONS NOT PAYING TAX:
Any person, firm or corporation failing or refusing to pay such tax when levied
shall be regarded as a trespasser and may be ousted form the city. In addition
thereto, an action may be maintained against such person, firm or corporation
for the amount of the tax and all expenses for collection of the same,
including reasonable attorney fees. (Ord. No. 239, 8/5/80)
7-305: TAX CONSTITUTES LIEN:
The tax so imposed shall constitute a first and prior lien on all the assets
located within the city or on the assets of any person, firm or corporation
engaged in the business of selling power, light or electricity. (Ord. No. 239,
8/5/80)
CHAPTER 4
TELEPHONE EXCHANGE FEE
SECTION:
7-401: Telephone exchange fee levied.
7-402: Fee in lieu of franchise fee.
7-401: TELEPHONE EXCHANGE FEE LEVIED:
There is hereby levied an annual inspection fee and service charge upon each
and every person, firm and corporation operating a telephone exchange in the
city in an amount equal to two percent (2%) of the gross revenues for each
current year for exchange telephone transmission service rendered wholly within
the limits of the city to compensate the city for the expense incurred and
services rendered incident to the exercise of its police power, supervision,
police regulation and police control of the construction of lines and equipment
of the telephone company in the city. The inspection fee and charge shall be
due and payable to the city on or before the first day of May, of each year,
commencing with the 1st day of May, 1858, for the calendar year ending in
December, preceding or fractional part thereof, and shall be paid into and
appropriated and expended from the general revenue fund of the city; provided,
however, that any amount due for a fractional part of the first year covered
hereby shall be payable on the first day of May, of the year following the year
in which this section is enacted. (Prior Code, Sec. 7-43)
State Law Reference: City powers to levy utility tax of 2%, 68, O.S. Sections
2601 et seq.
7-402: FEE IN LIEU OF FRANCHISE FEE:
During continued substantial compliance with the terms of this chapter by the
owner of any telephone exchange, the charge levied hereby shall be and continue
to be in lieu of all concessions, charges, excise, franchise, license,
privilege and permit fees or taxes or assessments except ad valorem taxes.
However, it is not intended hereby to extinguish or abrogate any existing
arrangement whereby the city is permitted to use underground conduit, duct
space or pole contacts of the company for the fire alarm and/or police call
systems of the city. (Prior Code, Sec. 7-44)
CHAPTER 5
EXCISE TAX
SECTION:
7-501: Excise Tax On Storage, Use Or Other Consumption Of Intangible Personal
Property Levied
7-502: Automatic Change In Use Tax Rate Upon Changes In Sales Tax Rate
7-503: Exemptions
7-504: Time When Due-Returns - Payment
7-505: Tax Constitutes Debt
7-506: Collection Of Tax By Retailer Or Vendor
7-507: Collection Of Tax By Retailer Or Vendor Not Maintaining A Place Of
Business Within State Or Both Within And Without State; Permits
7-508: Revoking Permits
7-509: Remunerative Deductions Allowed Vendors Or Retailers Of Other States
7-510: Interest And Penalties; Delinquency
7-511: Waiver Of Interest And Penalties
7-512: Erroneous Payments; Claim For Refund
7-513: Fraudulent Returns
7-514: Records Confidential
7-515: Provisions Cumulative
7-516: Provisions Severable
7-517: Definitions
7-518: Tax Collector Defined
7-519: Classification Of Taxpayers
7-520: Subsisting State Permits
7-521: Purposes Of Revenues
7-522: Citation And Codification
7-501: EXCISE TAX ON STORAGE, USE OR OTHER CONSUMPTION OF INTANGIBLE PERSONAL
PROPERTY LEVIED:
There is hereby levied and there shall be paid by every person storing, using
or otherwise consuming within the municipality tangible personal property
purchased or brought into this municipality, an excise tax on the storage, use
or other consuming within the municipality of such property at the rate equal
to the prevailing total of all sales taxes levied by the municipality on the
purchase price of such property. Such tax shall be paid by every person
storing, using or otherwise consuming, within the municipality, tangible
personal property purchased or brought into the municipality. The additional
tax levied hereunder shall be paid at the time of importation or storage of the
property within the municipality and shall be assessed to only property
purchased outside Oklahoma; provided, that the tax levied herein shall not be
levied against tangible personal property intended solely for use outside the
municipality, but which is stored within the municipality pending shipment
outside the municipality or which is temporarily retained in the municipality
for the purpose of fabrication, repair, testing, alteration, maintenance or
other service. Any person liable for payment of the tax authorized herein, may
deduct from such tax any local or municipal sales tax previously paid on such
goods or services; provided, that the amount deducted shall not exceed the
amount that would have been due if the taxes imposed by the municipality had
been levied on the sale of such goods or services. (Ord. 845, 2-13-2024)
7-502: AUTOMATIC CHANGE IN USE TAX RATE UPON CHANGES IN SALES TAX RATE:
The rate of excise tax levied pursuant to this chapter shall automatically
adjust to match the prevailing sales tax rate levied by the municipality, such
change in use tax rate to be effective on the date the change in the prevailing
sales tax rate takes effect, and such change in use tax rate not requiring
further approval of the governing body of the municipality. (Ord. 845, 2-13-
2024)
7-503: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply:
   A.   In respect to the use of any article of tangible personal property
brought into the municipality by a nonresident individual, visiting in this
municipality, for his or her personal use or enjoyment, while within the
municipality;
   B.   In respect to the use of tangible personal property purchased for
resale before being used;
   C.   In respect to the use of any article of tangible personal property on
which a tax, equal to or in excess of that levied by both the Oklahoma Use Tax
Code and the City of Grove Use Tax Ordinance, has been paid by the person using
such tangible personal property in the municipality, whether such tax was
levied under the laws of Oklahoma or some other state or municipality of the
United States. If any article of tangible personal property has already been
subjected to a tax by Oklahoma or any other state or municipality in respect to
its sale or use, in an amount less than the tax imposed by both the Oklahoma
Use Tax Code and the City of Grove Use Tax Ordinance, the provisions of this
chapter shall also apply to it by a rate measured by the difference only
between the rate provided by both the Oklahoma Use Tax Code and the City of
Grove Use Tax Ordinance, and the rate by which the previous tax upon the sale
or use was computed. Provided, that no credit shall be given for taxes paid in
another state or municipality, if that state or municipality does not grant
like credit for taxes paid in Oklahoma and the municipality;
   D.   In respect to the use of machinery and equipment purchased and used by
persons establishing new manufacturing or processing plants in the
municipality, and machinery and equipment purchased and used by persons for the
operation of manufacturing plants already established in the municipality.
Provided, this exemption shall not apply unless such machinery and equipment is
incorporated into, and is directly used in, the process of manufacturing
property subject to taxation under the Sales Tax Code of the municipality. The
term "manufacturing plants" shall mean those establishments primarily engaged
in manufacturing or processing operations, and generally recognized as such;
   E.   In respect to the use of tangible personal property now specifically
exempted from taxation under the Sales Tax Code of the municipality;
   F.   In respect to the use of any article of tangible personal property
brought into the municipality by an individual with intent to become a resident
of this municipality where such personal property is for such individual's
personal use or enjoyment;
   G.   In respect to the use of any article of tangible personal property used
or to be used by commercial airlines or railroads;
   H.   In respect to livestock purchased outside Oklahoma and brought into
this municipality for feeding or breeding purposes, and which is later resold;
   I.   In respect to the use of rail transportation cars to haul coal to coal-
fired plants located in this municipality which generate electric power. (Ord.
845, 2-13-2024)
7-504: TIME WHEN DUE-RETURNS - PAYMENT:
The tax levied by this chapter is due and payable at the time and in the manner
and form prescribed for payment of the State Use Code of the State of Oklahoma.
(Ord. 845, 2-13-2024)
7-505: TAX CONSTITUTES DEBT:
Such taxes, penalty, and interest due hereunder shall at all times constitute a
prior, superior and paramount claim as against the claims of unsecured
creditors, and may be collected by suit as any other debt. (Ord. 845, 2-13-
2024)
7-506: COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILER OR VENDOR:
Every retailer or vendor maintaining places of business both within and without
the State of Oklahoma, and making sales of tangible personal property from a
place of business outside this state for use in this municipality shall at the
time of making such sales collect the use tax levied by this chapter from the
purchaser and give to the purchaser a receipt therefor in the manner and form
prescribed by the Tax Commission, if the Tax Commission shall, by regulation,
require such receipt. Each retailer or vendor shall list with the Tax
Commission the name and address of all its agents operating in this
municipality and location of any and all distribution or sales houses or
offices or other places of business in this City. (Ord. 845, 2-13-2024)
7-507: COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILER OR VENDOR NOT MAINTAINING A PLACE OF
BUSINESS WITHIN STATE OR BOTH WITHIN AND WITHOUT STATE; PERMITS:
The Tax Commission may, in its discretion, upon application, authorize the
collection of the tax herein levied by any retailer or vendor not maintaining a
place of business within this state but who makes sales of tangible personal
property for use in this municipality and by the out-of-state place of business
of any retailer or vendor maintaining places of business both within and
without Oklahoma and making sales of tangible personal property at such out-of-
state place of business for use in this municipality. Such retailer or vendor
may be issued without charge, a permit to collect such taxes, by the Tax
Commission in such manner and subject to such regulations and agreements as it
shall prescribe. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer or
vendor to collect the tax upon all tangible personal property sold to his
knowledge for use within this municipality. Such authority and permit may be
cancelled when at any time the Tax Commission considers that such tax can more
effectively be collected from the person using such property in this
municipality. Provided, however, that in all instances where such sales are
made or completed by delivery to the purchaser within this municipality by the
retailer or vendor in such retailer's or vendor's vehicle, whether owned or
leased (not by common carrier), such sales or transactions shall continue to be
subject to applicable municipality sales tax at the point of delivery and the
tax shall be collected and reported under taxpayer's sales tax permit number
accordingly. (Ord. 845, 2-13-2024)
7-508: REVOKING PERMITS:
Whenever any retailer or vendor not maintaining a place of business in this
state, or both within and without this state, and authorized to collect the tax
herein levied, fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter or
the Oklahoma Use Tax Code or any order, rules or regulations of the Tax
Commission, the Tax Commission may, upon notice and hearing as provided for in
68 O.S. 2021, Section 1408, by order revoke the use tax permit, if any, issued
to such retailer or vendor, and if any such retailer or vendor is a corporation
authorized to do business in this state may, after notice and hearing above
provided, cancel said corporation's license to do business in this state and
shall issue a new license only when such corporation has complied with the
obligations under this chapter, the Oklahoma Use Tax Code, or any order, rules
or regulations of the Tax Commission. (Ord. 845, 2-13-2024)
7-509: REMUNERATIVE DEDUCTIONS ALLOWED VENDORS OR RETAILERS OF OTHER STATES:
Returns and remittances of the tax herein levied and collected shall be made to
the Tax Commission at the time and in the manner, form and amount as prescribed
for returns and remittances required by the Oklahoma Use Tax Code; and
remittances of tax collected hereunder shall be subject to the same discount as
may be allowed by said Code for the collection of State Use Taxes. (Ord. 845,
2-13-2024)
7-510: INTEREST AND PENALTIES; DELINQUENCY:
Section 217 of Title 68 O.S. 2021 is hereby adopted and made a part of this
chapter, and interest and penalties at the rates and in the amounts as therein
specified are hereby levied and shall be applicable in cases of delinquency in
reporting and paying the tax levied by this chapter. Provided, that the failure
or refusal of any retailer or vendor to make and transmit the reports and
remittances of tax in the time and manner required by this chapter shall cause
such tax to be delinquent. In addition, if such delinquency continues for a
period of five (5) days, the retailer or vendor shall forfeit his claim to any
discount allowed under this chapter. (Ord. 845, 2-13-2024)
7-511: WAIVER OF INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
The interest or penalty or any portion thereof accruing by reason of a
retailer's or vendor's failure to pay the municipality tax herein levied may be
waived or remitted in the same manner as provided for said waiver or remittance
as applied in administration of the State Use Tax provided in 68 O.S. 2021,
Section 220, and to accomplish the purposed of this section the applicable,
provisions of said Section 220 are hereby adopted by reference and made a part
of this chapter. (Ord. 845, 2-13-2024)
7-512: ERRONEOUS PAYMENTS; CLAIM FOR REFUND:
Refund of erroneous payment of the municipality use tax herein levied may be
made to any taxpayer making such erroneous payment in the same manner and
procedure, and under the same limitations of time, as provided for
administration of the State Use Tax as set forth in 68 O.S. 2021, Section 227,
and to accomplish the purpose of this section, the applicable provisions of
said Section 227 are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this
chapter. (Ord. 845, 2-13-2024)
7-513: FRAUDULENT RETURNS:
In addition to all civil penalties provided by this chapter, the willful or
refusal of any taxpayer to make reports and remittances herein required, or the
making of any false and fraudulent report for the purpose of avoiding or
escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof rightfully due under this
chapter shall be an offense, and upon conviction thereof the offending taxpayer
shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and
costs. Each day of noncompliance with this chapter shall constitute a separate
offense. (Ord. 845, 2-13-2024)
7-514: RECORDS CONFIDENTIAL:
The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning the
administration of the municipality use tax is legislatively recognized and
declared, and to protect the same the provisions of 68 O.S. 2021, Section 205,
of the State Use Tax Code, and each subsection thereof, is hereby adopted by
reference and made fully effective and applicable to administration of the
municipal use tax as is herein set forth in full. (Ord. 845, 2-13-2024)
7-515: PROVISIONS CUMULATIVE:
The provisions hereof shall be cumulative, and in addition to any and all other
taxing provisions of the municipality's ordinances. (Ord. 845, 2-13-2024)
7-516: PROVISIONS SEVERABLE:
The provisions hereof are hereby declared to be severable, and if any section,
paragraph sentence or clause of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or
inoperative by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not
affect any other section, paragraph, sentence or clause hereof. (Ord. 845, 2-
13-2024)
7-517: DEFINITIONS:
The definitions of words, terms and phrases contained the Oklahoma Use Tax
Code, 68 O.S. 2021, Section 1401, are hereby adopted by reference and made a
part of this chapter. In addition thereto, the following words and terms shall
be defined as follows:
CITY or MUNICIPALITY: The City of Grove, Oklahoma.
TRANSACTION: Shall mean sale. (Ord. 845, 2-13-2024)
7-518: TAX COLLECTOR DEFINED:
The term "tax collector" as used herein means the department of the
municipality government or the official agency of the state, duly designated
according to law or contract authorized by law, to administer the collection of
the tax herein levied. (Ord. 845, 2-13-2024)
7-519: CLASSIFICATION OF TAXPAYERS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the classification of taxpayers hereunder
shall be as prescribed by state law for purposes of the Oklahoma Use Tax Code.
(Ord. 845, 2-13-2024)
7-520: SUBSISTING STATE PERMITS:
All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the Tax Commission
pursuant to the Oklahoma Use Tax Code are for the purpose of this chapter
hereby ratified, confirmed and adopted in lieu of any requirement for an
additional municipality permit for the same purpose. (Ord. 845, 2-13-2024)
7-521: PURPOSES OF REVENUES:
It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this chapter to provide revenues for
the support of the functions of the municipal government of the City of Grove,
Oklahoma, and any and all revenues derived hereunder may be expended by the
governing body of the municipality for any purposes for which funds may be
lawfully expended as authorized. (Ord. 845, 2-13-2024)
7-522: CITATION AND CODIFICATION:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as CITY OF GROVE USE TAX
ORDINANCE, and the same shall be codified and incorporated into the Code of
Ordinances of the City of Grove, Oklahoma. (Ord. 845, 2-13-2024)
CHAPTER 6
EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SERVICE TAX
SECTION:
7-601: Tax Levied
7-601: TAX LEVIED:
The City hereby provides for the operation of an emergency telephone service,
through the levy of an emergency telephone service tax or service fee. Said tax
or service fee is hereby levied pursuant to Nine-One-One (911) Emergency Number
Act, title 63 Oklahoma Statutes, 1986, sections 2811 through 2819 and
specifically section 2814 thereof for the City and Delaware County to install
and operate an emergency 911 service and levy and collect a service fee or tax
not to exceed five percent (5%) of the amount billed to a service user for the
tariff charges for exchange telephone service or its equivalent, in any year,
such fee or tax to be imposed and shall remain in as such until a new vote of
the electors of Delaware County is conducted as authorized by law. (Ord. 348,
4-16-1991)
CHAPTER 7
HOTEL TAX
SECTION:
7-701: Citation And Codification
7-702: Definitions
7-703: Tax Rate
7-704: Exemptions
7-705: Tax To Be Separately Designated On Bills
7-706: Operator's Duties
7-707: Use Of Funds
7-708: Creation Of Convention And Tourism Bureau
7-709: Organization Of The Convention And Tourism Bureau; Powers And Duties
7-710: Amendments
7-711: Provisions Cumulative
7-712: Severability
7-713: Effective Date And No Termination Date
7-701: CITATION AND CODIFICATION:
This chapter shall be known and cited as the CITY OF GROVE HOTEL TAX ORDINANCE.
(Ord. 694, 2-3-2015, eff. 7-1-2015; amd. Ord. 819, 8-2-2022)
7-702: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
                                   Any business that has a current occupational
BUSINESS:                          license to conduct business within the City
                                   of Grove.
CITY:                              The City of Grove, Oklahoma.
                                   Any building or buildings, structures,
                                   trailer, or other facility in which the
                                   public may, for consideration, obtain
                                   sleeping accommodations, and in which two or
                                   more rooms are used for the accommodation of
HOTEL:                             such occupant whether such rooms are in one
                                   or several structures. The term shall
                                   include hotels, apartment hotels, motels,
                                   tourist courts, lodging houses, inns,
                                   resorts and bed and breakfasts. The term
                                   shall not include hospitals, sanitariums or
                                   nursing homes.
                                   The use or possession, or the right to the
                                   use or possession of any room or rooms in a
OCCUPANCY:                         hotel, or the right to the use or possession
                                   of the furnishings or the services and
                                   accommodations accompanying the use and
                                   possession of the room or rooms.
                                   The person, who for a consideration, uses,
                                   possesses, or has the right to the use or
OCCUPANT:                          possession of any room or rooms in a hotel
                                   under any lease, concession, permit, right
                                   of access, license to use, or other
                                   agreement.
                                   Any person operating a hotel within the
                                   city, included, but not limited to, the
OPERATOR:                          owner, proprietor, manager, lessee,
                                   sublessee, mortgagee in possession,
                                   licensee, or any other person otherwise
                                   operating such hotel.
                                   An occupant who has resided in a room in a
                                   hotel for not less than thirty (30)
PERMANENT RESIDENT:                consecutive days, with such status as a
                                   permanent resident to end when any break in
                                   such residency occurs.
                                   Any individual, corporation, company,
PERSON:                            partnership, voluntary association, firm,
                                   club, society, organization or any other
                                   entity of whatever kind or nature.
                                   An individual or an entity that engages in
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT BUSINESS: professional business development activities
                                   and solicitation of new business prospects.
                                   The consideration received for occupancy
                                   valued in money, whether received in money
                                   or otherwise, including all receipts, cash
RENT:                              credits, and property or services of any
                                   kind or nature, and any amount for which
                                   credit is allowed by the operator to the
                                   occupant, without any deduction therefrom
                                   whatsoever.
                                   A place where people go for vacation and/or
                                   recreation. A resort may have various types
RESORTS:                           of temporary lodging accommodations such as
                                   hotels, motels, guest rooms and cabins
                                   designated for overnight lodging of guests
                                   for an established rate or fees.
                                   A local business that prepares and serves
                                   food and drinks to customers. Meals are
RESTAURANT:                        generally served and eaten on the premises,
                                   but many restaurants also offer take-out and
                                   food delivery services.
                                   Any room or suite of rooms of any kind in
                                   any part or portion of a hotel which is
ROOM:                              available for or let out for use or
                                   possessed for any purpose other than as a
                                   "place of assembly."
TAX:                               The tax levied pursuant to this chapter.
                                   An eligible attraction as defined by the
TOURIST ATTRACTION:                Oklahoma Department of Transportation's
                                   Tourist Oriented Directional Signage (TODS)
                                   guidelines.
                                   Any local business with an inventory of
                                   fifty-one percent (51%) or more that caters
                                   to lake tourists and visitors. The business
                                   offers supplies/services geared toward
TOURIST RETAIL BUSINESS:           boating, fishing, hunting, camping, water
                                   recreation, lake gear, including but not
                                   limited to shops, boutiques, ship stores,
                                   marinas, etc. (Ord. 694, 2-3-2015, eff. 7-1-
                                   2015; amd. Ord. 819, 8-2-2022)
 
7-703: TAX RATE:
There is hereby levied an excise tax of five percent (5.0%) (in addition to any
and all other excise taxes now in force) upon the gross proceeds or gross
receipts derived from all rent for every occupancy of a room(s) in a hotel as
defined in section
7-702, after considerations of allowable exemptions as defined in section
7-704. (Ord. 694, 2-3-2015, eff. 7-1-2015; amd. Ord. 819, 8-2-2022)
7-704: EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   Occupancy: The following shall be exempt from the tax levied in this
chapter:
      1.   Any individual, organization, business or governmental agency that
qualifies for exemption through the Oklahoma Tax Commission from paying sales
tax per Oklahoma State Statutes; documentation for said exemption shall be
provided to operator at the time of payment. (Ord. 694, 2-3-2015, eff. 7-1-
2015; amd. Ord. 819, 8-2-2022)
7-705: TAX TO BE SEPARATELY DESIGNATED ON BILLS:
The operator shall separately designate, charge and show the tax on all bills,
statements, receipts or any other evidence of charge or payment of rent for
occupancy issued or delivered by the operator. In the absence of a certificate
of exemption or the approved use of a federal, state or local government/public
school credit card payment, it shall be presumed that the rent on all
occupancies is taxable. (Ord. 694, 2-3-2015, eff. 7-1-2015; amd. Ord. 819, 8-2-
2022)
7-706: OPERATOR'S DUTIES:
   A.   Operator Responsible For Collections: The operator shall be responsible
for the collection of the tax from the occupant which shall be held in trust by
the operator until paid to State of Oklahoma Tax Commission per their
collection and payment regulations for this purpose.
   B.   Records To Be Kept: Operator shall keep records of each occupancy and
of all rent paid, charged, or due thereon and of the tax payable thereon in
such form as maybe required by the State Tax Commission per their regulations.
   C.   Payment Of Tax: The payment of the tax levied pursuant to this chapter
shall be due prior to the twentieth day following the month during which the
charge for the occupancy of a hotel is incurred by the occupant. At the time of
filing a return of occupancy and rents, each operator shall pay the Oklahoma
Tax Commission (in the manner and form prescribed for payment of the municipal
lodging tax under the State Tax Law of the State of Oklahoma) the taxes imposed
by this chapter upon the rents included in such return. All taxes not paid with
a timely return shall be considered delinquent by the Oklahoma Tax Commission.
All the taxes for the period for which a return is required to be filed shall
be due from the operator and payable to the Oklahoma Tax Commission on or
before the date fixed for filing of the return for such period without regard
to whether a return is filed or whether the return which is filed correctly
shows the amount of rents and taxes due thereon. (Ord. 694, 2-3-2015, eff. 7-1-
2015; amd. Ord. 819, 8-2-2022)
7-707: USE OF FUNDS:
All taxes collected pursuant to provisions of this chapter shall be placed in a
special revenue fund of the city known as the City of Grove Tourism Development
Fund, and appropriated annually by the City Council based upon a budget
developed by the Bureau and used exclusively for the purpose of encouraging,
promoting, and fostering conventions and tourism; marketing the Grove
community; assisting with the promotion and support of community events and
activities; and special projects as deemed appropriate by the Bureau. (Ord.
694, 2-3-2015, eff. 7-1-2015; amd. Ord. 819, 8-2-2022)
7-708: CREATION OF CONVENTION AND TOURISM BUREAU:
The City of Grove Conventions and Tourism Bureau shall be composed of five (5)
members. The members of the Bureau shall consist of the following: two (2)
members representing the hotel industry; one (1) member representing a tourist
attraction; two (2) at-large members, each representing only one of the
following: a tourist retail business, a restaurant or a professional
development business, all as defined in section
7-702.
The Bureau members shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to a majority vote
of the City Council. The Council appointed members of said Bureau shall be for
terms of three (3) years. In the event of a member of the Bureau term expiring
or a vacancy occurring after September 1, 2022 on said Bureau, it shall be
filled by appointment by the Mayor, subject to a majority vote of the City
Council in accordance with the designated member representatives noted above.
No entity or business defined within section
7-702 and identified within section
7-708, shall have more than one representative serving on the Bureau at any
time.
Any member appointed to the Convention and Tourism Bureau under the provisions
of this chapter may be removed for cause upon a majority vote of the Grove City
Council. (Ord. 694, 2-3-2015, eff. 7-1-2015; amd. Ord. 819, 8-2-2022)
7-709: ORGANIZATION OF THE CONVENTION AND TOURISM BUREAU; POWERS AND DUTIES:
The City of Grove Convention and Tourism Bureau shall meet within thirty (30)
days of its appointment and shall be organized by electing a Chairman, Vice-
Chairman and Secretary. Thereafter, the Bureau shall meet as often as may be
necessary, and also shall be subject to a call of a special meeting by the
Chairman.
The Bureau shall adopt such administrative rules and regulations as they deem
necessary and expedient for the proper operation of said Bureau, and shall have
the authority to alter, change or amend such rules and regulations at their
discretion so long as the administrative rules and regulations are not in
conflict with the ordinances of the City of Grove, Oklahoma State Statute and
Federal law.
The Bureau hereunder appointed shall have the authority to develop a budget
with approval of the City Council, and utilize revenues collected and deposited
to the City of Grove Tourism Development Fund for tourism promotion of the City
of Grove. Tourism promotion of the City of Grove shall be defined by the
Committee to mean any activity as identified under section
7-707.
The Bureau hereunder appointed, in addition to their other powers provided
herein shall have all lawful and incidental powers necessary for achieving the
purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 694, 2-3-2015, eff. 7-1-2015; amd. Ord. 819, 8-
2-2022)
7-710: AMENDMENTS:
The people of the City of Grove, Oklahoma, by their approval of this chapter at
the election hereinabove provided for, hereby authorize the City by Ordinance
duly enacted to make such administrative and technical changes or additions in
the method and manner of administration and enforcing this chapter as may be
necessary or proper for efficiency and fairness, except that the rate of the
tax herein provided for shall not be changed without approval of the qualified
electors of the City as provided by law. (Ord. 694, 2-3-2015, eff. 7-1-2015;
amd. Ord. 819, 8-2-2022)
7-711: PROVISIONS CUMULATIVE:
The provisions hereof shall be cumulative and in addition to any and all other
taxing provisions of City Ordinances. (Ord. 694, 2-3-2015, eff. 7-1-2015; amd.
Ord. 819, 8-2-2022)
7-712: SEVERABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter are severable, and if any part or provision
hereof shall be adjudged invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such
adjudication shall not affect or impair any of the remaining parts or
provisions hereof. (Ord. 694, 2-3-2015, eff. 7-1-2015; amd. Ord. 819, 8-2-2022)
7-713: EFFECTIVE DATE AND NO TERMINATION DATE:
The provisions of this chapter and the collection of the excise tax referenced
herein shall become effective on and after July 1, 2015, subject to approval by
a majority of the qualified electors of the City voting on the same in the
manner prescribed by law. The provisions of this chapter and the collection of
the excise tax referenced herein shall have no termination date. (Ord. 819, 8-
2-2022)
PART 8
HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 1
NUISANCES IN GENERAL
SECTION:
8-101: Public Nuisance Prohibited
8-102: General Definition
8-103: Abatement Generally
8-104: Abatement Of Health Nuisances
8-105: Abatement Procedures Cumulative
8-106: Authority Of Officers; Appeal Of Administrative Orders
8-107: Recurring Or Intermittent Abatement
8-108: Penalty
8-101: PUBLIC NUISANCE PROHIBITED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to create or maintain a public
nuisance within the city, or to permit a public nuisance to remain on premises
under the person's control within the city. However, public nuisances are
expressly declared to be conditions detrimental to the health, safety, and
welfare of the inhabitants of the city.
   B.   While the city supports an ongoing commitment to aesthetic values,
situations which violate aesthetic standards but which do not create any actual
or potential detriment to the health, safety, and welfare of the inhabitants of
the city are not "public nuisances" as the term is used in this chapter.
Situations involving private nuisances shall not use the provisions of this
chapter to interfere with the normal resolution of these problems through civil
process or private action. (Ord. 505, 9-2-2003)
8-102: GENERAL DEFINITION:
In addition to other public nuisances declared by other sections of this code,
the following are hereby declared to be public nuisances:
   A.   The sale, or offering for sale, of unwholesome food or drink; or the
keeping of a place where such sales or offering are made.
   B.   The sale, offering for sale, or furnishing of intoxicating liquor in
violation of the state law or ordinances of the city; or the keeping of a place
where intoxicating liquor is sold, offered for sale or furnished in violation
of the state law or ordinances of the city.
   C.   The exposure, display, sale or distribution of obscene pictures, books,
pamphlets, magazines, papers, documents or objects; or the keeping of a place
where such are exposed, displayed, sold or distributed.
   D.   The keeping of a place where persons gamble, whether by cards, slot
machines, punch boards or otherwise.
   E.   The keeping of a place where prostitution, illicit sexual intercourse
or other immoral acts are practiced.
   F.   The keeping of a place where activities in violation of state law or
ordinance are practiced or carried on.
   G.   The conduct or holding of public dances in violation of the ordinance
of the city; or the keeping of a place where such dances are held.
   H.   The public exposure of a person having a contagious disease.
   I.   The continued making of loud or unusual noises which annoy persons of
ordinary sensibilities; or the keeping of an animal which makes such noises.
   J.   The operation or use of any electrical apparatus or machine which
materially or unduly interferes with radio or television reception by others.
   K.   Any use of a street or sidewalk or a place adjacent thereto which
causes crowds of people to gather so as to obstruct traffic on such street or
sidewalk, or which otherwise obstructs traffic thereon, except as may be
authorized by law or ordinance.
   L.   Permitting waste or other liquid to flow or fall, or ice or snow to
fall, from any building or structure upon any street or sidewalk.
   M.   All wells, pools, cisterns, bodies or containers of water in which
mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed, or which are so constructed, formed,
conditioned or situated as to endanger the public safety.
   N.   Rank weeds or grass, carcasses, accumulations of manure, refuse or
other things which are, or are likely to be, breeding places for flies,
mosquitoes, vermin or disease germs; and the premises on which such exist.
(Ord. 505, 9-2-2003)
8-103: ABATEMENT GENERALLY:
   A.   Some nuisances are of such nature as to constitute a grave and
immediate danger to the peace, health, safety, morals or welfare of one or more
persons or of the public generally. It is recognized that circumstances may be
such as to justify, and even to require, the city manager or other appropriate
officer or agency of the city government to take immediate and proper action
summarily to abate such nuisances, or to reduce or suspend the danger until
more deliberate action can be taken toward such abatement.
   B.   The chief of the fire department, the chief of police, the city
attorney, the building inspector, the electrical inspector, the plumbing
inspector or any other officer subordinate to the city manager may submit,
through or with the consent of the city manager, to the city council, a
statement as to the existence of a nuisance, as defined by section
8-102 of this chapter or by other city ordinances or state law, and a request
or recommendation that it be abated. The city manager himself, the health
officer, any councilman or any resident of the city may submit such a statement
and request or recommendation to the city council.
   C.   Upon receipt of a statement and request or recommendation under
subsection B of this section, the council shall determine whether or not the
alleged nuisance is a nuisance in fact. For the purpose of gathering evidence
on the subject, the council shall have power to subpoena and examine witnesses,
books, papers and other effects. Before proceeding to abate the nuisance or to
have it abated, the council shall give notice of a hearing on the proposed
statement to the owner of any property concerned and to any other person
alleged or deemed responsible for or to be causing the nuisance, and an
adequate opportunity to be heard, if such notice and opportunity for a hearing
can be given. Such notice to the owner and other persons concerned shall be
given in writing by mail or by service by a police officer, if their names and
addresses are known. If the names or addresses are not known, and the public
peace, health, safety, morals or welfare would not be unduly jeopardized by the
necessary delay, a notice of the hearing shall be publicized in a paper of
general circulation within the city.
   D.   If the council finds that a nuisance does in fact exist, it shall
direct the owner or other persons responsible for or causing the nuisance to
abate it within a specified time, if the public peace, health, safety, morals
or welfare would not be unduly jeopardized by the consequent delay. If such
peace, health, safety, morals or welfare would be unduly jeopardized by the
consequent delay, or if the owner or other persons responsible for or causing
the nuisance do not abate it within the specified time, the council shall
direct the city manager to abate the nuisance or to have it abated, if summary
abatement is practical, as authorized by 50 Oklahoma Statutes section 16. The
city clerk shall send a statement of the cost of such summary abatement to the
owner or other persons responsible for or causing the nuisance, as may be just
under the circumstances, if their names and addresses are known. Until paid,
such cost shall constitute a debt to the city collectible as other debts of the
city may be collected.
   E.   In cases where it is deemed impractical summarily to abate a nuisance,
the city may bring suit in the district court, as provided in 50 Oklahoma
Statutes section 17. (Ord. 505, 9-2-2003)
   F.   No action for nuisance shall be brought against agricultural activities
on farm or ranch land which has lawfully been in operation for two (2) years or
more prior to the date of bringing the action. (Ord. 587, 11-17-2009)
8-104: ABATEMENT OF HEALTH NUISANCES:
   A.   Pursuant to authority granted by 63 Oklahoma Statutes section 1-209,
the city council shall appoint an officer who shall have authority to order the
owner or occupant of any private premises in the city to remove from such
premises, at his own expense, any source of filth, cause of sickness, condition
conducive to the breeding of insects or rodents that might contribute to the
transmission of disease, or any other condition adversely affecting the public
health, within twenty four (24) hours, or within such other time as may be
reasonable, and a failure to do so shall constitute an offense. Such order
shall be in writing and may be served personally on the owner or occupant of
the premises, or authorized agent thereof, by the appointed officer or by a
policeman, or a copy thereof may be left at the last usual place of abode of
the owner, occupant, or agent, if known and within the state. If the premises
are unoccupied and the residence of the owner, occupant, or agent is unknown,
or is without the state, the order may be served by posting a copy thereof on
the premises, or by publication in at least one issue of a newspaper having a
general circulation in the city.
   B.   If the order is not complied with, the appointed officer may cause the
order to be executed and complied with, and the cost thereof shall be certified
to the city clerk, and the cost of removing or abating such nuisance shall be
added to the water bill or other city utility bill of the owner or occupant if
he is a user of water from the city water system or such other utility service.
The cost shall be treated as a part of such utility bill to which it is added,
and shall become due and payable, and be subject to the same regulations
relating to delinquency in payment, as the utility bill itself. If such owner
or occupant is not a user of any city utility service, such cost, after
certification to the city clerk, may be collected in any manner in which any
other debt due the city may be collected. (Ord. 505, 9-2-2003)
8-105: ABATEMENT PROCEDURES CUMULATIVE:
The various procedures for abating nuisances prescribed by this chapter and by
other provisions of state law and city ordinance shall be cumulative one to the
other and the city may elect to follow any such procedure which is applicable
in abating any particular nuisance. (Ord. 505, 9-2-2003)
8-106: AUTHORITY OF OFFICERS; APPEAL OF ADMINISTRATIVE ORDERS:
   A.   Pursuant to the authority granted by 11 Oklahoma Statutes section 22-
111 as amended in 1986, the city hereby designates the city manager to carry
out the duties of nuisance abatement. Provided that this designation does not
diminish the authority granted to health officers under section
8-104 of this chapter, but instead shall be interpreted as granting concurrent
jurisdiction and authority.
   B.   Any administrative order issued by the city manager shall be appealable
to the city council by the person against whom the order was directed, by the
filing of a written notice of appeal with the municipal clerk within ten (10)
days after the administrative order is rendered. (Ord. 505, 9-2-2003)
8-107: RECURRING OR INTERMITTENT ABATEMENT:
   A.   Some nuisances are of such a nature as to recur intermittently over a
significant period of time, but to be interrupted or to occur in such an
unpredictable schedule that such nuisances avoid abatement under existing
procedures. Such a situation is particularly likely to occur where lawfully
licensed and operable vehicles are parked repetitively in violation of the city
codes or where such parking repetitively occurs for less than twenty four (24)
hours at a time. Nonetheless, such repetitive violations are and remain a
public nuisance with significant impacts on the general welfare within the
neighborhood in which the violations occur.
   B.   It shall be the policy of the city to utilize the abatement procedures
set forth in this chapter whenever possible. However, in those instances in
which such efforts are unsuccessful, the applicable enforcement officer of the
city shall submit, in writing, a report to the city manager summarizing the
efforts of the officer or the department to enforce the applicable traffic
ordinances and nuisance ordinances against the vehicle and the owner and
operator thereof. A copy of the report shall be mailed to the registered owner
of the personal property and real property, at the last known place of
residence as shown on the registration forms; said report or accompanying
letter shall specify the precise way in which the vehicle is being parked
illegally and constituting a public nuisance. Thereafter, the city manager has
the discretion to summarily abate the nuisance by ordering the vehicle to be
impounded and towed from any location within the city wherein it is found to be
parked illegally or to constitute a public nuisance. Such an order for
impoundment and towing shall be effective for ninety (90) days after the
issuance of this impound order by the city manager.
   C.   Any owner or operator in receipt of such notice may request a hearing
before the city manager and shall be given an opportunity to show why the
vehicle should not be impounded as a public nuisance upon its next discovery in
violation of this code.
Furthermore, such owner or operator shall have the right to appeal any decision
the city manager may make at such hearing to the city council for final
determination. (Ord. 505, 9-2-2003)
8-108: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be punished as
provided in section
8-401 of this part. (Ord. 505, 9-2-2003)
CHAPTER 2
TRASH AND WEEDS
SECTION:
8-201: Trash And Weeds Prohibited
8-202: Definitions; Hay Harvesting And Permits; Penalty
8-203: Abatement Procedures
8-204: Summary Abatement Of Subsequent Accumulations
8-205: Abatement By City Forces Or By Contract
8-206: Abatement Costs
8-207: Penalty
8-201: TRASH AND WEEDS PROHIBITED:
   A.   It is unlawful for any owner of property located within the Municipal
limits from allowing trash to accumulate or weeds to grow or stand upon the
premises. (Ord. 505, 9-2-2003)
   B.   Each owner and lessee of property that has a trash dumpster(s) or trash
receptacle(s) including recycling containers, with a capacity of one (1) cubic
yard or more must provide an adequate amount and size of trash dumpster(s) or
trash receptacle(s) with lids to secure trash prior to collection. Property
owner and lessee shall be responsible for keeping lids closed to prevent
littering and exposure to stormwater. Industrial liquid wastes such as paint,
oil and other chemicals are not to be disposed of in a trash dumpster(s) or
receptacle(s).
   C.   
      1.   Each owner and lessee of property that has one (1) or more trash
dumpsters, trash receptacles, recycling containers or grease bins with a
capacity of one (1) cubic yard or more must enclose said container(s) on all
sides with opaque screening. Enclosure shall be two feet (2') above said
dumpster(s) or receptacle(s) as measured from the ground up. One (1) side of
the enclosure shall have an access gate the same height as the other three (3)
sides and shall have the ability to be opened a minimum of twelve feet (12')
wide. The size of the enclosure shall be according to the size of the dumpster
(s), receptacle(s) or containers as determined by the City of Grove.
      2.   The enclosure required hereby shall be screened with an opaque fence
or wall. The enclosure shall be constructed of wood or masonry products or some
combination thereof and shall be completed within thirty (30) days of placement
of the dumpster(s) or receptacle(s).
      3.   Prior to construction of such enclosure, a permit must be obtained;
the size of the enclosure and the type of construction materials shall meet the
approval of the City of Grove. Property owners and lessees shall be responsible
for providing access to the trash dumpsters, trash receptacles, recycling
containers and/or grease bins for disposal of contents, and shall maintain the
enclosure, and the area inside and outside of the enclosure in a sanitary
condition at all times.
   D.   Owner and lessee of property with trash enclosures existing prior to
October 1, 2019 shall be exempt from the access gate minimum opening
requirement of twelve feet (12'). (Ord. 505, 9-2-2003; amd. Ord. 563, 9-2-2008;
amd. Ord. 777, 10-1-2019)
8-202: DEFINITIONS; HAY HARVESTING AND PERMITS; PENALTY:
   A.   Definitions:
    CLEAN-UP: The removal of trash, junk and/or high grass and weeds from
property.
   HARVESTING: Cutting of hay and removing hay from the ground by baling.
   HAY: All vegetation including annuals and including woody plants that are
one inch (1") or less in diameter.
   HIGH GRASS/WEEDS:
      1.   Vegetation at any state of maturity that exceeds twelve inches (12")
in height or regardless of height, any vegetation that:
         a. Harbors, conceals or invites deposits or accumulation of refuse or
trash;
         b. Harbors rodents or vermin;
         c. Gives off unpleasant or noxious odors;
         d. Constitutes a fire or traffic hazard;
         e. Is dead or diseased.
      2.   Exceptions:
         a. Produce for human consumption grown in a tended and cultivated
garden;
         b. Healthy plantings, shrubs and trees that are tended and maintained;
         c. Tended crops on land zoned for agriculture use. Unless their
density and location creates a fire hazard to the property, interferes with the
mowing of high grass and weeds, or constitutes a detriment to the health,
benefit and welfare of the public and community.
   OWNER: The owner of record as shown by the most current tax rolls of the
County Treasurer.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY: Land, property, or interest therein, usually in a strip for or
devoted to highway or street systems.
   TRASH: Any junk, refuse, litter, ashes, leaves, debris, paper, combustible
materials, rubbish, offal or waste or matter of any kind or form which is
uncared for, no longer useful or wanted, discarded or abandoned.
   B.   Hay Harvesting:
      1.   Hay harvesting is allowed on undeveloped property that is three (3)
acres or greater.
      2.   Hay harvesting is allowed April 1 through September 1.
      3.   Hay shall be harvested at least once per calendar year.
      4.   Harvesting shall be completed no later than September 1 of the year
the permit is issued. (Exceptions may be made by the City Manager for weather
conditions, natural disasters and circumstances beyond the control of the
owner.)
      5.   Vegetation shall be maintained not to exceed twelve inches (12") in
height within forty feet (40') from public right-of-way and ten feet (10') from
adjacent properties.
      6.   No selective mowing will be allowed. All vegetation including
grasses, weeds, sunflowers, or volunteer growth, excluding landscaping, must be
mowed even if not harvested.
      7.   All windrowed vegetation shall be baled within three (3) days,
weather permitting.
      8.   Bales of vegetation shall not at any time be located closer than
forty feet (40') from public right-of-way and ten feet (10') from adjacent
properties.
      9.   All baled vegetation shall be removed from all property not zoned
agricultural within ten (10) days after being baled.
      10.   Harvesting operations shall not be performed during periods when
resultant wheel ruts would cause possible drainage or erosion problems.
      11.   Harvesting operations shall be completed in a workmanlike manner in
a way that meets all requirements of these regulations.
      12.   Harvesting operations shall be confined to the hours between one
(1) hour after sunrise to one (1) hour before sunset.
      13.   Property located in Agricultural Zoned Districts may be used for
animal grazing in lieu of or in combination with hay harvesting.
      14.   Harvesting operations pursuant to an issued permit shall be subject
to all local, State, and Federal laws, rules, and regulations.
   C.   Hay Permits:
      1.   A hay permit must be obtained by the owner prior to:
         a.   The vegetation reaching a height of twelve inches (12");
         b.   Commencement of harvesting.
      2.   Hay permits shall be non-transferable.
      3.   Hay permits shall expire on September 1 of the year the permit is
issued.
      4.   The annual permit fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) and is non-
refundable.
      5.   The owner shall sign a release stating he/she:
         a.   Will assume all risk and liability for hay quality, including any
contaminants, which may be contained in the harvested hay.
         b.   Will assume all risk and liability for any accidents and damages
that may occur as a result of the work.
         c.   Acknowledges that the City of Grove is not liable for work
performed.
   D.   Penalty:
      1.   Any person violating any provisions of this section shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section
1-108 of this Code. (Ord. 704, 5-19-2015)
8-203: ABATEMENT PROCEDURES:
The City Manager, or his designee, may cause property within the City limits to
be cleared of trash or weeds and grass to be cut or mowed in accordance with
the following procedures:
   A.   At least ten (10) days' notice shall be given to the property owner, by
mail, at the address shown by the current year's tax roll in the County
Treasurer's Office, before the City Manager or his designee holds a hearing or
takes action. The notice shall order the property owner to clean the property
of trash or to cut or mow the weeds or grass on the property, as appropriate,
and said notice shall further state that unless such work is performed within
ten (10) days of the date of the notice, the work shall be done by the City,
and a notice of lien shall be filed with the County Clerk against the property
for the costs due and owing the City. At the time of mailing of notice to the
property owner, the City shall obtain a receipt of mailing from the postal
service, which receipt shall indicate the date of mailing and the name and
address of the mailee. If the property owner cannot be located within ten (10)
days of the date of mailing, notice may be given by posting a copy of the
notice on the property or by publication, as defined in 11 Oklahoma Statutes
1991, section
1-102, one (1) time not less than ten (10) days prior to a hearing or action by
the City. If the City anticipates summary abatement of a nuisance in accordance
with this chapter or applicable State law, the notice, whether by certified
mail, or posting or publication, shall state that:
      1.   Any accumulations of trash or excessive weed or grass growth on the
owner's property occurring within six (6) months after the removal of trash or
cutting or mowing of weeds or grass on the property pursuant to such notice may
be summarily abated by the City;
      2.   The costs of such abatement shall be assessed against the owner; and
      3.   A lien may be imposed on the property to secure such payment all
without further prior notice to the property owner. (Ord. 644, 5-15-2012)
   B.   The owner of the property may give his written consent to the City
authorizing the removal of the trash or the mowing of the weeds or grass. By
giving said written consent, the owner waives his right to a hearing.
   C.   A hearing may be held by the City Manager or his designee to determine
whether the accumulation of trash or the growth of weeds or grass has caused
the property to become detrimental to the health, benefit, and welfare of the
public and the community or a hazard to traffic, or creates a fire hazard to
the danger of property.
   D.   Upon finding that the condition of the property constitutes a detriment
or hazard, and that the property would be benefited by the removal of such
conditions, the agents of the City are granted the right of entry on the
property for the removal of trash, mowing of weeds or grass, and the
performance of the necessary duties as a governmental function of the City.
Immediately following the cleaning or mowing of the property, the City Clerk
shall file a notice of lien with the County Clerk describing the property and
the work performed by the City, and stating that the City claims a lien on the
property for the cleaning or mowing costs.
   E.   The City Manager or his designee shall determine the actual cost of
such cleaning and mowing and any other expenses as may be necessary in
connection therewith, including the cost of notice and mailing. The City Clerk
shall forward, by mail, to the property owner, a statement of such actual cost
and demanding payment. (Ord. 505, 9-2-2003)
   F.   If payment is not made within thirty (30) days from the date of the
mailing of the statement, then within the next thirty (30) days, the Municipal
Clerk shall forward a certified statement of the amount of the cost to the
County Treasurer of the County in which the property is located and the same
shall be levied on the property and collected by the County Treasurer as other
taxes authorized by law. Once certified by the County Treasurer, payment may
only be made to the County Treasurer except as otherwise provided for in this
section. In addition the cost and the interest thereon shall be a lien against
the property from the date the cost is certified to the County Treasurer,
coequal with the lien of ad valorem taxes and all other taxes and special
assessment and prior and superior to all other titles and liens against the
property, and the lien shall continue until the cost shall be fully paid. At
the time of the collection the County Treasurer shall collect a fee of five
dollars ($5.00) for each parcel or property. The fee shall be deposited to the
credit of the General Fund of the County. If the County Treasurer and the
Municipality agree that the County Treasurer is unable to collect the
assessment, the Municipality may pursue a civil remedy for collection of the
amount owing and interest thereon by an action in person against the property
owner and an action in rem to foreclose its lien against the property. A
mineral interest, if severed from the surface interest and not owned by the
surface owner, shall not be subject to any tax or judgment lien created
pursuant to this section. Upon receiving payment, if any, the Municipal Clerk
shall forward to the County Treasurer a notice of such payment and directing
discharge of the lien. (Ord. 656, 10-2-2012)
   G.   The property owner shall have a right of appeal to the City Council
from any order of the City Manager or his designee. Such appeal shall be taken
by filing written notice of appeal with the City Clerk within ten (10) days
after the order of the City Manager or his designee is rendered. (Ord. 505, 9-
2-2003)
8-204: SUMMARY ABATEMENT OF SUBSEQUENT ACCUMULATIONS:
If the City Manager or his designee causes property within the City limits to
be cleaned of trash and weeds or grass to be cut or mowed in accordance with
the procedures provided for in section
8-203 of this chapter, any subsequent accumulations of trash or excessive weed
or grass growth on the property occurring within a six (6) month period may be
declared to be a nuisance and may be summarily abated without further prior
notice to the property owner. At the time of each such summary abatement, the
City shall notify the property owner of the abatement and the costs thereof.
The notice shall state that the property owner may request a hearing within ten
(10) days after the date of mailing the notice. The notice and hearing shall be
as provided for in section
8-203 of this chapter. Unless otherwise determined at the hearing, the cost of
such abatement shall be determined and collected as provided for in subsections
8-203E and F of this chapter. Provided, however, that this section shall not
apply if the records of the County Clerk show that the property was transferred
after notice was given pursuant to section
8-203 of this chapter. (Ord. 505, 9-2-2003)
8-205: ABATEMENT BY CITY FORCES OR BY CONTRACT:
The work ordered to be performed under section
8-203 of this chapter may be done by the employees of the City, under the
supervision of the City Manager, or it may be let by contract to the lowest and
best bidder, after appropriate notice, in the manner for letting other
contracts by public bid. (Ord. 505, 9-2-2003)
8-206: ABATEMENT COSTS:
   A.   Upon completion of the work ordered to be performed under this chapter,
the City Manager or his designee shall determine the cost thereof through the
creation of a report. Such report shall be itemized as to each tract of
property abated. The costs of abatement shall be the actual cost of such
cleaning or mowing, plus an administrative fee of two hundred twenty five
dollars ($225.00). The administrative fee has been legislatively determined to
be generally accurate, through an examination of the following cost factors:
      1.   The cost of labor expended by the City's Inspection Department in
the investigation, examination, and determination of public nuisances.
      2.   The pro rata capital costs of vehicles used by the City's Inspection
Department.
      3.   Maintenance and repairs of vehicles, equipment and tools used by
City's Inspection Department.
      4.   Clerical time devoted to enforcement effort.
      5.   The costs of notice, including stationery, postage, and related
items.
      6.   The cost of photography.
      7.   Costs of clerical time expended in the collection by the City of the
costs of abatement from the property owners.
      8.   Costs of administering the program and supervising the employees
actually performing the inspection, evaluations, reporting, clerical, and
abatement work.
      9.   Miscellaneous costs involved in the abatement of the property. (Ord.
644, 5-15-2012)
   B.   The City Clerk is hereby authorized to forward a statement of the
monies due and to demand payment thereof by certified mail with return receipt
requested, to the owner of the property at the address shown on the current tax
rolls in the Office of the Treasurer of the County in which the land is
located. (Ord. 505, 9-2-2003; amd. Ord. 644, 5-15-2012)
8-207: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be punished as
provided in section
8-401 of this part. (Ord. 505, 9-2-2003)
CHAPTER 3
DISMANTLED, JUNKED, ABANDONED VEHICLES
SECTION:
8-301: Definitions
8-302: Declaration Of Nuisance
8-303: Notice To Abate
8-304: Duty Of Vehicle And Property Owner To Abate
8-305: Abatement By City
8-306: Disposition Of Vehicle After Removal By City
8-307: Penalty
8-301: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of
this chapter:
DISMANTLED, JUNKED, ABANDONED OR INOPERABLE VEHICLES: Shall be deemed to
include the major parts thereof, including bodies, engines, transmissions,
frames and rear ends.
PRIVATE PROPERTY: Any real property in the city, which is not public property.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Any property in the city, which is owned or controlled by the
city, county, state or the United States, and shall include all streets and
highways.
VEHICLE: Any machine propelled by other than human muscle and shall include,
without limitation, any automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle, tractor, buggy,
wagon, boat or self-propelled farm or construction equipment. (Ord. 505, 9-2-
2003)
8-302: DECLARATION OF NUISANCE 1 :
   A.   Vehicles which are mechanically or physically incapable of being
operated shall be located within an enclosed structure or behind an opaque
screening fence. Such vehicles provide a breeding place and a refuge for vermin
of all types. "Mechanically or physically incapable of being operated" shall
mean, but not be limited to, the removal of lights, fenders, windows, doors or
major parts, including bodies, engines, transmissions, frames and rear ends.
   B.   Any vehicle that is not currently tagged shall be located off of the
public right of way. Vehicles which cannot be lawfully operated by virtue of
the lack of licensing, but which are nonetheless located on the public rights
of way, unreasonably interfere with the use of public rights of way for
vehicular or pedestrian traffic by physically reducing the space available to
lawful traffic and interfering with the vision which the public needs to
protect themselves from the hazards associated with travel.
   C.   Any vehicle described under subsection A or B of this section, or any
major component of such vehicle, located contrary to the above on any public or
private property for a period exceeding twenty four (24) hours, is hereby
expressly declared to be a nuisance and to be detrimental to the health, safety
and welfare of the inhabitants of this city. (Ord. 505, 9-2-2003)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS §§ 954A and 955.
8-303: NOTICE TO ABATE:
Upon complaint of any citizen, or by action of any health officer of the state,
county, or the city manager following a report to him by any officer or
employee of the city, concerning any nuisance under section
8-302 of this chapter, the city manager shall cause notice to be posted on any
vehicle constituting a nuisance as defined in this chapter. Such notice shall
state that the vehicle is a nuisance and shall be removed and/or completely
enclosed within a building or behind an opaque fence within twenty four (24)
hours after such notice is posted. (Ord. 505, 9-2-2003)
8-304: DUTY OF VEHICLE AND PROPERTY OWNER TO ABATE:
When the notice provided for in section
8-303 of this chapter has been posted, it shall be the duty of the owner of
such vehicle and the owner, lessee or other person in possession or control of
the property upon which such vehicle is located to remove the vehicle from such
property or have the vehicle housed in a building or behind an opaque fence
where it will not be visible from the street or from other private property,
the removal or enclosure to be made within twenty four (24) hours after such
notice has been posted. Such time may be extended by the city manager in case
of obvious hardship. (Ord. 505, 9-2-2003)
8-305: ABATEMENT BY CITY:
Upon failure of the owner of the vehicle, or the owner, lessee or person in
control of the property upon which the vehicle is located, to remove the
vehicle or place it in an enclosed building or behind an opaque fence, as
required by this chapter, the city manager or his designated agent shall notify
the police or inspections department of the city, which shall promptly issue a
citation to the owner for violation of said section. If the owner fails to
remove the vehicle after notice and hearing on said violation, the city manager
shall take steps to remove the vehicle and provide for storage in a proper
place, and all costs incurred as a result of such action shall be assessed
against the owner of the vehicle or the owner, lessee, or person in control of
the property upon which the vehicle is located. (Ord. 505, 9-2-2003)
8-306: DISPOSITION OF VEHICLE AFTER REMOVAL BY CITY:
The owner of any vehicle removed pursuant to this chapter may regain possession
thereof by making application to the chief of police, within two (2) months
after its removal, and upon payment to the city of all reasonable costs of
removal and storage which shall have accrued to such vehicle. If no claim for
such vehicle is made within two (2) months after its removal by the city, the
vehicle may be sold for the best price obtainable, as junk or otherwise, and
the proceeds shall be used to pay any removal or storage fees against the
vehicle. Any excess after such fees are paid shall be deposited in the general
fund of the city. (Ord. 505, 9-2-2003)
8-307: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be punished as
provided in section
8-401 of this part. (Ord. 505, 9-2-2003)
CHAPTER 4
VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
SECTION:
8-401: Penalties
8-401: PENALTIES 1 :
   A.   The violation of any provision of this part shall be punishable by a
fine, of not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment for
not more than sixty (60) days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day or
any portion of a day during which a violation occurs shall be a separate
offense. (Ord. 505, 9-2-2003)
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS § 14.111.
CHAPTER 5
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS AND WASTE
SECTION:
8-501: Definitions
8-502: Authority To Order Cleanup Or Abatement
8-503: Verification Of Adequacy Of Cleanup Or Abatement
8-504: Penalty
8-501: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter:
COSTS FOR THE CLEANUP AND ABATEMENT OF THE HAZARDOUS MATERIALS AND WASTE: Shall
include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following:
   A.   Costs of any emergency response contract labor and materials;
   B.   Actual labor costs of city personnel, including benefits, supervision,
workers' compensation, and administrative overhead;
   C.   Costs of security associated with the cleanup and abatement;
   D.   Costs to the city for hazardous materials responses, including labor,
equipment, and materials, from other governmental entities under mutual aid
arrangements; and
   E.   The fair rental or replacement costs of city owned equipment and
materials.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL: Any material that, because of its quantity, concentration,
or physical or chemical characteristics, poses a significant present or
potential hazard to human health and safety or to the environment, if released
into the workplace or the environment. (Ord. 508, 11-4-2003)
8-502: AUTHORITY TO ORDER CLEANUP OR ABATEMENT:
The city manager, the fire chief, emergency management director, or a
designated representative is authorized to order cleanup, or other abatement of
the effects of any hazardous substance or waste which has been unlawfully,
accidentally, or negligently released, or deposited upon or into any property
or facility within the city and to supervise such cleanup and abatement effort.
The city shall recover all costs incurred as a result of such cleanup or
abatement activity from the following:
   A.   The persons or entities whose accidental, negligent, or wilful act or
omission proximately caused such a release or deposit;
   B.   The persons or entities who owned, had custody, or had control of the
hazardous substance or waste at the time of such release or deposit, without
regard to fault or proximate causation;
   C.   The persons or entities who owned, had custody, or had control of the
container which held such hazardous waste or substance at the time or
immediately prior to such release or deposit, without regard to fault or
proximate cause; and
   D.   The property owner of the property on or in which the hazardous
substance or waste was released or deposited. (Ord. 508, 11-4-2003)
8-503: VERIFICATION OF ADEQUACY OF CLEANUP OR ABATEMENT:
In the event any person undertakes to clean up or abate the effects of any
hazardous substance or waste which has been negligently, unlawfully or
accidentally released, or deposited upon or into any property or facility, the
city may take such action as is necessary to supervise or verify the adequacy
of the cleanup and abatement. (Ord. 508, 11-4-2003)
8-504: PENALTY:
   A.   Fine Imposed: Any person, firm or corporation, or other legal entity,
violating the requirements of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction, shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars
($100.00) or imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days, or both, for each
and every violation, and each day's violation thereof shall constitute a
separate offense.
   B.   Fine Not Exclusive Penalty: In addition to fine or imprisonment, the
city may institute appropriate actions or proceedings at law or equity for the
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 508, 11-4-2003)
CHAPTER 6
DILAPIDATED BUILDINGS
SECTION:
8-601: Dilapidated Buildings Prohibited
8-602: Definitions
8-603: Authority Of Governing Body
8-604: Notification Procedures
8-605: Findings
8-606: Appeal
8-607: Abatement By City
8-608: Abatement Costs
8-609: Abatement By The Property Owner
8-610: Penalty
8-601: DILAPIDATED BUILDINGS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any owner of property located within the municipal
limits to allow a dilapidated building to exist upon the premises. (Ord. 673,
11-5-2013)
8-602: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of
this chapter:
BOARDED AND SECURED: The closing, boarding or locking of any or all exterior
openings so as to prevent entry into the structure.
CITY OR MUNICIPALITY: A municipality which has incorporated as a city in
accordance with the laws of this state.
DILAPIDATED BUILDING: A. A structure which through neglect or injury lacks
necessary repairs or otherwise is in a state of decay or partial ruin to such
an extent that the structure is a hazard to the health, safety, or welfare of
the general public, or
   B.   A structure which is unfit for human occupancy due to the lack of
necessary repairs and is considered uninhabitable or is a hazard to the health,
safety, and welfare of the general public, or
   C.   A structure which is determined by the municipal governing body to be
an unsecured building, or
   D.   A structure which has been "boarded and secured", as defined in this
chapter for more than eighteen (18) consecutive months, or
   E.   A structure declared by the municipal governing body to constitute a
public nuisance.
GOVERNING BODY: The city council of a city, the board of trustees of a town, or
the legislative body of a municipality, as it may be defined by applicable
laws.
PROPERTY OWNER: The owner of record as shown by the most current tax rolls of
the county treasurer.
PUBLISH: Printing in a newspaper which:
   A.   Maintains an office in the municipality and is of general circulation
in the municipality. If there is no such newspaper, then in any newspaper which
is of general circulation in the municipality; and
   B.   Meets the requirements of a legal newspaper as provided in 25 Oklahoma
Statutes section 106.
   C.   If there is no newspaper meeting the requirements as provided for in
this definition, the term publish or publication shall mean posting a copy of
the item to be published in ten (10) or more public places in the municipality.
When a notice is required to be published for a prescribed period of time,
publishing the notice one day each week during the prescribed period of
publication is sufficient in accordance with 25 Oklahoma Statutes section 103.
RESOLUTION: A special or temporary act of a municipal governing body which is
declaratory of the will or opinion of a municipality in a given matter and is
in the nature of a ministerial or administrative act. A resolution is not a law
and does not prescribe a permanent rule of conduct or government.
UNFIT FOR HUMAN OCCUPANCY: A structure that due to lack of necessary repairs is
considered uninhabitable and is a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of
the general public.
UNSECURED STRUCTURE: Any structure which is not occupied by a legal or
equitable owner thereof, or by a lessee of a legal or equitable owner, and into
which there are one or more unsecured openings such as broken windows, unlocked
windows, broken doors, unlocked doors, holes in exterior walls, holes in the
roof, broken basement or cellar hatchways, unlocked basement or cellar
hatchways or other similar unsecured opening which would facilitate an
unauthorized entry into the structure. (Ord. 673, 11-5-2013)
8-603: AUTHORITY OF GOVERNING BODY:
A municipal governing body may cause dilapidated buildings within the municipal
limits to be torn down and removed in accordance with the Oklahoma state
statutes. Prior to commencement of dismantling the dilapidated building, the
governing body may authorize that such a building be boarded and secured. (Ord.
673, 11-5-2013)
8-604: NOTIFICATION PROCEDURES:
The governing body shall approve a resolution scheduling a date to hold a
public hearing to determine if the property is dilapidated and has become
detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of the general public and the
community, or if the property creates a fire hazard which is dangerous to other
property;
At least ten (10) days' notice shall be given to the owner of the property
before the governing body holds a hearing to determine if the building is to be
torn down and removed. In addition, the governing body may authorize that the
building be boarded and secured.
A copy of the notice shall be sent by mail to the property owner at the address
shown by the current year's tax rolls in the office of the county treasurer.
Written notice shall also be mailed to any mortgage holder as shown by the
records in the office of the county clerk to the last known address of the
mortgagee. At the time of the mailing to the property owner and/or mortgage
holder, the city shall obtain a receipt of mailing from the postal service,
which receipt shall indicate the date of mailing, the name and address of the
mailee, and the date the notice was received or returned.
In addition, a minimum of ten (10) days prior to the public hearing, a copy of
the notice shall be posted on the property to be affected and shall be
published one time as defined in this chapter. (Ord. 673, 11-5-2013)
8-605: FINDINGS:
Pursuant to a finding that the condition of the property constitutes a
detriment or a hazard and that the property would be benefited by the removal
of such conditions, the governing body may cause the dilapidated structure to
be torn down and removed.
After the governing body has declared a building dilapidated per this chapter
and prior to the commencement of the tearing and removal of a dilapidated
building, the governing body may authorize that such a building be boarded and
secured.
The governing body shall fix reasonable dates for the commencement and
completion of the work. The reasonable dates shall allow for the appeal
process.
Upon the governing body finding that a building is dilapidated, the city clerk
shall immediately file a notice of dilapidation and liens allowed per the
Oklahoma state statutes. (Ord. 673, 11-5-2013)
8-606: APPEAL:
Any action to challenge the order of the municipal governing body shall be
filed within thirty (30) business days from the date of the order. (Ord. 673,
11-5-2013)
8-607: ABATEMENT BY CITY:
The agents of the municipality are granted the right of entry on the property
for the performance of the necessary duties as a governmental function of the
municipality if the work is not performed by the property owner within dates
fixed by the governing body. (Ord. 673, 11-5-2013)
8-608: ABATEMENT COSTS:
   A.   If property owner fails to perform or complete the work within the
dates fixed by the governing body, the city may complete the work with in house
employees or contract with the lowest and best bidder.
   B.   Upon completion of the work ordered to be performed under this chapter,
the city manager or his designee shall determine the cost thereof. The costs of
abatement shall be the actual cost of dismantling and removal of dilapidated
buildings and any other expenses that may be necessary in conjunction with the
dismantling and removal of the buildings, including testing and removal of
asphalt, asbestos, lead-containing materials, plus an administrative fee of two
hundred twenty five dollars ($225.00). The administrative fee has been
legislatively determined to be generally accurate, through an examination of
the following factors:
      1.   The cost of labor expended by the city in the investigation,
examination, and determination of a dilapidated building;
      2.   The pro rata capital costs of vehicles used by the city;
      3.   Maintenance and repairs of vehicles, equipment and tools used by the
city;
      4.   Clerical time devoted to enforcement efforts;
      5.   The costs of notice, including stationery, postage and related
items;
      6.   The cost of photography;
      7.   Cost of clerical time expended in the collection by the city of the
costs of abatement from the property owners;
      8.   Cost of administering the program and supervising employees actually
performing the inspection, evaluations, reporting, clerical and abatement work;
      9.   Miscellaneous costs involved in the abatement of the property.
   C.   The city clerk is hereby authorized to forward a statement of the
monies due and to demand payment thereof by certified mail with return receipt
requested, to the owner of the property at the address shown on the current tax
rolls in the office of the county treasurer. (Ord. 673, 11-5-2013)
8-609: ABATEMENT BY THE PROPERTY OWNER:
   A.   Abatement of the following types of structures is exempt from the
requirements set forth by the Oklahoma department of environmental quality
(ODEQ).
Demolition of random residential structures or residential structures declared
by the city of Grove to be in a dilapidated condition, up to and including
quadriplex (4 single-family) units, is exempt from the Oklahoma department of
environmental quality (ODEQ) requirements for testing and abatement of
asbestos, lead based materials and asphalt.
The following requirements must be met prior to demolition of such structures:
      1.   A demolition permit application must be filled out completely and
signed by the applicant and/or property owner, with signatures notarized.
      2.   Demolition permit fee must be submitted with application.
      3.   Proof of ownership of the property or duly authorized agent of the
owner must be submitted with the application.
      4.   Applicant shall submit a schedule for demolition.
      5.   Sewer line must be disconnected and capped in accordance with the
approved rules and requirements of the authority having jurisdiction.
      6.   All electrical, plumbing, gas must also be discontinued with the
approved rules and requirements of the authority having jurisdiction.
      7.   Underground hazards such as basements, cellars, septic tanks must be
identified.
      8.   Demolition site must be inspected by the city of Grove building
inspector prior to demolition and upon completion of demolition.
      9.   Demolition shall not commence until a demolition permit has been
approved and issued by the city of Grove building inspector.
      10.   Demolition site shall be kept in a safe manner for the workers and
the public by barriers constructed to be of a sufficient size and designed to
direct the public around the demolition site and not allow damage from runoff.
      11.   The contractor performing the demolition shall carry public
liability insurance, property damage insurance and workers' compensation
insurance sufficient to protect the owners and city from any claims.
      12.   All debris must be removed from the demolition site, fill material
must be added and spread if needed, and the finished site shall be brought to
grade level within thirty (30) days of the permit date.
      13.   Property owner shall provide proof all debris created from the
demolition was disposed of at a facility approved for handling of solid waste.
   B.   Abatement of the following types of structures shall comply with the
requirements set forth by the Oklahoma department of environmental quality
(ODEQ).
Controlled burns of any structure; demolition of commercial structures,
residential structures larger than a quadriplex or residential structures that
are part of a large scale buyout project shall comply with subsections A1 to
A13 of this section and the requirements set forth by the Oklahoma department
of environmental quality (ODEQ) for testing and abatement of asbestos, lead
based materials and asphalt prior to burning or demolition of any such
structure.
      1.   Provide proof the entire structure including, but not limited to,
insulation, roofing, flooring, painted surfaces and plumbing, has been examined
according to 27A Oklahoma Statutes section 2-5-106.1 for the presence of
asphalt, asbestos, and lead-containing materials.
      2.   Provide proof that all asphalt, asbestos and lead-containing
materials have been removed from the structure prior to demolition or burning.
      3.   Provide proof all asphalt, asbestos and lead-containing materials
removed from the structure have been disposed of at a facility approved for
handling of hazardous materials.
      4.   Provide proof inspection, removal and disposal of any hazardous
materials have been conducted according to the requirements of federal law.
      5.   Property owner(s) are responsible for the cost of testing, removal
and disposal of hazardous materials.
      6.   A controlled burn of any structure shall be performed only by Grove
fire department personnel.
         a.   Property owner shall complete and submit an application along
with the required fee to the fire department requesting a controlled burn.
         b.   The fire department shall follow the regulations set forth by
ODEQ prior to commencement of any controlled burn. (Ord. 674, 12-17-2013)
8-610: PENALTY:
Failure to comply with these regulations shall be punishable by a fine, of not
exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00), plus court costs and penalties, or by
imprisonment for not more than ten (10) days, or both such fine and
imprisonment. Each day or any portion of a day during which a violation occurs
shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 674, 12-17-2013)
CHAPTER 7
TOBACCO AND ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES
SECTION:
8-701: Purpose
8-702: Definitions
8-703: Prohibited Conduct
8-704: Required Signs
8-705: Penalties And Enforcement
8-706: Statutory Construction And Severability
8-701: PURPOSE:
It is the intent of the City of Grove in enacting this ordinance, to provide
for the public health, safety, and welfare by discouraging the inherently
dangerous behavior of smoking and the use of tobacco and vapor products around
non-users, especially children; by protecting the public from exposure to
secondhand smoke where people work, play, and learn; by reducing the potential
for children to wrongly associate tobacco product and vapor product use with a
healthy lifestyle; and by affirming and promoting a healthy environment in the
City of Grove. (Ord. 857, 2-7-2025)
8-702: DEFINITIONS:
INDOOR AREA: Any enclosed area used or visited by employees or the public, at
all times, regardless of whether work is being performed. Indoor Area includes
work areas, employee lounges, restrooms, conference rooms, classrooms, employee
cafeterias, hallways, any other spaces used or visited by employees, as well as
all space between a floor and ceiling that is predominantly or totally enclosed
by walls or windows, regardless of doors, doorways, open or closed windows,
stairways, or the like.
MUNICIPAL PROPERTY: All buildings, Indoor Areas, and Outdoor Areas, including
but not limited to recreational areas, and other property, or portions thereof,
owned or operated by the City of Grove, including but not limited to vehicles
and equipment owned by the municipality.
OUTDOOR AREA: Any area that is not an Indoor Area and includes outdoor
recreational areas.
SMOKING: The carrying by a person of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, or other
lighted smoking device.
TOBACCO PRODUCT: Any product that contains tobacco and is intended for human
consumption. Tobacco Product does not include any product approved by the
United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation
product.
VAPOR PRODUCT: Any noncombustible product, that may or may not contain
nicotine, that employs a mechanical heating element, battery, electronic
circuit, or other mechanism, regardless of shape or size, that can be used to
produce a vapor in a solution or other form. Vapor Product shall include any
vapor cartridge or other container with or without nicotine or other form that
is intended to be used with an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar,
electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device and any
vapor cartridge or other container of a solution, that may or may not contain
nicotine, that is intended to be used with or in an electronic cigarette,
electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, or electronic device. (Ord. 857, 2-7-
2025)
8-703: PROHIBITED CONDUCT:
   A.   No person is allowed to Smoke Tobacco Products in any places in which
Smoking Tobacco Products is prohibited by Oklahoma state law. (63 Okl.St.Ann. §
1-1523 (2019))
   B.   No person is allowed to Smoke or use Tobacco Products and/or Vapor
Products on any Municipal Property, indoor and outdoor, including parks and
recreational areas.
   C.   Nothing in this chapter prohibits any person or entity from prohibiting
Smoking or the use of Tobacco Products or Vapor Products on their property,
even if the use of Tobacco Products or Vapor Products is not otherwise
prohibited in that area.
   D.   No person or entity shall knowingly permit Smoking or the use of
Tobacco Products or Vapor Products in an area that is under their control, if
the use of Tobacco Products or Vapor Products is prohibited by law in that
area.
   E.   No person or entity shall permit the placement of ash receptacles, such
as ash trays or ash cans, within an area under the control of that person or
entity and in which Smoking is prohibited by law. However, the presence of ash
receptacles shall not be a defense to a charge of the use of Tobacco Products
or Vapor Products in violation of any provision of this chapter.
   F.   No person shall dispose of Smoking, Tobacco Product, or Vapor Product
waste within an area in which Smoking and the use of Tobacco Products or Vapor
Products is prohibited.
   G.   No person or entity shall intimidate, threaten, or otherwise retaliate
against another person or entity that seeks to attain compliance with this
chapter. (Ord. 857, 2-7-2025)
8-704: REQUIRED SIGNS:
   A.   The person or entity that has legal or de facto control of an area in
which Smoking and the use of Tobacco Products or Vapor Products is prohibited
by this chapter shall post a clear, conspicuous, and unambiguous sign at each
point of entry to the area, and in prominent locations within the area.
   B.   For restrictions on Smoking and the use of Tobacco Products or Vapor
Products in Indoor Areas, the sign or decal shall be at least 4 inches by 2
inches in size and shall clearly state that smoking or tobacco use is
prohibited or that a tobacco-free environment is provided. For restrictions on
the use of Tobacco Products or Vapor Products in Outdoor Areas, signs shall be
weather-resistant, at least 15 inches by 15 inches in size, with lettering of
at least 1 inch, and shall clearly state that smoking or tobacco use is
prohibited or that a tobacco-free environment is provided.
   C.   For the purposes of this section, the City Manager or his/her designee
shall be responsible for the posting of signs on Municipal Property, both
indoor and outdoor.
   D.   Notwithstanding this provision, the presence or absence of signs shall
not be a defense to a charge of Smoking or the use of Tobacco Products or Vapor
Products in violation of any other provision of this chapter. (Ord. 857, 2-7-
2025)
8-705: PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of Mark Morris,
Chief of Police. In addition, any peace officer or code enforcement official
may enforce this chapter.
   B.   Any person who knowingly violates this chapter shall be punished by a
citation and fine of not less than one-hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more
than five-hundred dollars ($500.00) in accordance with Chapter 10 of the City
of Grove Municipal Code.
   C.   The possession of a lighted Tobacco Product in violation of this
chapter is a nuisance.
   D.   The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and in addition to
any other remedies available at law or in equity.
   E.   Each instance of Tobacco Product or Vapor Product use in violation of
this chapter shall constitute a separate violation.
   F.   The use of a Vapor Product in violation of this chapter is a nuisance.
   G.   Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing a violation of any
provision of this chapter regarding Tobacco Product or Vapor Product use shall
also constitute a violation of this chapter.
   H.   In addition to other remedies provided by this chapter or by other law,
any violation of this chapter regarding Tobacco Product or Vapor Product use
may be remedied by the City Attorney, including, but not limited to,
administrative or judicial nuisance abatement proceedings, criminal code
enforcement proceedings, and suits for injunctive relief. (Ord. 857, 2-7-2025)
8-706: STATUTORY CONSTRUCTION AND SEVERABILITY:
It is the intent of the City Council of the City of Grove to supplement
applicable state and federal law and not to duplicate or contradict such law.
The provisions of this ordinance are severable, and the invalidity of any
provision of the ordinance shall not affect other provisions of the ordinance,
which can be given effect without the invalid provision. (Ord. 857, 2-7-2025)
CHAPTER 8
FOOD SERVICE SANITATION
SECTION:
8-801: Regulations Adopted
8-802: Definitions
8-803: Permits Required
8-804: Exceptions
8-805: Penalty
8-801: REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
The latest edition of the "Oklahoma state department of health rules and
regulations pertaining to food establishments" is hereby adopted and
incorporated by reference in this code. At least one copy of the rules and
regulations shall be on file in the office of the city clerk. The rules and
regulations shall govern the definitions; inspection of food service
establishments; the issuance, suspension, and revocation of permits to operate
food service establishments; the prohibiting of sale of adulterated or
misbranded food or drink and the enforcement of this section, except in case of
conflict with the provisions of this chapter, in which case the more
restrictive terms shall prevail. (Ord. 688, 9-2-2014)
8-802: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them:
DIRECTOR: The director of the Delaware County health department or his
authorized representative, who shall be a registered professional sanitarian or
sanitarian in training.
FOOD: Any raw, cooked or processed edible substance, beverage or ingredient
used or intended for use or for sale in whole or in part for human consumption.
FOOD HANDLER: Any person who for compensation engages in the preparation of
food or other food related service to the public.
FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT: Any fixed or mobile restaurant; coffee shop;
cafeteria; short order cafe; luncheonette; grill; tearoom; sandwich shop; soda
fountain; tavern; bar; cocktail lounge; night club; roadside stand; industrial
feeding establishment; private, public or nonprofit organization or institution
routinely serving food; catering kitchen; commissary or similar place in which
food or drink is prepared for sale or for service on the premises or elsewhere;
and any other eating or drinking establishment or operation where food is
served or provided for the public with or without charge. (Ord. 688, 9-2-2014)
8-803: PERMITS REQUIRED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person who operates a food service
establishment for profit in the city of Grove, to hire or permit to be hired,
or permit to work gratis, any person serving or preparing food or handling food
utensils who does not possess a current and unrevoked food handler's permit
approved by the director.
   B.   All food handlers shall be required to obtain, from the Delaware County
health department, a food handler's permit, the issuance of which shall be
subject to the requirements provided by the Delaware County health department
in conjunction with the Oklahoma state department of health.
      1.   Application for such a permit must be made to the director by such
person. The applicant must attend and meet any requirements established for a
course of instruction presented by the Delaware County health department and
approved by the director in the sanitary practice of food preparation, service
and personal hygiene.
      2.   An applicant may be approved by the director for a permit if he or
she has satisfactorily attended and met requirements established for the course
of instruction in another county or can show proof of completion of such a
course that is acceptable by the director.
      3.   Upon approval of the application by the director, the Delaware
County health department shall issue on behalf of the city of Grove a food
handler's permit to said person; provided that said applicant pays any fees
charged for issuing the permit. The permit entitles the person to work in a
food service establishment during the twenty four (24) months following the
date on which said permit is issued.
      4.   The director is hereby authorized to issue temporary permits
permitting said applicant to work in a food service establishment until the
next regular course of instruction in the sanitary practices of food service
and preparation is conducted; provided, however, such temporary permits shall
expire on the day the above mentioned course of instruction begins.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person to serve, prepare food or handle
food utensils in a food service establishment, except as otherwise provided for
herein, who cannot immediately exhibit a current and unrevoked food handler's
permit approved by the director.
   D.   Food handler's permits issued are not transferable to another person.
(Ord. 688, 9-2-2014)
8-804: EXCEPTIONS:
A food handler's permit shall not be required of a nonpaid person to prepare or
serve food for a nonprofit civic, charitable, or religious organization. (Ord.
688, 9-2-2014)
8-805: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in
section
1-108 of this code. In addition thereto, such person may be enjoined from
continuing such violations. Each day upon which such a violation occurs shall
constitute a separate violation. (Ord. 688, 9-2-2014)
PART 9
LICENSING AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
OCCUPATION TAXES
SECTION:
9-101: Occupation Tax Levy
9-101: OCCUPATION TAX LEVY 1 , 2 :
   A.   Except as herein provided, all persons operating a retail business or
profession or engaged in the pursuit of other occupational businesses shall be
from and after the effective date hereof, taxed and assessed an annual sum of
fifty dollars ($50.00) for an occupational license tax.
   B.   The occupational license tax as referred to in this section shall be
due as follows:
      1.   At the time of opening said business or profession; and
      2.   If said business or profession is in legal existence and has
previously paid said occupation tax, then said yearly fee will be due July 1 of
each year thereafter. (Ord. 452, 5-16-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. See also sections 3-102 and 3-202 of this code.
2 2. 11 OS §§ 22-106, 22-107.
CHAPTER 2
POOL AND BILLIARD HALLS
SECTION:
9-201: License Required To Operate Pool Or Billiard Hall, Domino Parlor
9-202: Liquor Or Beer, Gambling Prohibited; Revocation Of License
9-203: Minors Prohibited; Revocation Of License
9-204: Penalty For Failure To Secure License
9-205: State Laws Applicable
9-206: Hours Of Operation
9-201: LICENSE REQUIRED TO OPERATE POOL OR BILLIARD HALL, DOMINO PARLOR 1 :
A person not otherwise prohibited by law of the state is permitted to maintain
and operate a pool hall or billiard hall. In connection with operating a pool
or billiard hall a person may also operate domino tables. A license may be
granted to operate a pool or billiard hall, or domino tables in connection
therewith, upon the payment of a license fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00),
paid in advance. The pool or billiard hall or domino tables shall be conducted
in a building fronting a main street. The building shall have glass windows
which do not obstruct the view of the public from the street, and there shall
be no partitions, screens, or obstructions in the building to prevent complete
view from the front of the building directly through the outside window to the
rear of the same. No pool hall or billiard hall or domino parlor shall be
operated other than on the ground floor. (Ord. 102, 2-29-1940)
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS § 22-108.
9-202: LIQUOR OR BEER, GAMBLING PROHIBITED; REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Any owner, manager, or person operating the pool hall, billiard hall or domino
parlor shall not permit any intoxicating liquor, including beer, to be brought
into or drunk on the premises, and shall not permit any gambling in any form to
be carried on within the premises. Any violation of any section of this chapter
automatically revokes the license of the pool hall, billiard hall, or domino
parlor. (Ord. 102, 2-29-1940)
9-203: MINORS PROHIBITED REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
It is unlawful for any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years to frequent
or patronize any pool hall, billiard hall or domino parlor without the written
consent of his parents. If any minor shall frequent or patronize any pool or
billiard hall or domino parlor with the knowledge and consent of the owner or
operator of the same or the persons in charge thereof, then such violation
shall automatically revoke the license of the pool hall, billiard hall or
domino parlor. (Ord. 102, 2-29-1940)
9-204: PENALTY FOR FAILURE TO SECURE LICENSE:
Any person who shall operate or attempt to operate any pool hall, billiard
hall, or domino parlor without having first procured a license therefor, as
provided by this chapter, shall be punished by fine not to exceed five hundred
dollars ($500.00) plus court costs and penalties. (Ord. 454, 5-16-2000)
9-205: STATE LAWS APPLICABLE:
The owner, operator, or person in charge of any pool hall, billiard hall or
domino parlor is required to comply with all applicable requirements of the
state. (Ord. 102, 2-29-1940)
9-206: HOURS OF OPERATION:
It is unlawful for the owner, or operator of any pool hall, billiard hall or
domino parlor, or the persons in charge thereof to permit the same to remain
open after twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight. (Ord. 102, 2-29-1940)
CHAPTER 3
MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-301: Shooting galleries.
9-302: Fees for fortune telling prohibited.
9-303: Short weights and measures prohibited.
9-301: SHOOTING GALLERIES:
Every shooting gallery constructed, established, set up or operated hereafter
shall be constructed, established, set up and operated in accordance with the
standards, specifications and requirements of Sections 701 et seq. of Title 63
of the Oklahoma Statutes, and comply with all the requirements thereof. No
shooting gallery shall be operated until a license has been secured therefor in
accordance with this chapter. Any violation of any provision of this section or
of any provision of Section 701 et seq. of Title 63 of the Oklahoma Statutes
shall be deemed an offense against the city, and shall be punishable as such.
(Prior Code, Sec. 5-4)
9-302: FEES FOR FORTUNE TELLING PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person pretending or professing to tell fortunes by the
use of any subtle craft, means or device whatsoever, either by palmistry,
clairvoyance, or otherwise, plying his or her trade, art or profession, to make
any charge therefor either directly or indirectly or to receive any gift,
donation or subscription by any means whatsoever for the same. (Prior Code,
Sec. 5-5)
9-303: SHORT WEIGHTS AND MEASURES PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to sell, or offer for sale
any food, fuel, clothing or any other commodity which does not weigh or measure
fully as much, according to standard weights or measures of the state as the
weight or measure for which it is sold or offered for sale. (Prior Code, Sec.
5-6)
CHAPTER 4
MOTION PICTURE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-401: Admissibility Of Persons Under The Age Of Eighteen Years To "X" Or "R"
Rated Movie
9-402: Defense
9-403: Purchase Of Admission Tickets
9-404: Advertising
9-405: Penalty
9-401: ADMISSIBILITY OF PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF EIGHTEEN YEARS TO "X" OR "R"
RATED MOVIE:
   A.   Any person, natural, corporate or otherwise, who:
      1.   Exhibits a motion picture rated "X" or "R" by the Motion Picture
Association of America to any person under eighteen (18) years of age for
monetary consideration;
      2.   Sells to any person under eighteen (18) years of age an admission
ticket or pass to premises whereon there is exhibited or to be exhibited such
"X" or "R" rated motion picture, or show; or
      3.   Admits a person under eighteen (18) years of age for monetary
consideration to premises whereon there is exhibited or to be exhibited such
"X" or "R" rated motion picture or show,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor unless the person under eighteen (18) years is
accompanied by his or her parent, guardian, or spouse of eighteen (18) years or
older. (Ord. 237, 7-1-1980)
9-402: DEFENSE:
   A.   In any prosecution for violations of this chapter, it is affirmative
defense that:
      1.   The defendant had reason to believe that the person under eighteen
(18) years of age involved was eighteen (18) years old or more; and
      2.   Such a person under eighteen (18) years of age exhibited to the
defendant a draft card, driver's license, birth certificate or other, official
or apparently official document purporting to establish that such person under
eighteen (18) years of age was eighteen (18) years old or more. (Ord. 237, 7-1-
1980)
9-403: PURCHASE OF ADMISSION TICKETS:
It is unlawful for any person of less than eighteen (18) years of age to
purchase an admission ticket or pass to a motion picture or show which is rated
"X" or "R" by the Motion Picture Association of America. The display of a sign,
"This Motion Picture "X" Rated", or "This Motion Picture "R" Rated", or words
of similar import shall be admissible that the person of less than eighteen
(18) years of age knew or should have known of the character of the material
and of their duty to further inquire. It shall further be unlawful for any
person of less than eighteen (18) years of age to give his or her age falsely
as eighteen (18) years of age or over for the purpose of gaining admittance to
a motion picture or show rated "X" or "R" by the Motion Picture Association of
America. (Ord. 237, 7-1-1980)
9-404: ADVERTISING:
Any person, natural, corporate or otherwise, who exhibits a motion picture or
plans to exhibit a motion picture rated "X" or "R" by the Motion Picture
Association of America, and fails to include in such advertising, including
newspapers, pamphlets and advertisements or signs outside any movie theater the
fact that such motion picture is either "X" or "R" rated, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. (Ord. 237, 7-1-1980)
9-405: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation upon conviction of these sections in this
chapter shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars
($500.00) plus court costs and penalties. (Ord. 454, 5-16-2000)
CHAPTER 5
PENALTY
SECTION:
9-501: Penalty
9-501: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation who engages in any business, profession, trade
or occupation, or exercises any privilege, for which a license or permit is
required by this part without a valid license or permit as thereby required, or
who otherwise violates any provision of this part, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction, punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred
dollars ($500.00) plus court costs and penalties. (Ord. 454, 5-16-2000)
CHAPTER 6
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND OUTDOOR SELLERS
SECTION:
   Article A. In General
9-601: Use Of Public Way Prohibited
9-602: Pedestrians Prohibited From Stopping Vehicles In Streets Or Parks
9-603: Crying Wares Prohibited
9-604 through 9-615: Reserved
   Article B. Peddlers, Solicitors, Mobile Outdoor Sellers, And Outdoor Sellers
      Division 1. Generally
9-616: Definitions
9-617: Use Of Public Right-Of-Way; Prohibition
9-618: Hours Of Business
9-619: Peddlers, Solicitors, Mobile Outdoor Sellers, Outdoor Sellers Prohibited
From Entering Properties Posted
9-620: Exception
9-621: Penalty
9-622 through 9-630: Reserved
      Division 2. Permit
9-631: Permit Required
9-632: Application Procedure
9-633: Application/Investigation Fee
9-634: Review And Investigation; Issuance Or Denial
9-635: Appeal Of Disapproval Of Permit
9-636: Fees And Terms
9-637: Transfer Of Permit
9-638: Display
9-639: Revocation
9-640: Surrender Upon Expiration Or Revocation
9-641: Renewal Of Permit
9-642 through 9-654: Reserved
   Article C. Farmer's Market
      Division 1. Generally
9-655: Definitions
9-656: Use Of Public Right-Of-Way; Prohibition
9-657: Hours Of Business
9-658: Location
9-659: Exception
9-660: Penalty
9-661 through 9-669: Reserved
      Division 2. Permit
9-670: Permit Required
9-671: Application Procedure
9-672: Fees And Terms
9-673 through 9-681: Reserved
   Article D. Charitable Solicitations
      Division 1. Generally
9-682: Definitions
9-683: Reports
      Division 2. Permit
9-684: Permit Required
9-685: Application Required; Oath; Contents
9-686: Investigation And Approval Of Applications
9-687: Issuance; Filing Of Permit
9-688: Fee
9-689: Duration And Renewal
9-690: Permit Nontransferable
9-691: Revocation
9-692: Appeals
9-693: Exemption
9-694 through 9-699: Reserved
ARTICLE A. IN GENERAL
9-601: USE OF PUBLIC WAY PROHIBITED:
   A.   No person shall stand in or occupy any place in or upon any street
crossing, sidewalk or other public way other than places designated by the City
of Grove as marketplaces for the purpose of trading, selling, exhibiting or
vending any goods or merchandise.
   B.   The provisions of subsection A of this section shall not apply to:
      1.   Sales made by officers on execution or other judicial processes.
(Ord. 720, 4-5-2016)
9-602: PEDESTRIANS PROHIBITED FROM STOPPING VEHICLES IN STREETS OR PARKS:
No person shall stand in any street, roadway, or park and stop or attempt to
stop any person in any vehicle for the purpose of:
   A.   Selling or attempting to sell anything to any person in any vehicle;
   B.   Handing or attempting to hand any person in any vehicle any circular,
advertisement, handbill, political campaign literature, or any sample, souvenir
or gift;
   C.   Attempting to interfere with the normal flow of traffic for any other
similar purpose. (Ord. 720, 4-5-2016)
9-603: CRYING WARES PROHIBITED:
No person shall call attention to his business, or to the wares which he may
have for sale, by crying them out, by blowing a horn, by ringing a bell, or by
any other noisemaking device, except as specifically permitted by this Code. No
such person shall, by means of any dancing, singing, or other exhibition, call
about him upon the highways to numbers of people, or in any way interfere with
the free passage of pedestrians and vehicles along the highways. (Ord. 720, 4-
5-2016)
9-604 through 9-615: RESERVED:
(Ord. 720, 4-5-2016)
ARTICLE B. PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, MOBILE OUTDOOR SELLERS, AND OUTDOOR SELLERS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
9-616: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
EVENT COORDINATOR: Organizations or individuals who are hosting a for-profit
special event.
FOR-PROFIT SPECIAL EVENT: An organized event where more than one (1) peddler,
solicitor, mobile outdoor seller or outdoor sellers are offering for retail
sale or making retail sales of any goods, products, wares or merchandise for-
profit. The event shall be held at a designated location and only during dates
and times approved by the City of Grove.
LOCAL COMMUNITY ORGANIZATION: A local not-for-profit organization established
for the purpose of promoting tourism, festivals and activities within the City
of Grove.
LOCAL COMMUNITY SPECIAL EVENT: An event, festival or activities organized by a
local community organization. The event shall be held at a designated location
and only during dates and times approved by the City of Grove.
MOBILE OUTDOOR SELLER: Any person or group offering or exposing for retail sale
or making retail sales of any goods, products, wares or merchandise or other
property of any type from a mobile unit.
MOBILE UNIT: Any vehicle, trailer or structure designed and intended to be
mobile and move from place to place for the purpose of offering or exposing for
retail sales of any goods, products, wares or merchandise of any type.
OUTDOOR SELLER: Any person offering or exposing for retail sales or making
retail sales of, any goods, products, wares or merchandise or other property of
any type, at any fixed outdoor location; provided, however, that this
definition shall not include brick and mortar merchants who ordinarily and
regularly offer such items for retail sale located on the same premises.
PEDDLER: Any person who travels on foot or by any type of conveyance from place
to place, from house to house, or from street to street, carrying, conveying or
transporting goods, products, wares, merchandise or other property of any type,
and offering or exposing the same for retail sale, or making retail sales of
such articles to purchasers.
RETAIL SALE OR SALES: Any sale or sales transactions of goods, products, wares,
merchandise or other property of any type, except as made by a person engaged
in selling such property at wholesale to dealers in such property.
SOLICITOR: Any person who travels on foot or by any type of conveyance from
place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, taking or
attempting to take orders for the retail sale of goods, products, wares,
merchandise or other property of any type, for future delivery, or for services
to be furnished or performed in the future. (Ord. 720, 4-5-2016)
9-617: USE OF PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY; PROHIBITION:
No peddler, solicitor, mobile outdoor seller, or outdoor seller shall engage in
business within any portion of any public right-of-way, unless a designated
area is authorized by the City of Grove. (Ord. 720, 4-5-2016)
9-618: HOURS OF BUSINESS:
No peddler, solicitor, mobile outdoor seller, or outdoor seller shall conduct
business within any residential zoning districts, except between the hours of
nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) P.M. each day; provided,
however, that solicitations may be made where the person solicited has agreed
by previously arranged appointment of a time other than the prescribed hours.
The purpose of this restriction is to protect residents in the peaceable
possession of their homes and properties between the hours of six o'clock (6:
00) P.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. (Ord. 720, 4-5-2016)
9-619: PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, MOBILE OUTDOOR SELLERS, OUTDOOR SELLERS PROHIBITED
FROM ENTERING PROPERTIES POSTED:
No peddler, solicitor, mobile outdoor seller or outdoor seller shall enter any
premises or attempt to sell or solicit where the owner or occupant of such
premises has indicated his/her desire not to be contacted for sales or
solicitation by the placing of a "No Solicitors", "No Trespassers", "No
Trespassing" or similar sign on those premises, and any such entrance or
attempt to sell, peddle or solicit shall constitute a trespass upon private
property. (Ord. 720, 4-5-2016)
9-620: EXCEPTION:
The provisions of this article shall not apply to the following:
   A.   A peddler, solicitor, mobile outdoor seller, or outdoor seller
operating under the umbrella of a local community organization during a
permitted special event. The exception is limited to four (4) special events
per year. To be eligible for the exception the following is required:
      1.   The peddler, solicitor, mobile outdoor seller, or outdoor seller
must operate under the umbrella of a local community organization during a
special event scheduled by the organization.
      2.   The local community organization must submit a special event
application prior to each event (at no cost to the organization).
      3.   The local community organization shall display their special event
permit at all times during the event. If the permit is not displayed the
special event will be discontinued, and the local community organization may
receive a citation.
      4.   The local community organization shall submit a vendor special event
application for each vendor participating in the event.
      5.   The local community organization shall provide each vendor with an
identification tag showing they are a participant of the special event. Vendor
shall display the identification (ID) tag at all times during the event. If
vendor does not display ID tag, they will not be allowed to participate in the
special event, and may receive a citation.
      6.   The local community organization shall provide proof of ownership of
the property where the event will be held. If the organization does not own the
property, written permission to use the property from the owner shall be
submitted with the special event permit application.
   B.   A peddler, solicitor, mobile outdoor seller, or outdoor seller
participating in a for-profit special event that has been approved by the City
of Grove. The exception is limited for four (4) special events per year. To be
eligible for the exception the following is required:
      1.   The coordinator of the event must submit a special event application
prior to each event. Application fees are as follows:
 
1 - 20 vendors  $100.00 per event
21 - 40 vendors 200.00 per event
Over 40 vendors 300.00 per event
 
      2.   The event coordinator shall display their special event permit at
all times during the event. If the permit is not displayed the special event
will be discontinued, and the event coordinator may receive a citation.
      3.   The event coordinator shall submit a vendor special event
application for each vendor participating in the event.
      4.   The event coordinator shall provide each vendor with an
identification (ID) tag showing they are a participant in the special event.
Vendor shall display the ID tag at all times during the event. If vendor does
not display ID tag, they will not be allowed to participate in the special
event, and may receive a citation.
      5.   The event coordinator shall provide proof of ownership of the
property where the event will be held. If the coordinator does not own the
property written permission to use the property from the owner shall be
submitted with the special event permit application. (Ord. 720, 4-5-2016)
9-621: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall be subject to the
penalty listed in section
9-501 of this part. (Ord. 720, 4-5-2016)
9-622 through 9-630: RESERVED:
(Ord. 720, 4-5-2016)
DIVISION 2. PERMIT
9-631: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of peddler,
solicitor, mobile outdoor seller or outdoor seller within the corporate limits
of the City without first obtaining a permit from the City Clerk. (Ord. 720, 4-
5-2016)
9-632: APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
Applicants for a permit under this article shall file with the City Clerk a
verified application in writing on a form provided by the City Clerk, which
shall contain the applicant's following information:
   A.   Full name (including any alias or previously used names), description,
birth date and social security number;
   B.   Copy of photo ID;
   C.   Address both physical and mailing;
   D.   Local address if different than physical address;
   E.   A brief description of the business to be conducted, and the items to
be sold;
   F.   The time period the applicant desires to conduct business;
   G.   The license number and description of any vehicle to be used (if
applicable);
   H.   A verification that the applicant or the applicant's employer is a
vendor registered with the Oklahoma Tax Commission, or other proof that local
and State Sales Tax is being collected and paid on the items sold or to be
sold; or proof that the applicant or applicant's employer is exempt from the
payment of Sales Tax;
   I.   The content of any signs used, and proof a sign permit has been issued;
   J.   If employed by another, the name and address of the applicant's
employer, together with a brief description of credentials showing the exact
relationship;
   K.   A statement of whether the applicant has been convicted of a felony,
the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor.
(Ord. 720, 4-5-2016)
9-633: APPLICATION/INVESTIGATION FEE:
Any person making an application for a permit required by the provisions of
this article shall pay to the City Clerk an application/investigation fee in
the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00). The fee shall be for the purposes of
defraying the costs of processing the application and conducting an
investigation required by this article. No such fees shall be refundable. (Ord.
720, 4-5-2016)
9-634: REVIEW AND INVESTIGATION; ISSUANCE OR DENIAL:
   A.   Upon receipt of an application for a permit as required by section 9-
631 of this division, the City Clerk shall submit one (1) copy of the
application to the Chief of Police for review. The Chief of Police shall note
thereon any relevant information which appears in the official records in his/
her charge concerning any convictions of the applicant for any of the offenses
specified in subsection E1 of this section.
   B.   The City Clerk shall cause such other investigation or inquiry
concerning the applicant as deemed necessary to determine whether the
application is in compliance with the terms and conditions of this article and
other applicable provisions of this Code.
   C.   Upon completion of the necessary investigation as provided for by this
section, the City Clerk shall review the application to ensure that:
      1.   The applicant or the applicant's employer is a vendor registered
with the Oklahoma Tax Commission for the payment of Sales Tax, or that he has
otherwise demonstrated that Sales Tax has been or is being paid on the items
sold, or that the applicant or the applicant's employer is exempt from payment
of such tax;
      2.   The applicant or the applicant's employer is aware of his or her
responsibility to collect and pay Sales Tax, unless tax exempt;
      3.   The applicant's character or business responsibility is not
"unsatisfactory" (as described in subsection E of this section);
      4.   The applicant has been issued a sign permit, and the proposed signs
and locations thereof comply with all the provisions of the planning and zoning
ordinances of the City of Grove;
      5.   The applicant otherwise complies with all of the provisions of this
Code.
   D.   Within seven (7) business days after receipt of an application, the
City Clerk shall either approve or disapprove of the application. Grounds for
disapproval shall be the following:
      1.   A finding that the application is incomplete;
      2.   Nonpayment of the application fee and the investigation fee;
      3.   Failure of the applicant to verify that he/she, or his/her employer,
is a vendor registered with the Oklahoma Tax Commission for the payment of
Sales Tax; or that Sales Tax has been or is being paid on the items sold; or
that he/she, or his/her employer, is otherwise exempt from payment of Sales
Tax;
      4.   A finding that the applicant has not been issued a sign permit, and
signs and locations therefore are not in compliance with the planning and
zoning ordinances of the City of Grove;
      5.   A finding that the applicant's character or business responsibility
is "unsatisfactory" (as defined in subsection E of this section).
If the application is approved, the City Clerk shall issue the permit. If the
application is disapproved, the City Clerk shall state in writing and with
specificity, the reason(s) for disapproval. Mailing a copy of the letter of
disapproval to the address shown on the application shall be deemed to be
adequate notification.
   E.   For the purpose of this article, "unsatisfactory character or business
responsibility" of an applicant or applicant's employer shall be defined as
follows:
      1.   A finding that the applicant or applicant's employer has been
convicted of any of the following:
         a.   Murder;
         b.   Voluntary manslaughter;
         c.   Robbery;
         d.   Burglary;
         e.   Larceny;
         f.   Theft;
         g.   Fraud;
         h.   An offense involving moral turpitude;
         i.   Any nonconsensual sex offense;
         j.   Any offense involving a minor as a victim;
         k.   Any offense involving the possession, use, distribution or sale
of a controlled dangerous substance;
         l.   Any offense involving a firearm;
         m.   Any felony; or
      2.   A finding that the applicant or the applicant's employer has been
convicted of two (2) or more violations of the provisions of this article
within the preceding twelve (12) months; or
      3.   A finding that a previous permit held by the applicant or the
applicant's employer pursuant to the provisions of this article was revoked
within the previous twelve (12) months. (Ord. 720, 4-5-2016)
9-635: APPEAL OF DISAPPROVAL OF PERMIT:
An applicant who has been denied a permit under this article may appeal the
denial to the City Council. (Ord. 720, 4-5-2016)
9-636: FEES AND TERMS:
If an application is approved the permit shall be an additional fee of fifty
dollars ($50.00).
A permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article shall expire one (1)
year from the date of issuance, unless sooner revoked. (Ord. 720, 4-5-2016)
9-637: TRANSFER OF PERMIT:
No permit issued under the provisions of this article shall be used at any time
by any person other than the permittee to whom it was issued. (Ord. 720, 4-5-
2016)
9-638: DISPLAY:
Peddlers, solicitors, mobile outdoor sellers and outdoor sellers are hereby
required to exhibit and display their permit at all times whenever they are
engaged in peddling, soliciting or selling. (Ord. 720, 4-5-2016)
9-639: REVOCATION:
   A.   Permits issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked by
the City Clerk after written notice to the applicant of the intent to revoke,
and after a hearing at which the applicant shall be allowed to be present, to
be represented by counsel, to testify and present evidence on his/her own
behalf, and to confront and cross examine the witnesses against him/her.
Grounds for revocation shall be as follows:
      1.   Fraud, misrepresentation, or any false statement contained in the
application for the permit;
      2.   Conviction of the permittee for murder, voluntary manslaughter,
robbery or burglary;
      3.   Conviction of the permittee for two (2) or more violations of the
provisions of this article within the preceding twelve (12) months; or
      4.   A finding that the permittee has conducted the business for which
the permit was issued in an unlawful manner or in such manner as to constitute
a breach of the peace.
   B.   Notice of the proposed revocation of a permit shall be in writing,
setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint, and the date, time and
place for the revocation hearing. (Ord. 720, 4-5-2016)
9-640: SURRENDER UPON EXPIRATION OR REVOCATION:
When a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article expires, or is
revoked, its holder shall surrender it to the City Clerk and the permit shall
become the property of the City. (Ord. 720, 4-5-2016)
9-641: RENEWAL OF PERMIT:
The holder of any expiring permit issued under this article who desires a new
permit shall file a written application for renewal with the City Clerk. The
application for renewals shall contain the information required in section 9-
632 of this division, except, at the discretion of the City Clerk, a new photo
ID shall not be required if the existing photo ID continues to be a good
likeness of the applicant. The City Clerk, when determining whether to approve
or disapprove an application for a renewal of a permit, shall be guided by the
provisions of section 9-634 of this division. (Ord. 720, 4-5-2016)
9-642 through 9-654: RESERVED:
(Ord. 720, 4-5-2016)
ARTICLE C. FARMER'S MARKET
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
9-655: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
FARMER'S MARKET: A group of three (3) or more farmers, growers or producers
from the Craig, Delaware, Mayes or Ottawa County area that gather at one (1)
designated fixed site on a regularly scheduled basis to sell non-potentially
hazardous farm food products and whole shell eggs to the public. (Ord. 720, 4-
5-2016)
9-656: USE OF PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY; PROHIBITION:
No farmer's market shall engage in business within any portion of any public
right-of-way, unless a designated area is authorized by the City of Grove.
(Ord. 720, 4-5-2016)
9-657: HOURS OF BUSINESS:
Farmer's market shall conduct business only between the hours of eight o'clock
(8:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) P.M. each Wednesday and Saturday during the
growing season, unless operating during a local community organization special
event per section 9-659 of this division. (Ord. 720, 4-5-2016)
9-658: LOCATION:
The farmer's market shall conduct business only in an area designated by the
City of Grove, and shall not move from place to place. (Ord. 720, 4-5-2016)
9-959: EXCEPTION:
A farmer's market may operate without a permit under the umbrella of a local
community organization during a special event, only if:
   A.   The local community organization obtains a special event permit prior
to the event; and
   B.   The local community organization shall display their special event
permit at all times during the event. If the permit is not displayed the
special event will be discontinued, and the local community organization may
receive a citation; and
   C.   The local community organization submits a vendor special event
application for each vendor participating in the event; and
   D.   The local community organization provides each vendor with an
identification (ID) tag showing they are a participant in the special event.
Each vendor shall display the ID tag at all times during the event. If vendor
does not display ID tag, they will not be allowed to participate in the special
event, and may receive a citation. (Ord. 720, 4-5-2016)
9-660: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall be subject to the
penalty listed in section
9-501 of this part. (Ord. 720, 4-5-2016)
9-661 through 9-669: RESERVED:
(Ord. 720, 4-5-2016)
DIVISION 2. PERMIT
9-670: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any farmer's market to engage in business within the
corporate limits of the City without first obtaining a permit from the City
Clerk, unless otherwise allowed in this chapter. (Ord. 720, 4-5-2016)
9-671: APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
   A.   A representative of the farmer's market must submit a farmer's market
application.
   B.   Each participant shall submit a vendor application.
   C.   The representative shall provide each vendor with an identification
(ID) tag showing they are permitted to participate in the farmer's market. Each
vendor shall display the ID at all times during operating hours of the farmer's
market. If vendor does not display the ID tag, they will not be allowed to
participate in the farmer's market, and may receive a citation. (Ord. 720, 4-5-
2016)
9-672: FEES AND TERMS:
An annual fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be paid and will permit only the
vendors who have submitted a vendor application to participate in the farmer's
market. The permit is good for one (1) year, beginning July 1 and expiring June
30 of each year. (Ord. 720, 4-5-2016)
9-673 through 9-681: RESERVED:
(Ord. 720, 4-5-2016)
ARTICLE D. CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
9-682: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
CHARITABLE: Patriotic, philanthropic, religious, social service, welfare,
benevolent, educational, civic, or fraternal, either actual or purported.
COMMISSION: The Oklahoma State Tax Commission.
COST OF SOLICITATION: All costs of whatever nature incurred in raising the
funds solicited, except where a solicitation includes:
   A.   The sale of tickets for a show, benefit, dance, bazaar, raffle,
sporting or social event, or other event; or
   B.   The sale of a publication or advertising space in a publication; or
   C.   The sale of goods or commodities, the reasonable cost of giving or
holding the show, benefit, dance, bazaar, raffle, sporting or social event or
other similar event, or the reasonable costs of making or acquiring such
publication or such goods or commodities, but not including the costs of
selling the same.
Compensation in whatever form, paid to a professional promoter or professional
solicitor, is a part of the cost of solicitation, including the promoter's
charge for selling the tickets, advertising or goods or commodities.
PROFESSIONAL PROMOTER: A person who, for compensation, plans, promotes,
conducts, manages or carries on or attempts to plan, promote, conduct, manage
or carry on any drive or campaign for the purpose of charitable, educational,
religious, patriotic or philanthropic purpose, on the streets, in any office
building or business building, by house to house canvass, or in any other
public or private place, by telephone, by personal solicitation, by mail, or in
any other way, unless such person has first obtained a permit as provided for
in this article.
PROFESSIONAL SOLICITOR: A person other than a professional promoter who is
employed or retained for compensation to make solicitation or solicitations. A
bona fide officer or regular employee of a charitable organization shall not be
deemed a professional solicitor by reason of his participation in charitable
solicitations made by or on behalf of his employer.
SOLICIT AND SOLICITATIONS: The request, either directly or indirectly, for
money or financial assistance on the plea or representation that such money or
financial assistance will be used for a charitable purpose. Without limiting
the generality of the above, the words shall include the following methods of
securing money or financial assistance on the plea or representation that it
will be used for a charitable purpose:
   A.   Any oral or written request;
   B.   The distribution, circulation, mailing, posting, or publishing of any
handbills, written advertisement or publication;
   C.   The making of any announcement through the press, radio, television, or
by telephone or telegraph concerning an appeal, assembly, athletic or sporting
event, bazaar, benefit, campaign, contest, dance, dinner, entertainment,
exhibition, exposition, party, performance, picnic, sale, social gathering, or
similar events, which the general public is requested to patronize or to which
the general public is requested to make contribution;
   D.   The sale of, or the offer or attempt to sell, any advertisement,
advertising space, book, card, chance, coupon, device, magazine, membership,
subscription, ticket or other thing. A solicitation shall be deemed completed
when made, whether or not the person making the same receives any contribution
or makes any sale. (Ord. 438, 4-6-1999)
9-683: REPORTS:
   A.   Report Of Contributions Received; Expenses; Disbursal: Every person,
except as otherwise provided, soliciting any contribution for any charitable
purpose shall file with the Supervisor of Licenses within thirty (30) days
after the close of any solicitation or within thirty (30) days after a demand
therefor by the Supervisor of Licenses, a report of the Supervisor of Licenses
stating the contributions secured from or as a result of any solicitation. The
report shall also include in detail all expenses of or connected with such
solicitation, showing exactly for what uses and in what manner all such
contributions were or are to be disbursed or distributed.
   B.   Forms To Be Supplied By Supervisor Of Licenses; Signatures Required;
Who Must File: Such report shall be on forms to be furnished by the Supervisor
of Licenses and signed by the persons or association filing or obligated to
file for a permit, and the report, if made by any association, shall be signed
by at least two (2) officers thereof. When any solicitation is made by an
association, the report need be filed only by the association and not by any
individual solicitor engaged in the solicitation.
   C.   Reports Of Charitable Solicitation Permittee: The City Manager may
require from any permittee, under this Article any additional reports or
information at any time and at such intervals as in the discretion of the City
Manager shall be necessary for the successful administration of the provisions
of this Article and the protection of health, life, and property of citizens.
(Ord. 438, 4-6-1999)
DIVISION 2. PERMIT
9-684: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person or organization shall directly or indirectly solicit money, donations
of money, property or financial assistance of any kind or sell or offer to sell
any article, tag, service, emblem, publication, ticket, advertisement,
subscription, or anything of value, on the plea or the representation that the
sale or solicitation or the proceeds thereof are for a charitable, educational,
religious, patriotic or philanthropic purpose, on the streets, in any office
building or business building, by house-to-house canvass, or in any other
public or private place, by telephone, personal solicitation, by mail, or in
any other way, unless such person or organization has first obtained a permit
from the Supervisor of Licenses. (Ord. 438, 4-6-1999)
9-685: APPLICATION REQUIRED; OATH; CONTENTS:
A written application for a permit required by the provisions of this Article
shall be subscribed and sworn to by the president or other chief officer of the
organization making the application and filed with the Supervisor of Licenses
fifteen (15) days prior to the time when a permit is desired. The application
shall contain the information required by 18 Oklahoma Statutes section 552.3,
as amended, and may be a duplicate of the information provided to the Oklahoma
Tax Commission. (Ord. 438, 4-6-1999)
9-686: INVESTIGATION AND APPROVAL OF APPLICATIONS:
   A.   Supervisor Of Licenses To Make Investigations: Upon receipt of an
application, the Supervisor of Licenses, or his designee, shall make, or cause
to be made, any investigation the Supervisor shall deem necessary in order to
ensure that the terms and provisions of this Chapter are met.
   B.   Conditions Of Approval: The Supervisor of Licenses, or his designee,
shall approve an application if the Supervisor is satisfied that the
solicitation is not promoted or conducted primarily for the private profit of
its promoters; that the applicant is in good standing as a charitable
organization with the Oklahoma Tax Commission; and that the solicitation will
not be incompatible with the protection of health, life, and property of the
citizens. (Ord. 438, 4-6-1999)
9-687: ISSUANCE; FILING OF PERMIT:
   A.   Upon payment by the applicant of the required permit fee and after the
Supervisor of Licenses has approved the application, the Supervisor shall issue
a permit to the applicant for the period designated in the notification.
   B.   Upon receiving the permit, the applicant shall, within forty eight (48)
hours of such receipt, provide a copy of the permit to the Better Business
Bureau of Central Oklahoma. (Ord. 438, 4-6-1999)
9-688: FEE:
A nonrefundable fee in the amount of twenty five dollars ($25.00) shall be paid
to the City Clerk for each charitable solicitations permit applied for. (Ord.
438, 4-6-1999)
9-689: DURATION AND RENEWAL:
   A.   Duration Of Permit: The Supervisor of Licenses shall determine from the
application submitted pursuant to the provisions of this Article and from such
facts as may be developed in connection with the application, the period for
which the permit shall be approved, provided that the period shall not exceed
three (3) calendar months.
   B.   Renewal Of Permit: The Supervisor of Licenses, upon the receipt of such
further information, application or reports as he may deem necessary to
safeguard the interests of the public and carry out the purposes of this
Chapter, may renew and extend a permit for additional periods, none of which
shall exceed three (3) months. (Ord. 438, 4-6-1999)
9-690: PERMIT NONTRANSFERABLE:
Any permit issued under this Article shall be nontransferable. This Section
shall not prevent any permittee from using any number of solicitors and
representatives as may be reported to the Supervisor of Licenses. (Ord. 438, 4-
6-1999)
9-691: REVOCATION:
   A.   Conditions For Revocation Of Charitable Solicitation Permit: The City
Manager or his designee may revoke any permit if upon receipt of written
information, or upon on his own investigation, he finds that any agent or
representative of the permittee is misrepresenting or making untrue statements
with regard to the solicitation, or has made untrue statements in the
application, or is representing that any permit granted hereunder is an
endorsement of such solicitation.
   B.   Notice And Hearing Prior To Revocation: Before any permit is revoked,
the City Manager, or his designee, shall give the permittee not less than
twenty four (24) hours' notice in writing that a hearing is to be had, the
charges giving rise to the hearing, and that at the hearing the City Manager or
his designee shall ascertain the facts and, if any reasons for revoking the
permit are found to exist, that the permit shall be revoked. (Ord. 438, 4-6-
1999)
9-692: APPEALS:
Any appeal may be taken from any act of the City Manager or his designee, in
granting, refusing, or revoking any permit under this Division, to the City
Council within ten (10) days after the act of the City Manager which is the
subject of the appeal. Said appeal must be in writing and delivered to the City
Clerk within said ten (10) days. (Ord. 438, 4-6-1999)
9-693: EXEMPTION:
The provisions of this Article shall not apply to any established society,
labor union, association, or corporation except that such society, labor union,
association, or corporation must have a permit with no fee for such permit:
   A.   Organized and operated exclusively for religious, educational,
philanthropic, benevolent, fraternal, charitable or reformatory purposes and
not operated for pecuniary profit;
   B.   Where no part of the net earnings inures to the benefit of any person;
   C.   Where the solicitation of the organization shall be conducted among the
members by other members or officers, voluntarily and without remuneration for
the solicitations;
   D.   When the solicitation may be in the form of collections or
contributions at the regular exercises or services of any church, religious
society, lodge, benevolent order or fraternity or similar organization, or any
branch thereof. (Ord. 438, 4-6-1999)
9-694 through 9-699: RESERVED:
(Ord. 438, 4-6-1999)
CHAPTER 7
GARAGE SALES
SECTION:
9-701: Definitions.
9-702: Permits and fees.
9-703: Licensing.
9-704: Information to be filed.
9-705: Persons and sale excepted.
9-706: Penalty.
9-701: DEFINITIONS:
   A.   Garage sales shall mean and include all sales entitled "garage sales,"
"lawn sales," "attic sales," "rummage sales," "flea market sales," or any other
similar casual sale of tangible personal property which is advertised by any
means whereby the public at large is or can be made aware of the sale.
Advertisement shall include any and all written or oral notification that might
be received by three (3) or more persons at any one time, and shall include
display of merchandise to the public.
   B.   Goods are meant to include any goods, warehouse merchandise, or other
property capable of being the object of a sale regulated hereunder.
   C.   Person shall mean and include individuals, households, families,
partnerships, voluntary associations and corporations. (Ord. No. 338, 5/16/89)
9-702: PERMITS AND FEES:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a garage sale in the
city without first filing with the city clerk the information hereinafter
specified and obtaining from such clerk a license to do so, to be known as a
"garage sale license". There shall be a Three Dollar ($3.00) fee for the
license required herein.
   B.   All churches and non-profit organizations shall be exempt from paying
any fee for the license required herein. (Ord. No. 338, 5/16/89; Ord. No. 340,
8/1/89)
9-703: LICENSING:
   A.   Such license shall be issued to any one person or household at any one
address only four (4) times within a twelve (12) month period and no such
license shall be issued for more than four (4) consecutive calendar days.
   B.   Each license issued under this chapter must be prominently displayed on
the premises upon which the garage sale is conducted throughout the entire
period of the licensed sale. (Ord. No. 338, 5/16/89)
9-704: INFORMATION TO BE FILED:
The information to be filed with the city clerk, pursuant to this chapter,
shall be as follows:
      1.   Name of person, firm, group, corporation, association, or
organization conducting the sale;
      2.   Name of owner of the property on which the sale is to be conducted,
and consent of owner if applicant is other than the owner;
      3.   Location at which sale is to be conducted;
      4.   Number of days of sale;
      5.   Date, nature of any past sale;
      6.   Relationship or connection applicant may have had with any other
person, firm, group, organization, association, or corporation conducting the
sale and the date, or dates, of such sale;
      7.   Whether or not applicant has been issued any other vendor's license
by any local, state or federal agency; and
      8.   Sworn statement of affirmation by the person signing that the
information given is full and true and known to him to be so.
(Ord. No. 338, 5/16/89)
9-705: PERSONS AND SALE EXCEPTED:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or affect the following
persons or sales:
      1.   Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction;
      2.   Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials; or
      3.   Any person selling or advertising for sale an item or items of
personal property which are specifically named or designated in the
advertisement and which separate items do not exceed five (5) in number.
(Ord. No. 338, 5/16/89)
9-706: PENALTY:
Any person, association or corporation conducting any such sale without first
being properly licensed therefore or. who shall violate any of the other terms
and regulations of this chapter, shall, upon conviction be punished as provided
by a fine of not less than Ten Dollars ($10.00) nor more than Two Hundred
Dollars ($200.00) plus court costs. (Ord. No. 338, 5/16/89)
CHAPTER 8
TAXICABS
SECTION:
9-801: Definitions
9-802: License And Insurance Requirements
9-803: License Application And Licensing Fee
9-804: Rates To Be Posted
9-805: Taxicab Seating Capacity
9-806: Drivers To Be Employees And Agents Of Owners
9-807: Revocation Of Vehicle License; Appeals
9-808: Cruising
9-809: Soliciting Passengers
9-810: Stopping, Loading And Unloading
9-811: City Held Harmless From Damages
9-801: DEFINITIONS:
A "taxicab", for the purpose of this chapter, is any motor vehicle or other
vehicle used for the transportation of passengers for hire within the city by
means of automobile, taxicab, bus, hack, truck, van, SUV, baggage wagon or
other motor or horsedrawn vehicle, but not on regular or designated route.
Specifically excluded from the definition of "taxicab" is the Pelivan Transit
service, and the Grove grand trolley system. Any person or persons, or any
entity, operating a taxicab in the city shall be deemed a "taxicab service" or
"taxicab service provider" for the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 523, 9-21-
2004)
9-802: LICENSE AND INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
It is unlawful for any taxicab service to operate or cause to be operated a
taxicab in the city without first having obtained from the city a license as
herein provided for. All taxicab service providers shall also carry a policy of
insurance covering property damage and personal injuries in an amount required
by the laws of this state; provided, however, no policy shall be in an amount
less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for bodily injury and/or
property damage, per person, with three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00)
in coverage per occurrence; or alternatively a three hundred thousand dollar
($300,000.00) single limit policy covering bodily injuries and property damage.
(Ord. 523, 9-21-2004)
9-803: LICENSE APPLICATION AND LICENSING FEE:
All taxicab service providers operating in the city shall submit for the city's
review proof of insurance and an application for a taxicab license giving the
name and business address of the applicant, together with the approximate
number of vehicles proposed to be operated and such other information as the
council may require. Upon submission of the foregoing information, as well as
payment of the licensing fee, the city clerk shall issue a license to the
applicant which shall allow the taxicab service to operate within the city for
one year. The licensing fee shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) per year,
per taxicab service. (Ord. 523, 9-21-2004)
9-804: RATES TO BE POSTED:
   A.   Every taxicab operating under the provisions of this chapter in the
city shall have at all times posted in some conspicuous place in such taxicab,
the maximum rates to be charged for services and transportation of passengers,
and a copy of the rates shall also be filed with the city clerk.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the legal fare of any
taxicab after having hired the same. It is unlawful for a person to hire a
taxicab with the intent to defraud the taxicab service provider of the value of
such service. (Ord. 523, 9-21-2004)
9-805: TAXICAB SEATING CAPACITY:
No more than three (3) persons, including the driver, shall be permitted to be
seated in the front seat of any taxicab, and not more than four (4) persons
shall be seated in the rear seat of the taxicab. All passengers riding in the
vehicle must be seated at all times. (Ord. 523, 9-21-2004)
9-806: DRIVERS TO BE EMPLOYEES AND AGENTS OF OWNERS:
The owner of any taxicab licensed under the provisions of this chapter may
employ a driver for the same, but such driver shall in all respects be the
employee and/or agent of the owner of the taxicab in operating the same, and
all taxicab drivers shall apply for and receive all the proper permits and
licenses required by law before operating a taxicab. (Ord. 523, 9-21-2004)
9-807: REVOCATION OF VEHICLE LICENSE; APPEALS:
   A.   The license for any taxicab service to operate as a service for hire in
the city may be revoked by the city manager for the following reasons:
      1.   For failure of a driver to be properly licensed, as provided by the
provisions of this chapter or applicable Oklahoma state law;
      2.   If any vehicle is found to be unsuitable to be operated on the roads
of the state of Oklahoma, or the city, unless repairs are made sufficient to
cure same within ten (10) days with the taxicab being held out of service
during the repair time, and if repairs are made, proof of same must be
submitted to the city for review and inspection;
      3.   Whenever it shall appear upon investigation by the city manager that
the license issued hereunder has been obtained by misrepresentation, or that
the owner has permitted such vehicle to be used for immoral purposes, or that a
vehicle operated by the taxicab service has become unsafe for transportation of
persons;
      4.   For any other violation of this chapter, or a violation of this code
or laws of the state of Oklahoma if such violation causes a risk to the public
health, welfare or safety.
   B.   The taxicab service provider may file an appeal corresponding any
revocation with the city council, which appeal must be filed within ten (10)
days of the revocation or such appeal right shall be deemed to have expired. If
an appeal is filed, the city council shall set and hold a public hearing on the
matter within thirty (30) days of receiving notice of the appeal, or as soon as
possible if not set within thirty (30) days. The revocation shall remain in
place pending the appeal.
   C.   The final revocation of a license shall operate to revoke the right of
the taxicab service to operate within the city. When a license has been revoked
no license shall thereafter be issued to such owners or any related entity for
a period of twelve (12) months. (Ord. 523, 9-21-2004)
9-808: CRUISING:
No driver or owner of a taxicab shall seek employment by repeatedly or
persistently driving his or her vehicle to and from in a short space or passing
and repassing in front of any theater, hall, hotel, bus station, store or other
place of public gathering, or in any manner obstruct or impede traffic, or
cruise through the city in general for the purpose of picking up passengers.
(Ord. 523, 9-21-2004)
9-809: SOLICITING PASSENGERS:
No person at any city passenger station or place used by any vehicle for hire
for soliciting or delivering or for the transferring of passengers, nor any
taxicab owner or driver, shall solicit any transportation business (for either
passenger or property) by any loud noises of voice, instrument or other means.
Such sound shall be deemed loud and unlawful within the meaning of this chapter
when it may be heard for a greater distance than the voice of one speaking in
an ordinary conversational tone and manner. Neither shall such person intervene
with, molest or intimidate any person by any act or unusual persuasion in
soliciting such transportation of either person or property. (Ord. 523, 9-21-
2004)
9-810: STOPPING, LOADING AND UNLOADING:
Taxicabs shall make stops to discharge and take on passengers on the near side
of the street intersections, leaving the crosswalks open, and shall pull up as
close as possible to the curb to make all such stops. Taxicabs may not receive
or discharge passengers while in motion. Taxicabs shall not stand a longer time
than necessary to take on and discharge passengers, and except in an emergency,
shall not stand or remain situated more than two (2) minutes at any one place
on the streets and roads in the city. (Ord. 523, 9-21-2004)
9-811: CITY HELD HARMLESS FROM DAMAGES:
All taxicab service providers, owners and drivers shall save and hold harmless
the city from any and all damages (whether bodily injury or property damages)
incident with or in relation to the operation of a taxicab in the city, and in
addition to any damages stemming from an appeal taken pursuant to section
9-807 of this chapter. (Ord. 523, 9-21-2004)
CHAPTER 9
MOBILE FOOD UNITS
ARTICLE A. MOBILE FOOD UNITS
SECTION:
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
9-901: Definitions
9-902: Use Of Public Right-Of-Way Prohibited
9-903: Location
9-904: Time Limits
9-905: Inspection
9-906: Condition Of Unit
9-907: Trash
9-908: Signs
9-909 through 9-915: Reserved
DIVISION 2. PERMIT
9-916: Permit Required
9-917: Application Procedures
9-918: Application Fee
9-919: Review And Investigation; Issuance Or Denial
9-920: Appeal Of Denied Permit
9-921: Permit Fee
9-922: Transfer Of Permit Is Prohibited
9-923: Display
9-924: Revocation
9-925: Surrender Upon Expiration Or Revocation
9-926: Renewal Of Permit
9-927: Penalty
9-928 through 9-930: Reserved
DIVISION 3. MOBILE FOOD UNIT COURTS
9-931: Site Plan Required
9-932: Location
9-933: Permits
9-934: Transfer Of Permit Is Prohibited
9-935: Display
9-936: Operating Requirements
9-937: Revocation
9-938: Surrender Upon Expiration Or Revocation
9-939: Penalty
9-940 through 9-960: Reserved
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
9-901: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
 
                            A vehicle or trailer that is approved to be road
MOBILE FOOD UNIT:           worthy by the Oklahoma Department of Transportation
                            and is used to prepare and sell food to consumers.
                            The unit is readily moveable.
                            Any location within private property, primarily
MOBILE FOOD UNIT COURT:     engaged in providing an area for Mobile Food Units
                            to park on a permanent, continual basis.
                            The owner of the property where the Mobile Food
MOBILE FOOD COURT OPERATOR: Unit Court is located, or his/her authorized
                            designee.
                            Any street or highway and property adjacent to
                            streets and highways which is dedicated to public
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY:        use including bridge, alley and sidewalk over which
                            the Federal, State or local government exercises
                            control and dominion. (Ord. 781, 11-19-2019)
 
9-902: USE OF PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY IS PROHIBITED:
No Mobile Food Unit shall engage in business within any portion of any public
right-of-way, unless a designated area is authorized by the City of Grove.
(Ord. 781, 11-19-2019)
9-903: LOCATION:
   A.   Mobile Food Unit shall only conduct business on private property in a
Commercial or Industrial Zoned District with permission from the property
owner. Conducting business in any other district shall be prohibited unless it
is in a location approved by the city for an special event or celebration.
   B.   Mobile Food Unit shall not be located in any area that will impede the
normal flow of traffic or constitute a traffic hazard.
   C.   Special events and celebrations are by invitation only; Mobile Food
Units are prohibited from participating in such events without the permission
of the organizer, and may require additional permit fees.
   D.   No Mobile Food Unit shall enter any premises or attempt to sell or
solicit where the owner of occupant of such premises has indicated his/her
desire not to be contacted for sales or solicitation by the placing of a ‘No
Solicitors’, ‘No Trespassers’, ‘No Trespassing’ or similar sign on those
premises, and any such entrance or attempt to sell or solicit shall constitute
trespassing upon private property. (Ord. 781, 11-19-2019)
9-904: TIME LIMITS:
Mobile Food Unit shall remain at one physical location for no more than twelve
hours per day; or may operate and remain stationary only in conjunction with a
single event or celebration approved by the City. (Ord. 781, 11-19-2019)
9-905: INSPECTION:
Every Mobile Food Unit shall be inspected by the Delaware County Health
Department and shall meet the regulations as established in the State of
Oklahoma Mobile Food Establishment Guide prior to operations. Additional
inspections may be made by the city as often as needed to ensure compliance. A
minimum of three-day notice will be provided by the city prior to inspection.
Refusal of inspection shall constitute grounds for suspension or revocation of
license issued. (Ord. 781, 11-19-2019)
9-906: CONDITIONS OF UNIT:
Each unit shall be kept well painted, in good repair, in good sanitary
condition, and shall not be used for any other purposes. The name of the
business shall be on the outside of the unit. (Ord. 781, 11-19-2019)
9-907: TRASH:
It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to provide an adequate amount
of trash containers at the location site to prevent blowing or spilling of
trash. All trash shall be removed from the premises prior to vacating the site.
Failure to remove trash may result in the permittee being cited for littering.
(Ord. 781, 11-19-2019)
9-908: SIGNS:
A Sign Permit must be obtained from the city prior to placement of any sign(s)
advertising the food truck and/or its menu. (Ord. 781, 11-19-2019)
9-909: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall be subject to the
penalty listed in section
9-501 of this part, up to and including revocation of permit. (Ord. 781, 11-19-
2019)
9-910 through 9-915: RESERVED
DIVISION 2. PERMIT
9-916: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business of a Mobile Food Unit
within the corporate limits of the City without first obtaining a permit from
the City Clerk. (Ord. 781, 11-19-2019)
9-917: APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
Any person desiring to engage in business of a Mobile Food Unit shall submit a
written application form provided by the City Clerk which shall contain the
following information:
   A.   Full name (including any alias or previously used names), description,
birth date and social security number;
   B.   Copy of photo ID;
   C.   Address both physical and mailing;
   D.   Local address if different than physical address;
   E.   A description in detail of the Mobile Food Unit, and license number;
   F.   Copy of a current and valid permit issued by the Oklahoma State
Department of Health;
   G.   A verification the applicant is registered with the Oklahoma Tax
Commission, or other proof that local and state sales tax is being collected
and paid on items sold or to be sold; or proof that the applicant is exempt
from the payment of sales tax;
   H.   The time period the applicant desires to conduct business;
   I.   The kind, type and quantities of food products proposed to be kept at,
served or sold from the unit;
   J.   The content and type of any signs used, and proof a sign permit has
been issued;
   K.   A statement of whether the applicant has been convicted or a felony,
the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor.
(Ord. 781, 11-19-2019)
9-918: APPLICATION FEE:
Any person making an application for a permit required by the provisions of
this article shall pay to the City Clerk an application fee in the amount of
fifty dollars ($50.00). The fee shall be for the purposes of defraying the
costs of processing the application and conducting an investigation required by
this article. No such fees shall be refundable. (Ord. 781, 11-19-2019)
9-919: REVIEW AND INVESTIGATION; ISSUANCE OR DENIAL:
   A.   Upon receipt of an application for a permit as required by section 9-
716 of this division, the City Clerk shall submit one (1) copy of the
application to the Chief of Police for review. The Chief of Police shall note
thereon any relevant information which appears in the official records in his/
her charge concerning any convictions of the applicant for any of the offenses
specified in subsection E.1. of this section.
   B   The City Clerk shall cause such other investigation or inquiry
concerning the applicant as deemed necessary to determine whether the
application is in compliance with the terms and conditions of this article and
other applicable provisions of this Code.
   C.   Upon completion of the necessary investigation as provided for by this
section the City Clerk shall review the application to ensure that:
      1.   The applicant is a vendor registered with the Oklahoma Tax
Commission for the payment of Sales Tax, or that he has otherwise demonstrated
that Sales Tax has been or is being paid on the items sold or that the
applicant is exempt from payment of such tax;
      2.   The applicant is aware of his or her responsibility to collect and
pay Sales Tax, unless tax exempt;
      3.   The applicant’s character or business responsibility is not
“unsatisfactory” (as described in Subsection E. of this section);
      4.   The applicant has been issued a sign permit, and the proposed signs
and locations thereof comply with the provisions of this Code.
   D.   With seven (7) business days after receipt of an application, the City
Clerk shall either approve or disapprove the application. Grounds for
disapproval shall be the following:
      1.   A finding that the applicant is incomplete;
      2.   Nonpayment of the application fee and the investigation fee;
      3.   Failure of the applicant to verify that he/she is a vendor
registered with the Oklahoma Tax Commission for the payment of Sales Tax; or
the Sales Tax has been or is being paid on the items sold; or that he/she is
otherwise exempt from payment of Sales Tax.
      4.   A finding that the applicant has not been issued a sign permit, and
signs and locations therefore are not in compliance with the planning and
zoning ordinances of the City of Grove;
      5.   A finding that the applicant’s character or business responsibility
is “unsatisfactory” (as defined in subsection E of this section).
      If the application is approved, the City Clerk shall issue a permit. If
the application is disapproved, the City Clerk shall state in writing and with
specificity, the reason(s) for disapproval. Mailing a copy of the letter of
disapproval to the address show on the application shall be deemed to adequate
notification.
   E.   For the purpose of this article, “unsatisfactory character or business
responsibility” of an applicant shall be defined as follows:
      1.   A finding that the applicant has been convicted of any of the
following:
         a.   Murder;
         b.   Voluntary manslaughter;
         c.   Robbery;
         d.   Burglary;
         e.   Larceny;
         f.   Theft;
         g.   Fraud;
         h.   An offense involving moral turpitude;
         i.   Any nonconsensual sex offense;
         j.   Any offense involving a minor as a victim;
         k.   Any offense involving the possession, use, distribution or sale
of a controlled dangerous substance;
         l.   Any offense involving a firearm;
         m.   Any felony, or
      2.   A finding that the applicant has been convicted of two (2) or more
violations of the provisions of this article within the preceding twelve (12)
months; or
      3.   A finding that a previous permit held by the applicant pursuant to
the provisions of this article was revoked within the previous twelve (12)
months. (Ord. 781, 11-19-2019)
9-920: APPEAL OF DISAPPROVE OF PERMIT:
An application who has been denied a permit under this article may appeal the
denial to the City Council. (Ord. 781, 11-19-2019)
9-921: FEES AND TERMS:
If an application is approved, the Permit Fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00).
A permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be renewed
July 1 of each year thereafter pursuant to Section 9-726, unless sooner
revoked. (Ord. 781, 11-19-2019)
9-922: TRANSFER OF PERMIT:
No permit issued under the provisions of this article shall be used at any time
by any person other than the permittee to whom it was issued. (Ord. 781, 11-19-
2019)
9-923: DISPLAY:
The permit shall be displayed on the Mobile Food Unit at all times during
operation. (Ord. 781, 11-19-2019)
9-924: REVOCATION:
   A.   Permits issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked by
the City Clerk after written notice to the applicant of the intent to revoke,
and after a hearing at which the applicant shall be allowed to be present, to
be represented by counsel, to testify and present evidence on his/her own
behalf, and to confront and cross examine the witnesses against him/her.
Grounds for revocation shall be as follows:
      1.   Fraud, misrepresentation, or any false statement contained in the
application for the permit;
      2.   Conviction of the permittee for murder, voluntary manslaughter,
robbery or burglary;
      3.   Conviction of the permittee for two (2) or more violations of the
provisions of this article within the preceding twelve (12) months; or
      4.   A finding that the permittee has conducted the business for which
the permit was issued in an unlawful manner as to constitute a breach of the
peace.
      5.   Two (2) or more complaints of trespassing and/or locating on
property without the owner’s permission.
   B.   Notice of the proposed revocation of a permit shall be in writing,
setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint, and the date, time and
place for the revocation hearing. (Ord. 781, 11-19-2019)
9-925: SURRENDER UPON EXPIRATION OR REVOCATION:
When a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article expires, or is
revoked, its holder shall surrender it to the City Clerk and the permit shall
become the property of the City. (Ord. 781, 11-19-2019)
9-926: RENEWAL OF PERMIT:
The holder of any expiring permit issued under this article who desires a new
permit shall file a written application for renewal with the City Clerk. The
application for renewals shall contain the information required in section 9-
717 of this division, except, at the discretion of the City Clerk, a new photo
ID shall not be required if the existing photo ID continues to be a good
likeness of the applicant. The City Clerk, when determining whether to approve
or disapprove an application for a renewal of a permit, shall be guided by the
provisions of section 9-719 of this division. (Ord. 781, 11-19-2019)
9-927: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall be subject to the
penalty listed in section
9-501 of this part. (Ord. 781, 11-19-2019)
9-928 through 9-930: RESERVED
DIVISION 3. MOBILE FOOD UNIT COURTS
9-931: SITE PLAN:
Any person desiring to establish, maintain or operate a Mobile Food Unit Court
shall submit a written site plan application and required documentation to the
Planning & Zoning Commission for consideration. In addition to all the Site
Plan required documents, the plan shall include:
   A.   A temporary solid waste management plan that will be implemented during
the first year of operations;
   B.   A permanent solid waste management plan that shall be implemented after
the first year of operations;
   C.   Temporary toilet facilities plan that will be implemented during the
first year of operations;
   D.   Permanent toilet facilities plan that will be implemented after the
first year of operations;
   E.   Off-Street Parking. (Ord. 781, 11-19-2019)
9-932: LOCATION:
Mobile Food Unit Courts may only be located in C-3 Highway Commercial and
Commercial Recreation Zoned Districts. Mobile Food Unit Courts are prohibited
from locating in any other zoning district. (Ord. 781, 11-19-2019)
9-933: PERMITS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to begin construction of a Mobile
Food Unit Court within the corporate limits of the City of Grove without first
obtaining the required construction permits; and
   B.   It shall be unlawful to engage in business of a Mobile Food Unit Court
within the corporate limits of the City without first obtaining a permit from
the City Clerk. Such permit shall be renewed July 1 of each year thereafter.
(Ord. 781, 11-19-2019)
9-934: TRANSFER OF PERMIT:
No permit issued under the provisions of this article shall be used at any time
by any person other than the permittee to whom it was issued. (Ord. 781, 11-19-
2019)
9-935: DISPLAY:
The permit shall be displayed in a conspicuous place at the Mobile Food Unit
Court at all times during operation. (Ord. 781, 11-19-2019)
9-936: OPERATING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The Mobile Food Unit Court must have adequate trash receptacles to
prevent spillage, overflowing of containers and blowing of trash;
   B.   The Mobile Food Unit Court must have an approved toilet facility
available onsite during all hours of operations; portable facilities will be
allowed for the first one-year of operations, after one-year an approved
permanent facility shall be constructed;
   C.   The area the Mobile Food Units are parked on must be hard surfaced with
concrete or asphalt;
   D.   A solid waste management plan must be in place for the Mobile Food Unit
Court;
   E.   Mobile Food Units shall not be permitted to dispose of wastewater and/
or grease cleanouts at the Mobile Food Unit Court site unless approved potable
water and wastewater hook-ups and grease cleanout containers are available.
   F.   Only Mobile Food Units that are permitted through the city are allowed
to locate in the Mobile Food Unit Court, it is the responsibility of the Mobile
Food Court Operator to ensure that only city permitted units are located in the
Mobile Food Unit Court;
   G.   Court operator shall obtain copies of all participating Mobile Food
Units local, county and state permits/licenses, and such records may be subject
to the Health Department review;
   H.   Mobile Food Units must display current valid local, county and state
permits/licenses.
   I.   Mobile Food Units must comply with the all city codes. (Ord. 781, 11-
19-2019)
9-937: REVOCATION:
Permits issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked by the City
Clerk after written notice to the applicant of the intent to revoke, and after
a hearing at which the applicant shall be allowed to be present, to be
represented by counsel, to testify and present evidence on his/her own behalf,
and to confront and cross examine the witnesses against him/her. Grounds for
revocation shall be as follows:
   A.   Fraud, misrepresentation, or any false statement contained in the
application for the permit;
   B.   Conviction of the permittee for murder, voluntary manslaughter, robbery
or burglary;
   C.   Conviction of the permittee for two (2) or more violations of the
provisions of this article within the preceding twelve (12) months; or
   D.   A finding that the permittee has conducted the business for which the
permit was issue in an unlawful manner as to constitute a breach of the peace.
   E.   Notice of the proposed revocation of a permit shall be in writing,
setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint, and the date, time and
place for the revocation hearing. (Ord. 781, 11-19-2019)
9-938: SURRENDER UPON EXPIRATION OR REVOCATION:
When a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article expires, or is
revoked, its holder shall surrender it to the City Clerk and the permit shall
become the property of the City. (Ord. 781, 11-19-2019)
9-939: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall be subject to the
penalty listed in section 9-501 of this part. (Ord. 781, 11-19-2019)
9-940 through 9-960: RESERVED
PART 10
OFFENSES AND CRIMES
CHAPTER 1
OFFENSES IN GENERAL
SECTION:
10-101: Attempts To Commit An Offense
10-102: Aiding In An Offense
10-103: Parent Causing Delinquency Of A Minor
10-104: Other Persons Aiding In Delinquency Of A Minor
10-105: School Attendance Requirements For Minors And Penalties For Violations
10-101: ATTEMPTS TO COMMIT AN OFFENSE:
Every person who attempts to commit an offense against the ordinances of the
City, and in such attempt does any act toward the commission of such offense,
but fails or is prevented or intercepted in the perpetration thereof, is guilty
of an offense, and shall be punished in the manner prescribed for the attempted
offense itself. (Prior Code ch. 14)
10-102: AIDING IN AN OFFENSE:
When no punishment for counseling or aiding in the commission of a particular
offense is expressly prescribed by ordinance, every person who counsels or aids
another in the commission of such is guilty of an offense, or misdemeanor, and
punishable in the same manner as the principal offender. (Prior Code ch. 14)
10-103: PARENT CAUSING DELINQUENCY OF A MINOR 1 :
Any parent or other person who knowingly and wilfully: a) causes, aids, abets
or encourages any minor to be in need of supervision, or deprived; or b) shall
by any act or omission to act have caused, encouraged or contributed to the
deprivation, or the need of supervision of the minor, or to such minor becoming
deprived, or in need of supervision; shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined a sum not to exceed five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days,
or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 510, 11-18-2003)
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS § 858.1.
10-104: OTHER PERSONS AIDING IN DELINQUENCY OF A MINOR 1 :
Any person who knowingly and wilfully: a) causes, aids, abets or encourages a
minor to be, to remain or to become delinquent, in need of supervision or
dependent and neglected, or b) omits the performance of any duty, which act or
omission causes or tends to cause, aid, abet, or encourage any minor to be
delinquent, in need of supervision or dependent and neglected, within the
purview of the Oklahoma Juvenile Code, upon conviction, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined a sum not to exceed
five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisonment for a period not to exceed
ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 510, 11-18-2003)
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS § 858.3.
10-105: SCHOOL ATTENDANCE REQUIREMENTS FOR MINORS AND PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS
1 :
   A.   It shall be unlawful for a parent, or guardian, or other person having
custody of a child who is over the age of five (5) years and under the age of
eighteen (18) years to neglect or refuse to cause or compel such child to
attend some public, private or other school of the parents' choosing, unless
other means of education are provided for the full term of the schools of the
district the child resides. Full term is defined as the school's calendar year,
to include the daily hours of instruction set by the school or other means of
education the child attends.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any child who is over the age of twelve (12)
and under the age of eighteen (18) years, and who has not finished four (4)
years of high school work, to neglect or refuse to attend some public, private
or other school, or receive an education by some other means for the full term
while the schools of the City of Grove are in session. Provided that this
section shall not apply if any such child:
      1.   Is prevented from attending school by reason of mental or physical
ability, to be determined by the Board of Education of the district upon a
certificate or other documentation of the school physician or public health
physician or, if no such physician is available, a duly licensed and practicing
physician;
      2.   Is excused from school attendance, by the principal teacher of the
school in which the child is enrolled, at the request of the parent, guardian,
custodian or other person having control of such child, as demonstrated by
proper documentation;
      3.   Who has attained his or her sixteenth birthday and is excused from
attending school by the school administrator of the school district where the
child attends school, and the parent, guardian, or custodian of the child, as
demonstrated by proper documentation. Provided, that no child shall be excused
from attending school by such agreement unless it has been determined such
action is in the best interest of the child and/or community, and that such
child will remain under the supervision of a parent, guardian, or custodian
until the child has reached eighteen (18) years of age.
      4.   Has been adjudicated emancipated by a court of competent
jurisdiction.
   C.   Any parent, guardian, custodian, or other person violating any of the
provisions of this section, upon conviction, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor,
and shall be punished as follows:
      1.   A fine no more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisonment
for not more than ten (10) days, or both such fine and imprisonment.
   D.   Each day the child remains out of school after the oral and documented
or written warning has been given to the parent, guardian, custodian, child or
other person or the child has been ordered to school by the Juvenile Court
shall constitute a separate offense.
   E.   At the trial of any person charged with violating the provisions of
this section, the attendance records of the child or ward may be presented in
court by any authorized employee of the school district.
   F.   The court may order the parent, guardian, or other person having
custody of the child to perform community service in lieu of the fine set forth
in this section. The court may require that all or part of the community
service be performed for a public school district.
   G.   The court may order as a condition of a deferred sentence or as a
condition of sentence upon conviction of the parent, guardian, or other person
having custody of the child any conditions as the court considers necessary to
obtain compliance with school attendance requirements. The conditions may
include, but are not limited to, the following:
      1.   Verifying attendance of the child with the school;
      2.   Attending meetings with school officials;
      3.   Taking the child to school;
      4.   Taking the child to the bus stop;
      5.   Attending school with the child;
      6.   Undergoing an evaluation for drug, alcohol, or other substance abuse
and following the recommendations of the evaluator; and
      7.   Taking the child for drug, alcohol, or other substance abuse
evaluation and following the recommendations of the evaluator, unless excused
by the court. (Ord. 722, 5-3-2016)
 
Notes
1 2. Similar provisions, 70 OS § 10-105.
CHAPTER 2
OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
SECTION:
10-201: Petit Larceny Prohibited
10-202: Injuring Automobiles And Other Vehicles
10-203: Destroying Or Injuring Buildings And Other Property
10-204: Placing Signs On Property Of Another
10-205: Throwing Or Shooting At Persons Or Property
10-206: Tampering With Or Damaging Public Utilities
10-207: Unlawful Intrusion Upon Land
10-208: Illegal Entrance
10-209: Throwing Advertising On Street, Prohibited
10-210: Throwing Injurious Substances
10-211: Injury To Plants And Trees
10-212: Public Streets And Trees
10-213: Trespass Prohibited
10-214: Parking On Property Of Another
10-215: Interference With Fire Hydrants
10-216: Shoplifting
10-217: Detention And Arrest Of Shoplifters
10-218: Concealing Unpurchased Merchandise, Presumption
10-219: Unauthorized Use Of Cable Television Services
10-220: Cable Television Services; Penalty
10-201: PETIT LARCENY PROHIBITED 1 :
   A.   Petit larceny is the taking of personal property of value not exceeding
fifty dollars ($50.00) accomplished by fraud or stealth and with intent to
deprive another thereof, but it does not include the taking of such property
from the "person" of another.
   B.   Petit larceny is unlawful, and any person who commits larceny shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior Code, Chapter 14)
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS §§ 1704, 1706.
10-202: INJURING AUTOMOBILES AND OTHER VEHICLES:
It is unlawful for any person to start, otherwise meddle with, molest, enter,
occupy, loiter in, take or drive away any automobile or other vehicle belonging
to another, without the consent of the owner or person in charge thereof.
(Prior Code, Chapter 14)
10-203: DESTROYING OR INJURING BUILDINGS AND OTHER PROPERTY:
It is unlawful for any person to destroy, injure, deface, besmear, or molest
any structure, building, outbuilding, fence, or any other property, real or
personal, public or private, belonging to another; or to use any such property
wrongfully to the detriment of the owner or other person entitled to its use;
or to interfere wrongfully with the use of any such property by its owner or
any other person entitled to its use. (Prior Code, Chapter 14)
10-204: PLACING SIGNS ON PROPERTY OF ANOTHER:
It is unlawful for any person to place, stick, tack, paste, post, paint, mark,
write or print any sign, poster, picture, announcement, advertisement, bill
placard, device or inscription upon any public or private building, fence,
sidewalk, bridge, viaduct, post, automobile, other vehicle or other property of
another, without the consent of the owner or person in charge thereof. (Prior
Code, Chapter 14)
10-205: THROWING OR SHOOTING AT PERSONS OR PROPERTY:
It is unlawful for any person to throw or shoot any stone, shot or other object
into or across any street or alley, or in any place where he is likely to hit
another person wrongfully or to injure property, or to throw or shoot any
stone, shot or other object at any person, vehicle, structure, electric light
or other property of another (whether public or private), except in case where
such is done in defense of oneself, of another person or of property. (Prior
Code, Chapter 14)
10-206: TAMPERING WITH OR DAMAGING PUBLIC UTILITIES:
It is unlawful for any person to connect or attach any kind of pipe, wire or
other contrivance to any pipe, line, wire or other conductor carrying gas,
water or electricity and belonging to a public utility (whether publicly or
privately owned), in such a manner as to enable him to consume or use the gas,
water or electricity without it passing through the meter or any other way so
as to evade payment therefor. It is also unlawful for any person to damage,
molest, tamper with, or destroy any pipe, line, wire, meter, or other part of
any public utility, including any telegraph or telephone system. (Prior Code,
Chapter 14)
10-207: UNLAWFUL INTRUSION UPON LAND:
It is unlawful for any person to intrude or squat upon any lot or piece of land
within the city without a license or authority from the owner thereof, or to
erect or occupy thereon any hut, hovel, shanty or other structure without such
license or authority, or to place, erect or occupy within the bounds of any
street, alley or avenue of the city, any hut, shanty, hovel, or other structure
without authority of law or ordinance. (Prior Code, Chapter 14)
10-208: ILLEGAL ENTRANCE:
It is unlawful for any person to enter upon the property of another or into an
area or structure on such property (whether such property, area or structure is
public or private), when such entrance is plainly forbidden by signs or
otherwise or when the property, area or structure is enclosed, except when such
entrance is in line of duty, or with the expressed, or tacit consent of the
owner or person in charge, or otherwise by authority of law or ordinance.
(Prior Code, Chapter 14)
10-209: THROWING ADVERTISING ON STREET, PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to throw, leave or deposit, or cause to be
thrown, left or deposited, upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public
area, any handbill, circular, or other advertising matter. (Prior Code, Chapter
14)
10-210: THROWING INJURIOUS SUBSTANCES:
It is unlawful for any person to purposely or premeditatedly put or throw upon
the person or property of another, or upon any animal, any acid, corrosive or
other irritating or harmful substance, or human or animal waste or urine, with
intent to injure or harass the person, property or animal. (1983 Code)
10-211: INJURY TO PLANTS AND TREES:
It is unlawful for any person to wilfully and without authority cut, pull,
pluck or otherwise injure any flowers, flowering plants, shrubs or trees
growing in or around any park or public street within the city, or wilfully or
without authority to tear down, remove, cut or otherwise injure or destroy any
gate or fence enclosing any such park or ground, or wilfully injure or destroy
any stand, bench, seat or other property situated upon such park or ground. Any
person convicted of violating this section is guilty of an offense. (Prior
Code, Chapter 14)
10-212: PUBLIC STREETS AND TREES:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to:
      1.   Wilfully or wantonly cut, deface or in any way injure any tree or
sapling standing or growing in any of the streets, alleys or public places
within the city;
      2.   Attach any guy wires, telephone, telegraph, or electric wire, or any
wire to any live tree;
      3.   Dig any hole, ditch or trench in any public street, road, avenue or
alley, or any other public premises or ground within, belonging to or under the
supervision or control of the city;
      4.   Take or remove any dirt, earth or any substance from any street,
road, alley or other public place in the city, or to cut, break or otherwise
injure any pavement, curb or gutter therein; or
      5.   Connect any driveway to any street or other public place without
first securing permission from the city inspector so to do.
   B.   Any such digging, removing, or driveway connection shall be done under
the supervision of the street superintendent or city engineer. (1983 Code)
10-213: TRESPASS PROHIBITED:
   A.   Unauthorized Entry: No person shall wilfully enter or remain upon or in
any land, structure, vehicle, aircraft or watercraft with knowledge that he is
not authorized or privileged to enter or remain upon or in such land,
structure, vehicle, aircraft or watercraft, if:
      1.   Such person enters upon or in the land, structure, vehicle, aircraft
or watercraft, after such entry upon or in has been forbidden by a personal
communication of the owner or person authorized by the owner to make such
communication, or he remains upon or in the land, structure, vehicle, aircraft
or watercraft after he has been ordered to leave by the owner or person
authorized by the owner to so order;
      2.   The land, structure, vehicle, aircraft or watercraft is posted in a
reasonable manner which would ordinarily come to the attention of intruders; or
      3.   The premises or property is used for residential purposes.
   B.   Exceptions: The provisions of this section shall not apply to cases
involving landlord and tenants. (Ord. 228, 9-19-1979)
   C.   Entry Or Presence Upon Business Premises Of Persons Convicted Of
Certain Crimes:
      1.   Every person, partnership, corporation or other legal entity engaged
in any public business, trade, or profession of any kind wherein merchandise,
goods or services are offered for sale may forbid the entry or presence of any
person upon the premises of the place of business, if the person has been
convicted of a crime involving entry onto or criminal acts occurring upon any
real property owned, leased, or under the control of such person, partnership,
corporation or other legal entity. Such crimes shall include, but are not
limited to, shoplifting, vandalism, and disturbing the peace while upon the
premises of any place of business of the person, partnership, corporation, or
other legal entity.
      2.   In order to exercise the authority conferred by subsection C1 of
this section, the owner or an agent of the owner of a public business, trade,
or profession must notify the person whom the owner or agent desires to
prohibit from such owner's place of business.
      3.   No person shall wilfully enter or remain upon the premises after
being expressly forbidden to do so in the manner provided for in this section.
Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this section, upon
conviction, shall be guilty of trespass and shall be punished by a fine of not
more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or by confinement in the
municipal jail for a term of not more than thirty (30) days, or by both such
fine and imprisonment.
      4.   The provisions of this act shall not preclude any other remedy
allowed by law. (Ord. 463, 7-5-2000)
10-214: PARKING ON PROPERTY OF ANOTHER:
It is unlawful for any person to park an automobile or other vehicle, or to
place any structure or object on the driveway, yard, or property of another
without the expressed or tacit consent of the owner or person in charge, or
otherwise by authority of law or ordinance. (1983 Code)
10-215: INTERFERENCE WITH FIRE HYDRANTS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person except one duly authorized by the city
utility personnel or a member of the fire department to open, turn on or off,
interfere with, attach any pipe or hose to, or connect anything with, any fire
hydrant or stopcock belonging to the city.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to obstruct access to any fire hydrant by
placing around or thereon brick, lumber, dirt or other thing, or in any other
manner obstructing access to a fire hydrant. (1983 Code)
10-216: SHOPLIFTING:
Definitions as used in sections
10-217 through
10-219 of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this section:
MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENT: Any mercantile place of business in, at, or from
which goods, wares and merchandise are sold, offered for sale or delivered from
and sold at retail or wholesale.
MERCHANDISE: All goods, wares and merchandise offered for sale or displayed by
a merchant.
MERCHANT: Any corporation, partnership, association or person who is engaged in
the business of selling goods, wares and merchandise in a mercantile
establishment.
WRONGFUL TAKING: Includes stealing of merchandise or money and any other
wrongful appropriation of merchandise or money. (Ord. 222, 3-6-1979)
10-217: DETENTION AND ARREST OF SHOPLIFTERS:
   A.   Any peace officer may arrest without warrant any person he has probable
cause for believing has committed larceny of merchandise held for sale in
retail or wholesale establishments, when such arrest is made in a reasonable
manner.
   B.   Any merchant, his agent or employee, who has reasonable grounds or
probable grounds or probable cause to believe that a person has committed or is
committing a wrongful taking of merchandise or money from a mercantile
establishment, may detain such person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable
length of time for all or any of the following purposes:
      1.   Conducting an investigation, including reasonable interrogation of
the detained person, as to whether there has been a wrongful taking of such
merchandise or money;
      2.   Informing the police or other law enforcement officials of the facts
relevant to such detention;
      3.   Performing a reasonable search of the detained person and his
belongings when it appears that the merchandise or money may otherwise be lost;
and
      4.   Recovering the merchandise or money believed to have been taken
wrongfully. Any such reasonable detention shall not constitute unlawful arrest
or detention, nor shall it render the merchant, his agent or employee
criminally or civilly liable to the person so detained. (Ord. 222, 3-6-1979)
10-218: CONCEALING UNPURCHASED MERCHANDISE, PRESUMPTION:
Any person concealing unpurchased merchandise of any mercantile establishment
either on the premises or outside the premises of such establishment, shall be
presumed to have so concealed such merchandise with the intention of committing
a wrongful taking of such merchandise within the meaning of section
10-217 of this chapter and such concealment or the finding of such unpurchased
merchandise concealed upon the person or among the belongings of such person
shall be conclusive evidence of reasonable grounds and probable cause for the
detention in a reasonable manner and for a reasonable length of time, of such
person by a merchant, his agent or employee, and any such reasonable detention
shall not be deemed to be unlawful, nor render such merchant, his agent or
employee criminally or civilly liable. (Ord. 222, 3-6-1979)
10-219: UNAUTHORIZED USE OF CABLE TELEVISION SERVICES:
   A.   Any person, firm or corporation who creates or makes use of any
authorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically,
inductively, or otherwise, with any part of a cable system franchised by the
city without the express consent of the cable company operating said system
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person, firm or corporation who tampers
with, removes, or injures any property, equipment, or part of said cable system
or any means of receiving cable service or other services provided thereto,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 450, 1-18-2000)
10-220: CABLE TELEVISION SERVICES; PENALTY:
   A.   Any person, firm or corporation in violation of section
10-219 of this chapter shall be subject to imprisonment in the city jail for
not more than thirty (30) days and by a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars
($200.00) plus costs, or both said fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 450, 1-18-2000)
CHAPTER 3
OFFENSES AGAINST THE PUBLIC
SECTION:
10-301: Disturbing The Peace
10-302: Insulting Signs, Literature Or Language
10-303: Literature Or Language Ridiculing Religion
10-304: Fireworks Regulated
10-305: Storing Or Keeping Explosives
10-306: Carrying Weapons; Exceptions
10-307: Reckless Conduct
10-308: Carrying, Discharging Firearms; Exceptions
10-309: Requirements For The Operation Of A Shooting Range
10-310: Amplified Sound, Loud Noise Or Music Prohibited
10-311: Political Advertising On Rights-Of-Way
10-312: Congregating On Sidewalk
10-301: DISTURBING THE PEACE:
   A.   It is unlawful to disturb or alarm the peace of another or others by
doing any of the acts set out in subsection B of this section.
   B.   Disturbing the peace is the doing of any of the following in such a
manner as would foreseeably alarm or disturb the peace of another or others:
      1.   Using obscene, offensive, abusive, profane, vulgar, threatening,
violent or insulting language or conduct;
      2.   Appearing in an intoxicated condition;
      3.   Engaging in a fistic encounter;
      4.   Lewdly exposing one's person, or private parts thereof, in any
public place or in any place where there are present other persons to be
offended or annoyed thereby;
      5.   Pointing any pistol or any other deadly weapon whether loaded or not
at any other person or persons either in anger or otherwise;
      6.   Holding an unlawful assembly of two (2) or more persons, including
being assembled together and acting in concert, to do any unlawful act against
the peace or to the terror of others or preparing for or moving toward such
acts, or otherwise assembling unlawfully or riotously;
      7.   Interrupting any lawful assembly of people by making noise, by rude,
indecent or improper behavior, by profane, improper or loud language, or in any
other manner, either within the place of assembly or within hearing distance
thereof;
      8.   Making unnecessarily loud, offensive noises;
      9.   Disturbing any congregation or assembly of persons meeting for
religious worship by making noise, by rude, indecent or improper behavior, by
profane, improper or loud language, or in any other manner, either within the
place of worship or within hearing distance thereof; or
      10.   Committing any other act in such a manner as to unreasonably
disturb or alarm the public.
   C.   Willfully Disturbing, Interfering with or Disrupting Public Business or
Employees:
      1.   It is unlawful for any person, alone or in concert with others and
without authorization, to willfully disturb, interfere or disrupt public
business or the business of any board, commission, public trust, political
subdivision, or school board, which includes publicly posted meetings, or any
agency operations or any employee, agent, official or representative of the
state or political subdivision.
      2.   It is unlawful for any person who is without authority or who is
causing any disturbance, interference or disruption to willfully refuse to
disperse or leave any property, building or structure owned, leased or occupied
by state officials or any political subdivision or its employees, agents or
representatives or used in any manner to conduct state business or any
political subdivision's business or operations after proper notice by a peace
officer, public official, board member, or other security personnel.
      3.   For purposes of this section, "disturb, interfere or disrupt" means
any conduct that is violent, threatening, abusive, obscene, or that jeopardizes
the safety of self or others. Further, conduct at a public meeting, or directed
toward a public employee, that a reasonable person would find hostile,
offensive, and intended to disrupt the public meeting or employees' work shall
meet the definition of disturb, interfere or disrupting public business.
Abusive conduct may include infliction of verbal abuse, such as the use of
derogatory remarks, insults, and epithets, verbal or physical conduct that a
reasonable person would find threatening, intimidating, or humiliating, or the
undermining of the public meeting process.
(Prior Code ch. 14) (Ord. 866, 7-1-2025)
10-302: INSULTING SIGNS, LITERATURE OR LANGUAGE:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation within the City to
display any sign, emblem, badge, flag or device, which in its common acceptance
is insulting, profane, or abusive to the citizens of the City, and which is
calculated, or of which the natural consequence is, to cause a breach of the
peace or an assault.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to wilfully use, utter, publish,
circulate or distribute any profane, violent, abusive, or insulting language or
literature where:
      1.   A natural consequence of the language or literature is to cause a
breach of the peace or an assault; or
      2.   The language or literature, in its common acceptance, is calculated
to cause a breach of the peace or an assault. (Prior Code ch. 14)
10-303: LITERATURE OR LANGUAGE RIDICULING RELIGION:
It is unlawful for any person to utter, publish, distribute or circulate any
literature or language within the corporate limits of the city that casts
profane ridicule on any deity, or any religion, which in its common acceptance
is calculated or where the natural consequence is to cause a breach of the
peace or an assault. (Prior code ch. 14)
10-304: FIREWORKS REGULATED 1 , 2 :
   A.   It is unlawful for any person or persons to shoot or explode any
fireworks, except as allowed by state law within the city limits except on
private property within the residential district owned or controlled by the
person or persons shooting or exploding the fireworks. Any fireworks prohibited
by state law are also prohibited by city ordinance. "Fireworks" shall have the
meaning prescribed by state law, 68 Oklahoma Statutes section 1622.
   B.   Shooting or sale of fireworks is permitted only on the dates of June 15
through July 6 between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. and ten o'clock
(10:00) P.M. and only in accordance with any applicable rules set by the
council.
   C.   Selling places shall be only in approved structures as approved by the
fire chief or his designated agent. No sales will be permitted within one
hundred feet (100') of any gasoline dispensing service agency. (Prior code §§
8-9, 8-10 as amended)
   D.   Every retail sale of fireworks by a wholesaler, distributor,
manufacturer or a retailer is subject to the levy and collection of sales tax.
Vendors who fail to collect the sales tax are subject to penalties outlined in
the Oklahoma state statutes section 1361 of title 68. Every retail fireworks
location must possess a valid and current sales tax permit and have it
conspicuously posted in the immediate vicinity of the sales operation and have
it immediately available for examination by the public or enforcement officer.
   E.   All individuals or entities shall meet the requirements of the state
fire marshal and shall obtain the appropriate Oklahoma license or permit to
conduct outdoor fireworks displays. The state fire marshal has the authority to
grant, suspend, revoke or refuse to renew any license or certification. (Ord.
625, 9-6-2011)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section 13-101 of this code.
2 2. 68 OS §§ 1624, 1621 et seq.
10-305: STORING OR KEEPING EXPLOSIVES:
It is unlawful for any person to store or keep within the city any
nitroglycerin, dynamite, gunpowder, or any other highly explosive material or
substance, except that gunpowder may be kept in quantities of not to exceed
five (5) pounds where the same is securely kept. (1983 Code)
10-306: CARRYING WEAPONS; EXCEPTIONS 1 :
It is unlawful for any person to carry concealed upon or about his person any
pistol, revolver, dagger, bowie knife, dirk knife, switchblade knife, spring
type knife, metal knuckle, or any other dangerous or deadly weapon or
instrument except when doing so in line of duty or as may be permitted by law.
(Prior code ch. 14)
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS § 2189.1 et seq.
10-307: RECKLESS CONDUCT:
It is unlawful for any person to engage in reckless conduct while having in his
possession any shotgun, rifle or pistol, such actions consisting of creating a
situation of unreasonable risk and probability of death or great bodily harm to
another, and demonstrating a conscious disregard for the safety of another
person. (1983 Code)
10-308: CARRYING, DISCHARGING FIREARMS; EXCEPTIONS 1 :
   A.   Definitions: Following are definitions for the purposes of this
section:
    CHILD: A person under eighteen (18) years of age.
   PISTOLS: Any firearm capable of discharging a projectile composed of any
material which may reasonably be expected to be able to cause lethal injury,
with a barrel or barrels less than sixteen inches (16") in length, and using
either gunpowder, gas or any means of rocket propulsion, but not to include
flare guns, underwater fishing guns or blank pistols.
   RIFLES: Any firearm capable of discharging a projectile composed of any
material which may reasonably be expected to be able to cause lethal injury,
with a barrel or barrels more than sixteen inches (16") in length, and using
either gunpowder, gas or any means of rocket propulsion, but not to include
archery equipment, flare guns or underwater fishing guns. In addition, any
rifle capable of firing "shot" but primarily designed to fire single
projectiles will be regarded as a "rifle".
   SHOTGUNS: Any firearm capable of discharging a series of projectiles of any
material which may reasonably be expected to be able to cause lethal injury,
with a barrel or barrels more than eighteen inches (18") in length, and using
either gunpowder, gas or any means of rocket propulsion, but not to include any
weapon so designed with a barrel less than eighteen inches (18") in length. In
addition, any "shotgun" capable of firing single projectiles but primarily
designed to fire multiple projectiles such as "shot" will be regarded as a
"shotgun". (Ord. 343, 11-21-1989; amd. Ord. 509, 11-18-2003)
   B.   Discharging Weapons Within City: It is unlawful for any person to
discharge any species of firearm, including bow and arrows, in the city limits,
except when doing so in the line of duty when lawfully doing so in defense of
oneself, of another person, or property, or when otherwise authorized by law or
ordinance. It is unlawful to discharge an air rifle or BB gun in the city.
   C.   Carrying Weapons: A person shall be permitted to carry shotguns, rifles
or pistols, open and not concealed, under the following conditions:
      1.   When going to, during participation in or coming from hunting
animals or fowl, including moving from place to place by vehicle. However, a
rifle or shotgun may be carried in a land borne motor vehicle over a public
highway or roadway when clip or magazine loaded and not chamber loaded when
carried in a locked compartment of the vehicle, such as the trunk of an
automobile;
      2.   When going to, during competition in or practicing or coming from a
safety or hunter safety class, target shooting, skeet, trap or other recognized
sporting events;
      3.   When unloaded, going to or coming from a gunsmith;
      4.   When unloaded, going to or coming from a store for purposes of
repair, trade, barter or sale;
      5.   Going to or coming from a military function of the state military
forces to be defined as the Oklahoma army or air national guard, federal
military reserve and active military forces;
      6.   Going to or coming from a recognized police function of either a
municipal, county or state government as functioning police officials;
      7.   When unloaded, going to or coming from a place of publicly
recognized firearms display such as a "gun show" where the public is invited;
      8.   When unloaded, going to or coming from a point of private trade for
purposes of transferring a firearm to another private citizen in exchange for
monies, payment for services or trade; and
      9.   When going to, coming from and during a performance for
entertainment purposes. (Ord. 343, 11-21-1989)
   D.   Unlawful Sale Or Gift Of Weapons To Child: It shall be unlawful for any
person to sell or give to any child any of the arms or weapons designated in
this section; provided, the provisions of this section shall not prohibit a
parent from giving his or her child a rifle or shotgun for participation in
hunting animals or fowl, hunter safety classes, target shooting, skeet, trap or
other recognized sporting events, except as provided in subsection E of this
section.
   E.   Allowing Minors To Possess Firearms:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to intentionally,
knowingly, or recklessly permit his or her child to possess any of the arms or
weapons designated in this section, including any rifle or shotgun, if such
parent is aware of a substantial risk that the child will use the weapon to
commit a criminal offense or if the child has either been adjudicated a
delinquent or has been convicted as an adult for any criminal offense.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any child to possess any of the arms or
weapons designated in this chapter, except rifles or shotguns used for
participation in hunting animals or fowl, hunter safety classes, target
shooting, skeet, trap or other recognized sporting event.
   F.   Exceptions: The possession of rifles or shotguns authorized by this
section shall not authorize the possession of such weapons by any person
previously adjudicated as a delinquent child or a youthful offender for the
commission of an offense, which would have constituted a felony offense if
committed by an adult, to have in said person's possession or under the
person's immediate control, or have in any vehicle which he or she is driving
or in which said person is riding as a passenger, or at the person's residence,
any pistol, imitation or homemade pistol, machine gun, sawed off shotgun or
rifle, or any other dangerous or deadly firearm which could be easily concealed
on the person, in personal effects or in an automobile, within ten (10) years
after such adjudication.
   G.   Penalties:
      1.   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall, upon a
first conviction, be adjudged guilty of a misdemeanor and the party offending
shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor
more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), or by imprisonment for a period
not to exceed thirty (30) days or both such fine and imprisonment. On the
second and every subsequent violation, the party offending shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment for
a period not less than thirty (30) days nor more than three (3) months, or by
both such fine and imprisonment.
      2.   Any child violating the provisions of this section shall be subject
to adjudication as a delinquent.
      3.   In addition, any person violating the provisions of this section
shall be liable for civil damages for any injury or death to any person and for
any damage to property resulting from any discharge of a firearm or use of any
other weapon designated in this section. (Ord. 509, 11-18-2003)
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS §§ 1272, 1273, 1276, 1283; 23 OS § 10.
10-309: REQUIREMENTS FOR THE OPERATION OF A SHOOTING RANGE:
   A.   Definitions: Following are the definitions for the purpose of this
section:
    ENCLOSED SHOOTING RANGE: A fully enclosed building of a permanent character
specifically designed or subsequently modified for the specific purpose of
providing a location for the discharge of firearms for purposes of practicing
marksmanship.
   OUTDOOR SHOOTING RANGE: An outside area designed specifically or
subsequently modified for the specific purpose of providing a location for the
discharge of firearms for purposes of practicing marksmanship.
   B.   Outdoor Shooting Ranges Prohibited: Outdoor shooting ranges are
prohibited within the City of Grove corporate limits.
   C.   Construction Requirements:
      1.   Buildings containing shooting ranges shall have walls, ceilings and
floors that are impenetrable to the bullets of the firearms being used within
it, or have internal baffling built so that the bullets cannot hit the walls or
ceiling. Doors and windows which are in front of the firing points must be
bolted from the range side and must comply with this subsection as a part of
the building walls at all times the range is in use.
      2.   The range shall be so constructed and insulated from noise that the
discharge of firearms within the range shall not disturb the peace of other
persons; hearing protectors which fully cover the shooter's ears will be
provided by the range and made available for all shooters or other persons in
the firing area. No gas or incendiary projectiles shall be allowed.
      3.   Any construction of a new building, or remodeling of an existing
building in order to establish a range, will require the issuance of a building
permit, as otherwise provided in this Code. Detailed plans and specifications
must be submitted along with the application for such permit. Prior to the
issuance of such permit, the plans and specifications must be approved in
writing by the Grove building inspector and the Grove Chief of Police.
      4.   Protective stalls shall be built in between each firing point.
      5.   Range shall have an exhaust fan or system placed above the shooting
and target area capable of a complete change of air in the range no less than
twenty (20) times per hour.
      6.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to exempt such range, or
its construction or remodeling, or its operation, from any applicable City,
State or Federal law, or rule or regulation.
   D.   Licensing Requirements:
      1.   A license to operate a range is required by each operator prior to
the commencement of a range operation, and said license must be renewed
annually as a condition for continued operation.
      2.   All instructors shall be certified by the National Rifle Association
or by the State of Oklahoma, and shall provide proof of said certification
before a City license will be issued. Instructors shall maintain their
certification with the National Rifle Association, and shall provide proof of
such certification on an annual basis before a City license will be renewed.
      3.   The application for a license shall be made in writing, and said
application shall contain the following information:
         a.   Name of applicant, stating whether individual, partnership,
corporation or association.
         b.   Address of applicant.
         c.   Age of applicant (individual's age, or date of incorporation or
formation if a business entity).
         d.   If applicant is not an individual, name and addresses of all
officers and members (if there are more than 5 such officers and members, the
list shall include only the managing officers, and those persons or entities
which collectively own majority interests).
         e.   Location and legal description of the premises sought to be
licensed, and a statement of whether the premises are owned or leased by
applicant.
         f.   Qualifications and experience of applicant.
         g.   Designation of service agent for service of legal process.
         h.   Any other information the Chief of Police or his designee may
deem necessary.
      4.   The annual license fee for the operation of a range shall be fifty
dollars ($50.00), payable at the time of application and at the time of the
application for renewal. A license issued under this section shall not be
transferable or assignable, and any attempt to transfer, assign or encumber
such license shall render such license void.
      5.   Prior to the issuance of any license, or the renewal of any license,
the Chief of Police or his designee shall inspect the range to see that all
requirements of this section are met. Such inspector may inspect the range more
often as needed. The operator, by applying for a license, consents to such
safety inspections during any normal business hours.
      6.   No license granted under this section shall ever be held to bar a
prosecution for violation of any other ordinance of the City, or to prevent the
enforcement of any ordinance or inhibit the exercise of powers and duties of
any officer under the terms of any such ordinance.
      7.   A license issued for the operations of a shooting range shall set
forth the name and location of the range covered by such license, name or names
of those persons to whom the license is issued, and any other information the
Chief of Police or his designee may deem necessary.
      8.   Such license shall be placed and maintained at all times in an open,
prominent and conspicuous place inside the range.
   E.   Insurance Requirements: The owner of the range, whether individual, or
corporation, or other business entity, shall carry liability insurance
protecting the general public and users of the range against any injury
resulting from the discharge of firearms in the range in an amount no less than
one million dollars ($1,000,000.00).
   F.   Alcohol Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit any
person or persons to bring any alcoholic beverages or non-intoxicating
beverages on the premises of any range, or to permit the consumption of same on
the premises, or to permit same to be left at any place on the premises. It
shall be unlawful for any person operating a range to permit any intoxicated
person to be or remain therein.
   G.   Range Operations:
      1.   Any person under the legal age of eighteen (18), desiring to use the
range must be accompanied by an adult.
      2.   No more than one (1) person shall shoot from a single firing point
at one (1) time. All other persons (except instructors) must stand behind the
firing point. No one shall be allowed in front of the firing points at any time
during operation.
      3.   Loaded weapons shall be allowed only in the firing area on the range
and shall not be permitted at any other place inside the building or premises.
      4.   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm in a
manner so that the shot, bullets or fragments thereof will avoid the backstop
and other safety precautions and escape the confines of the range, or cause
bodily injury to persons on the range. The operator shall supervise the users
of the range, and shall remove and bar from the range any person who refuses to
comply with generally accepted safety practices, or with this section, or with
the rules and regulations concerning safety imposed by the operator.
      5.   Shot guns, shot shells, and rifles of any caliber larger than a 22-
gauge long rifle shall not be used in enclosed ranges, unless the range is
equipped with backstop equipment which will safely contain such ammunition, and
the Chief of Police or his designee specifically certifies the range to be so
equipped, following actual inspection of the equipment as installed.
      6.   Any shooting range establishment, gun smith, or firearm retailer
shall be authorized and encouraged to utilize a discharge barrel or other
similar safety apparatus to ensure the safe handling of firearms.
      7.   A sign stating the rules and regulations of the range operation
shall be placed in a prominent and conspicuous location within the range.
   H.   Mandatory Reporting: If at any time, an accidental discharge involves
injury or death, the licensee shall provide a written Incident Report that
shall include the following:
      1.   Name of shooter.
      2.   Name of victim.
      3.   Time and date of the incident.
      4.   Detailed statement of the events that occurred.
   I.   Revocation Of License: The Chief of Police or his designee is hereby
vested with authority to revoke or suspend any license issued under this
section on any of the following grounds:
      1.   Violation of any of the provisions of this section, or of any rules
or regulations existing now or hereafter adopted, or of any laws of the State.
      2.   Permitting, aiding or abetting the commission of an illegal act in
or on the licensed premises.
      3.   Selling or permitting the consumption of alcoholic beverages or non-
intoxicating beverages or any intoxicating substances on the licensed premises.
      4.   Admitting any person under the influence of alcohol or any
intoxicating substance to use the facilities of the range.
      5.   In any case of such suspension or revocation, the reasons therefor
shall be furnished the owner or manager of the range in writing, and the
licensee shall have the right to appeal to the City Council by filing notice of
his intent to appeal within ten (10) days from the date of receipt of the
notice of suspension and revocation from the Chief of Police. Such appeal shall
be set down for hearing within thirty one (31) days after the City Manager
receives the notice of intent to appeal.
   J.   Penalty:
      1.   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be subject
to section
1-108, "General Penalty", of this Code. (Ord. 724, 5-17-2016)
10-310: AMPLIFIED SOUND, LOUD NOISE OR MUSIC PROHIBITED:
It shall be an offense for a person in any public or private location to
wilfully or maliciously disturb the peace or quietude of any individual by
creating noise of such character or duration so as to be considered a "noise
disturbance" as defined in subsection A of this section.
   A.   Definitions: For the purpose of this section, certain words and phrases
used herein are defined as follows:
    AUDIBLE: Any sound produced by a sound amplification system. Words or
phrases need not be discernible and bass reverberations are included.
   DECIBEL: Logarithmic and dimensionless unit of measure used in describing
amplitude of sound. Decibel is denoted as dB.
   DISTRICT ZONING: The designated zoning of property located within the
corporate limits as established by the City of Grove zoning ordinances and
identified on the zoning map.
   NOISE DISTURBANCE: Any sound that exceeds a level greater than the decibel
(dB) rating allowed in said district zoning. Noise disturbance must continue
for more than fifteen (15) minutes and shall be measured within the district
zoning at a minimum distance of fifty feet (50') from the origin of sound.
Sound level measurements shall be made with a sound level meter.
 
Residential District:   
 70 decibels dBA      11:00 P.M. - 7:00 A.M.
 80 decibels dBA      7:00 A.M. - 11:00 P.M.
Commercial District:    
 80 decibels dBA      11:00 P.M. - 7:00 A.M.
 90 decibels dBA      7:00 A.M. - 11:00 P.M.
 
    PERSON: Any human being, firm, association, organization, partnership,
business, trust, corporation, company, contractor, supplier, installer, user,
owner or operator including any municipal corporation or its officers or
employees.
   SOUND AMPLIFICATION SYSTEM: Any radio, tape player, compact disc player,
loudspeaker or other electronic device used for the amplification of sounds
including, without limitation, sounds created by human voice or musical
instrumentation.
   B.   Noises Prohibited:
      1.   General Prohibitions: In addition to the specific prohibitions
outlined below, if any person shall wilfully or maliciously disturb, either by
day or night, the peace and quiet of any city, neighborhood, family or person
by loud or unusual noise such person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor,
and, on conviction thereof shall be fined in any sum not to exceed one hundred
dollars ($100.00), or by imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days, or by
both fine and imprisonment, at the discretion of the court or jury trying the
same.
      2.   Specific Prohibitions: The following acts are declared to be a
nuisance and in violation of this section when such sound exceeds the noise
disturbance level:
         a.   The sounding of horns, whistles, sirens, firearms, explosives,
fireworks or other such alarm, whether manual or power operated;
         b.   Owning, maintaining, or harboring any animal which produces
frequent or prolonged noisemaking;
         c.   Operating or causing to be operated any motor vehicle unless the
exhaust system is:
            (1)   Free from defects which affect sound reduction;
            (2)   Equipped with a muffler or other noise dissipative device;
            (3)   Not equipped with any cutout, bypass or similar device; and
            (4)   Not modified in a manner which will amplify or increase the
noise emitted by the motor of such vehicle above that emitted by a muffler of
the type originally installed on the vehicle.
         d.   Operating or permitting the operation of any motor vehicle with a
dynamic engine braking device (commonly known as jake braking) engaged except
for the aversion of immediate danger;
         e.   Operating or permitting the operation of any sound amplification
system, jukebox, electronic audio equipment, musical instrument, television, or
any other similar device used for transmitting or broadcasting sound;
         f.   Operating or permitting the operation of any of the following
between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.:
            (1)   Power equipment used for the performance of construction and/
or repair of home or accessory structures, ground maintenance or auto repair
including, but not limited to, power tools, lawn mowers or garden equipment;
            (2)   Commercial power equipment for the performance of
construction, demolition, and/or repair work;
            (3)   Heating, cooling and refrigeration systems;
            (4)   Toys or models powered by an internal combustion engine;
            (5)   Other similar noise producing devices.
         g.   Operating or permitting the operation of refuse compacting
vehicles and garbage collection in residential districts between the hours of
six o'clock (6:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.;
         h.   Operating or permitting the operation of refuse compacting
vehicles and garbage collection in commercial districts between the hours of
nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M.;
         i.   Shouting, carousing, singing; or
         j.   Other prolonged noisemaking.
   C.   Exemptions: The provisions of this section shall not apply to the
following:
      1.   The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the
existence of an emergency;
      2.   The emission of sound in the performance of emergency work;
      3.   Sporting, school, civic, religious, military, and Municipal events;
      4.   Music furnished by a business for the exclusive enjoyment and
entertainment of persons actually on the premises or within the place of
business, provided the music shall not exceed ninety (90) decibels (dB) within
the premises at a distance of not less than 6.1 meters from the source of
sound; provided further speakers located upon any premises outside the walls of
any business shall not be operated between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00)
P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.;
      5.   Noise produced within an industrial zoned district; or
      6.   Permitted special events.
         a.   Applications for a permit for relief from the noise restrictions
may be made to the City Manager or his/her authorized representative. The
relief requested may be granted upon the following:
            (1)   The activity, operation or noise source will be of temporary
duration and cannot be done in a manner that would comply with this section.
   D.   Penalty: Any violations, unless otherwise indicated, of the provision
of this part are punishable by fine or imprisonment as provided in section
1-108 of this Code. (Ord. 651, 7-17-2012; amd. Ord. 724, 5-17-2016)
10-311: POLITICAL ADVERTISING ON RIGHTS-OF-WAY:
   A.   A "political advertising sign" is defined as any sign, poster or
placard printed, pointed, made, or designed for the purpose of furthering or
advertising the candidacy of any person who is or intends to become or may be a
candidate for the election to any public office, whether such public office be
in the local, State or Federal government, or any subdivision thereof.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect or display
any advertising sign or advertising of any other character upon any public
utility easement within the City.
   C.   No person, firm or corporation shall place, tack, nail, staple or glue
any advertising sign on any telephone, telegraph, electric or street lighting
pole within this City.
   D.   Any advertising sign erected, placed or displayed in violation of the
provisions hereof shall be a public nuisance. No property right shall exist in
such sign erected, placed or displayed in violation of the provisions hereof,
and such sign may be removed and destroyed by any person. (1983 Code; amd. Ord.
724, 5-17-2016)
10-312: CONGREGATING ON SIDEWALK:
It is an offense for any person or assemblage of persons to obstruct any
sidewalk or passage, or any street or alley, or any walk on any public grounds
in the City by congregating or in any way assembling therein or thereon. (Prior
Code § 14-36; amd. Ord. 724, 5-17-2016)
CHAPTER 4
OFFENSES AGAINST THE HEALTH, WELFARE AND MORALS
SECTION:
10-401: Public Intoxication And Drinking Prohibited
10-402: Possession; Transportation Of Intoxicating Beverages
10-403: Intoxicating Liquors
10-404: Marijuana And Controlled Dangerous Drugs Prohibited
10-405: Drug Paraphernalia Prohibited
10-406: Prostitution
10-407: Disorderly House
10-408: Maintaining Or Leasing Disorderly House
10-409: Residents And Visitors To Disorderly House
10-410: Nudity; Improper Dress; Indecent Exposure
10-411: Definitions; Obscenity Regulations
10-412: Prohibited Obscene Conduct
10-413: Vagrancy
10-414: Curfew For Minors
10-415: Sleeping On The Streets; Depots
10-416: Begging Prohibited
10-417: Harmful Deception
10-418: False Or Bogus Checks
10-419: Unlawful To Sell Or Furnish Tobacco, Nicotine Or Vapor Product To
Persons Under Twenty-One (21) Years Of Age; Unlawful To Distribute Tobacco,
Nicotine Or Vapor Products Or Tobacco, Nicotine Or Vapor Product Samples To Any
Person Under Twenty-one (21) Years Of Age; Unlawful To Sell, Give Or Furnish
Materials Or Devices Used In Smoking, Chewing Or Other Methods Of Consumption
Of Tobacco, Nicotine Or Vapor Products To Persons Under The Age Of Twenty-One
(21) Years Of Age; Unlawful To Purchase Or Have Possession Of Tobacco, Nicotine
Or Vapor Products By Persons Under The Age Of Twenty-One Years Of Age; Unlawful
To Falsify Proof Of Age; Education Or Tobacco Use Cessation Program
Requirements; Unlawful To Sell Tobacco Products Except In Original Sealed
Packaging; Unlawful To Display Tobacco, Nicotine Or Vapor Products In A Manner
That Allows Public Access
10-420: Permitting Or Allowing Gatherings Where Minors Are Consuming Alcoholic
Beverages
10-401: PUBLIC INTOXICATION AND DRINKING PROHIBITED:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to appear or be upon or in any street,
alley, or other public place in the city in a state of intoxication. It is
unlawful for any person to drink intoxicating liquor or beverage upon or in any
street, alley, or other public place within the city. It is unlawful to use,
sell or furnish to another any illegal drug or narcotic in any place in the
city except as legally prescribed by a physician.
   B.   For the purposes of this section, a "state of intoxication" means the
condition in which a person is under the influence of any intoxicating,
spirituous, vinous or malt liquors, or of any narcotic, to such extent as to
deprive the person of his or her full physical or mental power. (Prior code,
chapter 14)
10-402: POSSESSION; TRANSPORTATION OF INTOXICATING BEVERAGES:
   A.   It is unlawful, and punishable as provided in subsection C of this
section, for any person under twenty one (21) years of age to drive, operate,
or be in actual physical control of a motor vehicle within this state who:
      1.   Has any measurable quantity of alcohol in the person's blood or
breath at the time of a test administered within two (2) hours after an arrest
of the person;
      2.   Exhibits evidence of being under the influence of any other
intoxicating substance as shown by analysis of a specimen of the person's
blood, breath, saliva, or urine in accordance with the provisions of sections
752 and 759 of title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes; or
      3.   Exhibits evidence of the combined influence of alcohol and any other
intoxicating substance.
   B.   As used in this section, the term "other intoxicating substance" means
any controlled dangerous substance as defined in the uniform controlled
dangerous substances act, section
2-101 et seq., of title 63 of the Oklahoma Statutes, or any other substance,
other than alcohol, which is capable of being ingested, inhaled, injected, or
absorbed into the human body and is capable of adversely affecting the central
nervous system, vision, hearing, or other sensory or motor function.
   C.   1. Any person under twenty one (21) years of age who violates any
provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be guilty of driving under
the influence while underage. A violator shall be punished for a first offense
by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than two
hundred dollars ($200.00), or by completion of twenty (20) hours of community
service, or by requiring the person to attend and complete a treatment program,
or by any combination of fine, community service, or treatment.
      2.   Any violator, upon a second or subsequent conviction, shall be
punished by a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) or by
completion of forty (40) hours of community service, or by requiring the person
to attend and complete a treatment program, or by any combination of fine,
community service, or treatment.
      3.   The court may assess additional community service hours in lieu of
any fine specified in this section.
      4.   In addition to any penalty imposed pursuant to the provisions of
this section, the person may be subject to:
         a.   The cancellation or denial of driving privileges as ordered by
the court pursuant to 47 Oklahoma Statutes section 6-107.1,
         b.   The seizure of the driver's license at the time of arrest or
detention, and the administrative revocation of driving privileges by the
department of public safety pursuant to 47 Oklahoma Statutes section 754, and
         c.   The mandatory revocation of driving privileges pursuant to 47
Oklahoma Statutes section 6-205.1, which revocation period may be modified as
provided by law.
   D.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the filing of
charges pursuant to 47 Oklahoma Statutes section 761 or 11-902 when the facts
warrant.
   E.   When any district court, municipal court of record or any municipal
court in a city or town in which the judge is an attorney licensed to practice
law in this state has determined that a person under the age of eighteen (18)
years has committed any offense described in subsection C of this section, or
that a person eighteen (18), nineteen (19), or twenty (20) years of age has
committed an offense described in section 1 of this act, the court shall notify
the department of public safety, on a form prescribed by the department as
provided in 47 Oklahoma Statutes section 6-107.2.
   F.   The notice shall include the name, date of birth, physical description
and, if known, the driver's license number of the person. The notice shall
contain a recommendation to the department to cancel or deny driving privileges
for a specified period of time, in the discretion of the court, except as
otherwise provided by law, as follows:
      1.   For a period not to exceed six (6) months;
      2.   For a period not to exceed one year; or
      3.   For a period not to exceed two (2) years; or
      4.   Until the person attains twenty one (21) years of age.
The court shall send a copy of the notice to the person first class, postage
prepaid. (Ord. 405, 12-17-1996)
   G.   It is unlawful for anyone to knowingly permit a person under the age of
twenty one (21) years to possess or consume any alcoholic beverage, low point
beer, controlled dangerous substance or combination thereof. (Ord. 632, 11-1-
2011)
   H.   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly transport in any moving
vehicle upon a public highway, street, or alley any intoxicating beverage
except in the original container which shall not have been opened and from
which the original cap or seal shall not have been removed unless the opened
container be in the rear trunk or rear compartment. The rear trunk or
compartment shall include the spare tire compartment in a station wagon or
panel truck or any outside compartment which is not accessible to the driver or
any other person in the vehicle while it is in motion.
   I.   For the purpose of this section, "intoxicating beverage" shall be as
defined by 37 Oklahoma Statutes. (Ord. 405, 12-17-1996)
10-403: INTOXICATING LIQUORS:
   A.   It is unlawful:
      1.   For any person to barter, sell, give away or otherwise furnish to
another any intoxicating liquor or beverage of any kind except as permitted by
law;
      2.   To have in possession or under control any intoxicating liquor or
beverage except as permitted by law, or to transport or in any manner convey
from place to place in the city any intoxicating liquor or beverage except as
permitted by law;
      3.   To loiter in a place where intoxicating liquor is sold, bartered,
given away or otherwise furnished contrary to law; or
      4.   To keep, maintain, aid or abet in keeping or maintaining a place
where intoxicating liquor is sold, bartered, given away or otherwise furnished
in violation of law. (Prior Code, Chapter 14)
10-404: MARIJUANA AND CONTROLLED DANGEROUS DRUGS PROHIBITED 1 :
   A.   For the purpose of this Section, the following terms shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this subsection:
    CONTROLLED DANGEROUS SUBSTANCE: Any drug or substance included in schedules
I through V of the Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances Act found in title
63 Oklahoma Statutes section
2-101 et seq.; including, but not limited to:
      1.   Cocaine and its derivatives;
      2.   Opiates and opium derivatives such as heroin, codeine, pethidine,
and morphine;
      3.   Hallucinogenic substances including lysergic acid diethylamide,
marijuana (Cannabis sativa L.), including seed of mature plants, mescaline,
psilocybin, and various types of methoxyamphetamines;
      4.   Stimulants such as amphetamines and methamphetamines; or
      5.   Barbituarates and other depressants such as amobarbital,
secobarbital, pentobarbital, phenobarbital, methoqualine, phencyclidine, and
diszepam.
   DELIVER OR DELIVERY: The actual, constructive or attempted transfer from one
person to another of a simulated drug or simulated controlled dangerous
substance, whether or not there is an agency relationship.
   DRUG: 1. Substances recognized as drugs in the official United States
Pharmacopoeia, official homeopathic pharmacopoeia of the United States or
official national formulary or any supplement to any of them;
      2.   Substances intended for use in the diagnosis, cure, mitigation,
treatment or prevention of disease in man or animals;
      3.   Substances intended to affect the structure or any function of the
body of man or other animals; or
      4.   Substances intended for use as a component of any article specified
in this definition. It does not include devices or their components, parts or
accessories.
   MARIJUANA: All parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L., whether growing or
not, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of such plant, and
every compound, manufacture, sale, derivative, mixture or preparation of such
plant, its seeds or resin, but shall not include the mature stalks of such
plant, fiber produced from such stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of such
plant, any other compound, manufacture or preparation of such mature stalks
(except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized
seed of such plant which is incapable of germination.
   PRACTITIONER:
      1.   A physician, dentist, podiatrist, veterinarian, scientific
investigator or other person licensed, registered or otherwise permitted to
distribute, dispense, conduct research with respect to, use for scientific
purposes or administer a controlled dangerous substance in the course of
professional practice or research in this State; or
      2.   A pharmacy, hospital, laboratory or other institution licensed,
registered or otherwise permitted to distribute, dispense, conduct research
with respect to, use for scientific purposes or administer a controlled
dangerous substance in the course of professional practice or research in this
State.
   SIMULATED DRUGS OR SIMULATED CONTROLLED DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES: Any product
which identifies itself by using a common name or slang term associated with a
controlled substance and which indicates on its label or accompanying
promotional material or it is represented that the product simulates the effect
of a controlled dangerous substance.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person knowingly or intentionally to possess
marijuana unless such substance was obtained directly, or pursuant to a valid
prescription or order from a practitioner, while acting in the course of his
professional practice.
   C.   It is unlawful for any person to deliver any simulated drug or
simulated controlled dangerous substance to another person. (Ord. 267, 5-4-
1982; amd. Ord. 268, 5-4-1982)
 
Notes
1 1. 63 OS § 2-101 et seq.
10-405: DRUG PARAPHERNALIA PROHIBITED:
   A.   For the purpose of this Section, "drug paraphernalia" means all
equipment, products and materials of any kind which are to be used or intended
for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting,
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing,
testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing,
injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body, a
controlled dangerous substance in violation of this act. It includes, but is
not limited to:
      1.   Kits used or intended for use in planting, propagating, cultivating,
growing or harvesting or any species of plant which is a controlled dangerous
substance or from which a controlled dangerous substance can be derived;
      2.   Kits used or intended for use in manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing or preparing controlled dangerous substances;
      3.   Isomerization devices used or intended for use in increasing the
potency of any species of plant which is a controlled dangerous substance;
      4.   Testing equipment used or intended for use in identifying, or in
analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled dangerous
substances;
      5.   Scales and balances used or intended for use in weighing or
measuring controlled dangerous substances;
      6.   Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol,
mannite, dextrose and lactose, used or intended for use in cutting controlled
dangerous substances;
      7.   Separation gins and sifters used or intended for use in removing
twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining marijuana;
      8.   Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used or
intended for use in compounding controlled dangerous substances;
      9.   Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used or intended
for use in packaging small quantities of controlled dangerous substances;
      10.   Containers and other objects used or intended for use in
parenterally injecting controlled dangerous substances into the human body;
      11.   Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used or intended for
use in parenterally injecting controlled dangerous substances into the human
body; and
      12.   Objects used or intended for use in ingesting, inhaling or
otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil into the human
body, such as:
         a.   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes
with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured metal
bowls;
         b.   Water pipes;
         c.   Carburetion tubes and devices;
         d.   Smoking and carburetion masks;
         e.   Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material, such
as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in
the hand;
         f.   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
         g.   Chamber pipes;
         h.   Carburetor pipes;
         i.   Electric pipes;
         j.   Air-driven pipes;
         k.   Chillums;
         l.   Bongs; or
         m.   Ice pipes or chillers.
Provided however, drug paraphernalia shall not include separation gins intended
for use in preparing tea or spice, clamps commonly used for constructing
electrical equipment, water pipes designated for ornamentation or pipes
designed for smoking tobacco.
   B.   No person shall deliver, possess or manufacture drug paraphernalia,
knowing or under circumstances in which it will be used to plant, propagate,
cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process,
prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest,
inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled, dangerous
substance in violation of this section. (Ord. No. 270, 5/18/82)
10-406: PROSTITUTION:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to:
      1.   Be a prostitute;
      2.   Solicit, entice, or procure another to commit or engage in any act
of prostitution;
      3.   Engage in any act of prostitution;
      4.   Knowingly let premises for purposes of prostitution;
      5.   Conduct a business or premises for prostitution;
      6.   Accept or receive the proceeds of any act of prostitution; or
      7.   Be a party to an act of prostitution or solicitation of prostitution
in the limits of the city.
   B.   For the purposes of this section:
      1.   Prostitution is the giving of the body for sexual intercourse or
sodomy for hire or money;
      2.   Soliciting for prostitution is the soliciting, inviting, inducing,
directing, or transporting of a person to any place with the intention of
promoting prostitution;
      3.   Letting premises for prostitution is the granting of the right of
use or the leasing of any premises, knowing that they are to be used for the
practice of prostitution, or allowing the continued use of the premises with
that knowledge; and
      4.   Letting premises for lewdness is the granting of the right of use or
the leasing of any premises, knowing that they are to be used for the practice
of lewdness or allowing the continued use of the premises with that knowledge.
10-407: DISORDERLY HOUSE:
   A disorderly house means any structure or vehicle by which the peace,
comfort, health, welfare or decency of the public is disturbed by reason of the
people therein committing or resorting to any of the following acts:
      1.   The sale, distribution, possession or use of any controlled
dangerous substance, the sale, distribution, possession or use of which is
declared unlawful by state statute;
      2.   The violation of any of the ordinances of this city or statutes of
this state regulating the sale, distribution, possession or use of alcoholic
beverages including beer containing more than one-half of one percent (.5%)
alcohol by volume;
      3.   The performance of any sexual act declared unlawful by state statute
or city ordinance including, but not limited to, soliciting for purposes of
prostitution; or
      4.   The violation of any state statute or city ordinance prohibiting
gambling. (Prior Code, Chapter 14)
10-408: MAINTAINING OR LEASING A DISORDERLY HOUSE:
   A.   No person shall keep or maintain, or aid, abet or assist in keeping and
maintaining a disorderly house.
   B.   No owner, lessee, lessor, or other person, partnership or corporation
having control over any house, building, structure, tent, vehicle, mobile home,
or recreational vehicle shall knowingly use, lease, sub-lease or otherwise
permit the use of same for the purpose of keeping therein any disorderly house,
and knowing or ascertaining that such house, building, structure, tent,
vehicle, mobile home, or recreational vehicle is so occupied as a disorderly
house, no persons, partnership or corporation shall continue to grant
permission to so use such premises as a disorderly house. (Prior Code, Chapter
14)
10-409: RESIDENTS AND VISITORS TO DISORDERLY HOUSE:
No person shall knowingly reside in, enter into, or remain in a disorderly
house. In any prosecution for violation of this section, the city shall have
the burden to prove such knowledge by direct evidence only and not by
circumstantial evidence. This section shall not apply to physicians or officers
in the discharge of their professional or official duties. (Prior Code, Chapter
14)
10-410: NUDITY; IMPROPER DRESS; INDECENT EXPOSURE:
It is unlawful for any person to:
      1.   Appear in any public place in the city in a state of nudity;
      2.   Appear in any public place in the city in any offensive, indecent or
lewd dress; or
      3.   Make an indecent public exposure of his or her person. (Prior Code,
Chapter 14)
10-411: DEFINITIONS; OBSCENITY REGULATIONS:
The following terms when used in the chapter shall have the meaning
respectively ascribed to them in this section:
      1.   "Obscene" means that to the average person applying contemporary
community standards:
         a.   The predominant appeal of the matter taken as a whole, is to
prurient interest; i.e. shameful or morbid interest in sexual conduct, nudity,
or excretion;
         b.   The matter depicts or describes in a patently offensive manner
sexual conduct regulated by Title 21 of the Oklahoma Statutes; and
         c.   The work, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic,
political or scientific value;
      2.   "Material" means any book, magazine, newspaper or other printed or
written material or any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture, or other
pictorial representation or any statue or other figure, or any recording,
transcription or mechanical, chemical, or electrical reproduction or any other
articles, equipment or machines;
      3.   "Person" means any individual, partnership, firm, association,
corporation or other legal entity;
      4.   "Disseminate" means to transfer possession of, with or without
consideration;
      5.   "Knowingly" means being aware of the character and the content of
the material;
      6.   "Nudity" means the showing of the human mate or female genitals or
pubic area with less than a fully opaque covering, or the depiction of covered
male genitals in a discernible turgid state;
      7.   "Performance" means any preview, play, show, skit, film, dance or
other exhibition performed before an audience;
      8.   "Available to the public" means that the matter or performance may
be purchased or attended on a subscription basis, on a membership fee
arrangement, or for a separate fee for each item or performance;
      9.   "Service to patrons" means the provision of services to paying
guests in establishments providing food and beverages; including but not
limited to hostessing, hat checking, cooking, bar tending, serving, table
setting and clearing, waiter and waitressing, and entertaining; and
      10.   "Promote" means to cause, permit, procure, counsel or assist.
10-412: PROHIBITED OBSCENE CONDUCT:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to:
      1.   Knowingly disseminate, sell, offer for sale, publish, display,
distribute, make available to the public or buy any obscene material;
      2.   Knowingly engage in commerce for commercial gain with materials
depicting and describing explicit sexual conduct, nudity, or exhibition
utilizing displays, circulars, advertisements and other public sales efforts
that promote such commerce primarily on the basis of their prurient appeal;
      3.   Knowingly engage or participate in any obscene performance made
available to the public; or
      4.   Provide service to patrons in such a manner as to expose to public
view:
         a.   His or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal region
or pubic hair region;
         b.   Any device, costume or covering which gives the appearance of or
simulates the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal region or pubic
hair region;
         c.   Any portion of the female breast at or below the areola thereof;
or
         d.   Knowingly promote the commission of any of the above listed
unlawful acts.
   B.   Each complete or partial display or other material exhibition of any
motion picture film or other material shall be deemed to constitute a separate
offense. The provisions of Sections
10-411 and
10-412 shall not apply to a projectionist, assistant projectionist, usher or
cashier provided such person has no financial interest in the motion picture
theatre so long as that person is not acting as director or manager of the
theatre. (Prior Code, Chapter 14)
10-413: VAGRANCY:
It is unlawful to be a vagrant in the limits of the city. For the purposes of
this section, a vagrant means any person who loiters or remains in or wanders
about, a public or private place for any of the following purposes:
      1.   For the purpose of gambling with cards, dice or other gambling
paraphernalia;
      2.   For the purpose of engaging in prostitution or soliciting
prostitution or soliciting for an act of lewdness;
      3.   For the purpose of engaging in theft, or breaking and entering any
building, property or automobile of another;
      4.   For the purpose of injuring, destroying, molesting or defacing any
property of another;
      5.   For the purpose of assaulting any person;
      6.   For the purpose of begging or soliciting alms, provided that this
section shall not apply to persons soliciting alms for bona fide religious,
charitable or eleemosynary organizations with the authorization of such
organizations; or
      7.   For the purpose of selling, purchasing, trading or otherwise
exchanging, procuring or making available illegal drugs or contraband.
(Prior Code, Chapter 14)
10-414: CURFEW FOR MINORS:
   A.   For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
      1.   "Minor" is any person under the age of eighteen (18);
      2.   "Parent" is the natural or adoptive parent of a minor;
      3.   "Guardian" is any person other than a parent who has legal
guardianship of a minor;
      4.   "Custodian" is any person over the age of twenty-one (21) years who
is in loco parentis to a minor; and
      5.   Public place means any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, park,
playground or place to which the general public has access and a right to
resort for business, entertainment or other lawful purpose. A public place
shall include, but not be limited to, any store, shop, restaurant, tavern,
bowling alley, cafe, theater, drug store, pool room, shopping center and any
other place devoted to amusement or entertainment of the general public. It
shall also include the front or immediate area of the above.
   B.   It is unlawful for any minor to remain, wander, stroll or play in any
public place on foot or to cruise about without a set destination in any
vehicle in, about or upon any public place in the city between the hours of 11:
00 P.M. and 6:00 A.M. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 12:00
A.M. midnight and 6:00 A.M. Friday through Saturday unless:
      1.   The minor is accompanied by a parent, guardian, custodian or other
adult person having custody or control of such minor;
      2.   The minor is on an emergency errand or specific business or activity
directed or permitted by his parent, guardian or other adult person having the
care and custody of the minor; or
      3.   Where the presence of such minor is connected with or required by
some legitimate employment, trade, profession or occupation.
   C.   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation operating or having
charge of any public place to knowingly permit or suffer the presence of minors
between the hours of curfew designated in Subsection B of this section.
   D.   It is unlawful for any parent, guardian, custodian or other adult
person having custody or control of any minor to suffer or permit or by
inefficient control to allow such person to be on any public place within the
city between the hours of curfew designated in Subsection B of this section.
The provisions of this section do not apply if:
      1.   The minor is accompanied by a parent, guardian, custodian or other
adult person having the care, custody or control of the minor;
      2.   The minor is on an emergency errand or specific business or activity
directed by his parent, guardian, custodian or other adult having the care and
custody of the minor; or
      3.   The parent, guardian or other adult person herein has made a missing
person notification to the city police department.
   E.   The council may permit by resolution or motion procedures for advance
notice or registration with the city of special events or functions sponsored
by churches, schools, clubs or other organizations which require minors to be
out at a later time. The council may also prescribe the procedures for taking
into custody minors found in violation of this section.
10-415: SLEEPING ON THE STREETS; DEPOTS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person, between the hours of 12:00 A.M. midnight
and sunrise, to sleep on any street, in any other public place, or on any
property of another without the express or tacit consent of the owner or person
in charge of such place.
   B.   It is unlawful for a person to loiter on or about the premises of any
public or private school or other public building, or in or about a depot of a
public carrier. (Prior Code, Chapter 14)
10-416: BEGGING PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to beg alms for any person, organization or
agency except an organization or agency, public or private, whose purpose or
one of whose purposes is to aid persons in need. (Prior Code, Chapter 14)
10-417: HARMFUL DECEPTION:
It is unlawful for any person knowingly to deceive another, whether by
impersonation, misrepresentation, or otherwise, when such deception results in
or contributes to the loss, damage, harm or injury of the person deceived or of
a third party, or results in or contributes to the benefit of the deceiver.
(Prior Code ch. 14)
10-418: FALSE OR BOGUS CHECKS:
It is unlawful for any person, with intent to cheat and defraud, to obtain or
attempt to obtain from any person, firm or corporation, any money, property or
valuable thing of the value of fifty dollars ($50.00) or less by means of any
false or bogus check or by any other written or printed or engraved instrument
or spurious coin. The term "false or bogus check" shall include checks or
orders given for money or property which are not honored on account of
insufficient funds of the maker to pay same, as against the maker or drawer
thereof. The making, drawing, issuing or delivering of a check, draft or order,
payment of which is refused by the drawee, shall be prima facie evidence of
intent to defraud and the knowledge of insufficient funds in or credit with,
such bank or other depository. Such maker or drawer shall not have paid the
drawee the amount due thereon, together with the protest fees, and the check or
order shall be presented for payment within one hundred eighty (180) days after
same is delivered and accepted. (Prior Code ch. 14)
10-419: UNLAWFUL TO SELL OR FURNISH TOBACCO, NICOTINE OR VAPOR PRODUCT TO
PERSONS UNDER TWENTY-ONE (21) YEARS OF AGE; UNLAWFUL TO DISTRIBUTE TOBACCO,
NICOTINE OR VAPOR PRODUCTS OR TOBACCO, NICOTINE OR VAPOR PRODUCT SAMPLES TO ANY
PERSON UNDER TWENTY-ONE (21) YEARS OF AGE; UNLAWFUL TO SELL, GIVE OR FURNISH
MATERIALS OR DEVICES USED IN SMOKING, CHEWING OR OTHER METHODS OF CONSUMPTION
OF TOBACCO, NICOTINE OR VAPOR PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF TWENTY-ONE
(21) YEARS OF AGE; UNLAWFUL TO PURCHASE OR HAVE POSSESSION OF TOBACCO, NICOTINE
OR VAPOR PRODUCTS BY PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF TWENTY-ONE YEARS OF AGE; UNLAWFUL
TO FALSIFY PROOF OF AGE; EDUCATION OR TOBACCO USE CESSATION PROGRAM
REQUIREMENTS; UNLAWFUL TO SELL TOBACCO PRODUCTS EXCEPT IN ORIGINAL SEALED
PACKAGING; UNLAWFUL TO DISPLAY TOBACCO, NICOTINE OR VAPOR PRODUCTS IN A MANNER
THAT ALLOWS PUBLIC ACCESS:
NICOTINE PRODUCTS: Any product that contains nicotine extracted or isolated
from plants, vegetables, fruit, herbs, weeds, genetically modified organic
matter, or that is synthetic in origin and is intended for human consumption;
provided, however, this term shall not include products approved by the United
States Food and Drug Administration for smoking cessation.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, fiduciary, partnership, corporation, trust, or
association, however formed.
PROOF OF AGE: A driver license, license for identification only, or other
generally accepted means of identification that describes the individual as
twenty-one (21) years of age or older and contains a photograph or other
likeness of the individual and appears on its face to be valid.
SAMPLE: A tobacco product, nicotine product or vapor product distributed to
members of the public at no cost for the purpose of promoting the product.
SAMPLING: The distribution of samples to members of the public in a public
place.
TOBACCO PRODUCTS: Any product that contains tobacco and is intended for human
consumption.
TRANSACTION SCAN: The process by which a seller checks, by means of a
transaction scan device, the validity of a driver license or other government-
issued photo identification.
TRANSACTION SCAN DEVICE: Any commercial device or combination of devices used
at a point of sale or entry that is capable of deciphering in an electronically
readable format the information encoded on the magnetic strip or bar code of a
driver license or other government-issued photo identification; and
VAPOR PRODUCT: Noncombustible products, that may or may not contain nicotine,
that employ a mechanical heating element, battery, electronic circuit, or other
mechanism, regardless of shape or size, that can be used to produce a vapor in
a solution or other form. "Vapor products" shall include any vapor cartridge or
other container with or without nicotine or other form that is intended to be
used with an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo,
electronic pipe, or similar product or device and any vapor cartridge or other
container of a solution, that may or may not contain nicotine, that is intended
to be used with or in an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic
cigarillo or electronic device. "Vapor products" do not include any products
regulated by the United States Food and Drug Administration under Chapter V of
the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act. (Title 63 OK Statutes § 1-229.12)
   B.   Unlawful to Sell or Furnish Any Tobacco, Nicotine or Vapor Product to
Persons under twenty-one (21) years of age:
      1.   It is unlawful for any person to sell or furnish in any manner any
tobacco, nicotine or vapor product to another person who is under twenty-one
(21) years of age, or to purchase in any manner a tobacco product on behalf of
any such person. It shall not be unlawful for any employee under twenty-one
(21) years of age to handle tobacco, nicotine or vapor products when required
in the performance of the employee's duties.
      2.   A person engaged in the sale or distribution of tobacco, nicotine or
vapor products shall demand proof of age from a prospective purchaser or
recipient if an ordinary person would conclude based on appearance that the
prospective purchaser may be under twenty-one (21) years of age.
      If an individual engaged in the sale or distribution of tobacco products,
nicotine products or vapor products has demanded proof of age from a
prospective purchaser or recipient who is not under twenty-one (21) years of
age, the failure to subsequently require proof of age shall not constitute a
violation of subsection B2 of this section.
      3.   When a person violates the provisions of subsection B1 or B2 of this
section shall be guilty of an offense and the City shall assess such a person a
fine of:
         a.   Not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first
offense.
         b.   Not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the second
offense.
         c.   Not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) for subsequent
offenses within a two-year period following the occurrences of the first
offense.
      Upon failure of any person to pay an administrative fine within ninety
(90) days of the assessment of the fine, the City shall notify the Department
of Public Safety, and the Department shall suspend or not issue a driver
license to the person until proof of payment has been furnished to the
Department of Public Safety.
      4.   Proof that the defendant demanded, was shown, and reasonably relied
upon proof of age shall be a defense to any action brought pursuant to this
section. A person cited for violating this section shall be deemed to have
reasonably relied upon proof of age, and such person shall not be found guilty
of the violation if such person proves that:
         a.   the individual who purchased or received the tobacco product,
nicotine product or vapor product presented a driver license or other
government-issued photo identification purporting to establish that such
individual was twenty-one (21) years of age or older, or
         b.   the person cited for the violation confirmed the validity of the
driver license or other government-issued photo identification presented by
such individual by performing a transaction scan by means of a transaction scan
device.
      Provided, that this defense shall not relieve from liability any person
cited for a violation of this section if the person failed to exercise
reasonable diligence to determine whether the physical description and picture
appearing on the driver license or other government-issued photo identification
was that of the individual who presented it. The availability of the defense
described in this subsection does not affect the availability of any other
defense under any other provision of law.
      5.   If the sale is made by an employee of the owner of a store at which
tobacco products, nicotine products or vapor products are sold at retail, the
employee shall be guilty of the violation and shall be subject to the fine.
Each violation by any employee of an owner of a store licensed to sell tobacco
products or nicotine products or permitted to sell vapor products shall be
deemed a violation against the owner for purposes of a license suspension
pursuant to subsection B3 of this section. Each violation by an employee of a
store predominantly engaged in the sale of vapor products in which the sale of
other products is merely incidental shall be deemed a violation against the
owner for purposes of a sales tax permit suspension pursuant to the provisions
of subsection B3 of this section. An owner of a store licensed to sell tobacco
products or nicotine products or permitted to sell vapor products shall not be
deemed in violation of the provisions of the Prevention of Youth Access to
Tobacco Act for any acts constituting a violation by any person, when the
violation occurs prior to actual employment of the person by the storeowner or
the violation occurs at a location other than the owner's retail store. For
purposes of determining the liability of a person controlling franchises or
business operations in multiple locations, for any violations of subsection B1
or B2 of this section, each individual franchise or business location shall be
deemed a separate entity.
      Upon failure of the employee to pay the administrative fine within ninety
(90) days of the day of the assessment of such fine, the ABLE Commission shall
notify Service Oklahoma, and Service Oklahoma shall suspend or not issue a
driver license to the employee until proof of payment has been furnished to
Service Oklahoma.
      Upon failure of a storeowner to pay the administrative fine within ninety
(90) days of the assessment of the fine, the ABLE Commission shall notify the
Tax Commission, and the Tax Commission shall suspend the store's license to
sell tobacco products or nicotine products or the store's sales tax permit for
a store that is predominantly engaged in the sale of vapor products in which
the sale of other products is merely incidental until proof of payment has been
furnished to the Oklahoma Tax Commission. (Title 63 OK Statutes § 1-229.13)
   C.   Unlawful to Distribute Tobacco, Nicotine or Vapor Products orTobacco,
Nicotine or Vapor Product Samples to any Person under twenty-one (21) years of
age.
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person or retailer to distribute
tobacco products, nicotine products, vapor products or product samples to any
person under twenty-one (21) years of age.
      2.   No person shall distribute tobacco products, nicotine products,
vapor products or product samples in or on any public street, sidewalk, or park
that is within three hundred (300) feet of any playground, school, or other
facility when the facility is being used primarily by persons under twenty-one
(21) years of age.
      3.   When a person violates the provisions of subsection C1 or C2 of this
section shall be guilty of an offense and the City shall assess such a person a
fine of:
         a.   not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first
offense.
         b.   not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the second
offense.
         c.   not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) for subsequent
offenses within a two-year period following the occurrences of the first
offense.
      Upon failure of any person to pay an administrative fine within ninety
(90) days of the assessment of the fine, the City shall notify the Department
of Public Safety, and the Department shall suspend or not issue a driver
license to the person until proof of payment has been furnished to the
Department of Public Safety. (Title 63 OK Statutes § 1-229.18)
   D.   Unlawful to Sell, Give or Furnish Material or Devices used in Smoking,
Chewing or other Methods of consumption of Tobacco, Nicotine or Vapor Products
to Persons under twenty-one (21) years of age:
      1.   It is unlawful for any person to sell, give or furnish in any manner
to another person who is under twenty-one (21) years of age any material or
device used in the smoking, chewing, or other method of consumption of tobacco
products, nicotine products or vapor products, including cigarette papers,
pipes, holders of smoking materials of all types, and other items designed
primarily for the smoking or ingestion of tobacco products, nicotine products
or vapor products.
      2.   When a person violates subsection D1 of this section, the City shall
impose an administrative fine of not more than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00)
for each offense. (Title 63 OK Statutes § 1-229.26)
   E.   Unlawful to Purchase or have Possession of Tobacco, Nicotine or Vapor
Products by Persons under twenty-one (21) years of age; Unlawful to Falsify
Proof of Age; Education or Tobacco Use Cessation Program requirements:
      1.   It is unlawful for a person who is under twenty-one (21) years of
age to purchase, receive, or have in his or her possession a tobacco product,
nicotine product or vapor product, or to present or offer to any person any
purported proof of age which is false or fraudulent, for the purpose of
purchasing or receiving any tobacco product, nicotine product or vapor product.
It shall not be unlawful for an employee under twenty-one (21) years of age to
handle tobacco products, nicotine products or vapor products when required in
the performance of the employee's duties.
      2.   When a person violates subsection E1 of this section, the violator
shall complete an education or tobacco use cessation program approved by the
court. If the violator fails to complete the tobacco use cessation program
ordered by the court, a fine may be imposed that shall not exceed fifty dollars
($50.00) for a first offense or one hundred dollars ($100.00) for subsequent
offenses. The violator may also be required to complete a community service
program or other appropriate programs or services as ordered by the court. The
court shall have jurisdiction over the violator for twelve (12) months
following sentencing to ensure all programs and orders of the court are
followed. (Title 10A. OK Statutes § 2-8-224)
   F.   Unlawful to Sell Tobacco, Nicotine or Vapor Products except in
original, sealed packaging.
      1.   It is unlawful for any person to sell Tobacco, Nicotine or Vapor
Products except in the original, sealed package in which they were placed by
the manufacturer.
      2.   When a person violates subsection F1 of this section, the City shall
impose an administrative fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00)
for each offense. (Title 63 OK Statutes § 1-229.19)
   G.   Unlawful to Display Tobacco, Nicotine or Vapor Products in a Manner
that allows Public Access.
      1.   It is unlawful for any person or retail store to display or offer
for sale tobacco products, nicotine products or vapor products in any manner
that allows public access to the tobacco products, nicotine products or vapor
products without assistance from the person displaying the tobacco products,
nicotine products or vapor products or an employee or the owner of the store.
The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to retail stores which do not
admit into the store persons under twenty-one (21) years of age.
      2.   When a person violates subsection G1 of this section, the City shall
impose an administrative fine of not more than Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00)
for each offense. (Title 63 OK Statutes § 1-229.21)
   H.   Enforcement:
      1.   Any conviction for a violation of this Article and any compliance
checks by a municipal police officer pursuant to subsection C of this section
shall be reported in writing to the Alcoholic Beverage Laws Enforcement (ABLE)
Commission within thirty (30) days of such conviction or compliance check. Such
reports shall be compiled in a manner prescribed by the ABLE Commission.
Convictions shall be reported by the Court Clerk or his/her designee and
compliance checks shall be reported by the Chief of Police or his/her designee.
      2.   For the purpose of determining second or subsequent violations, both
the offenses penalized by the ABLE Commission as administrative fines and the
offenses penalized by the municipality and reported to the ABLE Commission,
shall be considered together in such determination.
      3.   Persons under twenty-one (21) years of age may be enlisted by the
Police Department to assist in compliance checks and enforcement of this
Article pursuant to the rules of the ABLE Commission. (Ord. 540, 6-6-2006; amd.
Ord. 689, 10-7-2014; Ord. 769, 3-5-2019; Ord. 785, 2-18-2020; Ord. 809, 2-15-
2022; Ord. 823, 11-1-2022; Ord. 854, 9-17-2024; Ord. 856, 12-17-2024)
10-420: PERMITTING OR ALLOWING GATHERINGS WHERE MINORS ARE CONSUMING ALCOHOLIC
BEVERAGES:
   A.   Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall apply:
    ALCOHOL: Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from
whatever source or by whatever process produced.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every
liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which contains
one-half of one percent (1/2 of 1%) or more of alcohol by volume and which is
fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with
other substances. This term includes intoxicating beverages and "low point
beer" as defined herein.
   GATHERING: A party, gathering, or event, where a group of three (3) or more
persons have assembled or are assembling for a social occasion or social
activity.
   INTOXICATING BEVERAGE: Includes beverages containing more than three and
two-tenths percent (3.2%) alcohol by weight.
   LEGAL GUARDIAN:
      1.   A person who, by court order, is the guardian of the person of a
minor; or
      2.   A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the
court.
   LOW POINT BEER: Means and includes beverages containing more than one-half
of one percent (1/2 of 1%) alcohol by volume, and not more than three and two-
tenths percent (3.2%) alcohol by weight, including, but not limited to, beer or
cereal malt beverages obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion of
barley or other grain, malt or similar products.
   MINOR: Any person less than twenty one (21) years of age.
   PARENT: A person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, foster parent, or
stepparent of another person.
   PREMISES: Any residence or other private property, place, or premises,
including any commercial or business premises.
   RESPONSE COSTS: The costs associated with responses by law enforcement,
fire, and other emergency response providers to a gathering, including, but not
limited to:
      1.   Salaries and benefits of law enforcement, code enforcement, fire, or
other emergency response personnel for the amount of time spent responding to,
remaining at, or otherwise dealing with a gathering, and the administrative
costs attributable to such response(s);
      2.   The cost of any medical treatment for any law enforcement, code
enforcement, fire, or other emergency response personnel injured responding to,
remaining at, or leaving the scene of a gathering;
      3.   The cost of repairing any city equipment or property damaged, and
the cost of the use of any such equipment, in responding to, remaining at, or
leaving the scene of a gathering; and
      4.   Any other allowable costs related to the enforcement of this
section.
   B.   Consumption Of Alcohol By Minor In Public Place, Place Open To Public,
Or Place Not Open To Public: Except as permitted by state law, it is unlawful
for any minor to:
      1.   Consume at any public place or any place open to the public
alcoholic beverage; or
      2.   Consume at any place not open to the public any alcoholic beverage,
unless in connection with the consumption of the alcoholic beverage that minor
is being supervised by his or her parent or legal guardian.
   C.   Hosting, Permitting, Or Allowing A Party, Gathering, Or Event Where
Minors Consuming Alcoholic Beverages Prohibited:
      1.   Prevention Of Consumption By Minors: It is the duty of any person
having control of any premises, who knowingly hosts, permits, or allows a
gathering at said premises to take all reasonable steps to prevent the
consumption of alcoholic beverages by any minor at the gathering. Reasonable
steps are controlling access to alcoholic beverages at the gathering;
controlling the quantity of alcoholic beverages present at the gathering;
verifying the age of persons attending the gathering by inspecting drivers'
licenses or other government issued identification cards to ensure that minors
do not consume alcoholic beverages while at the gathering; and supervising the
activities of minors at the gathering.
      2.   Knowingly Permit Minor To Consume Alcoholic Beverage: It is unlawful
for any person having control of any premises to knowingly host, permit, or
allow a gathering to take place at said premises where at least one minor
consumes an alcoholic beverage, whenever the person having control of the
premises either knows a minor has consumed an alcoholic beverage or reasonably
should have known that a minor consumed an alcoholic beverage had the person
taken all reasonable steps to prevent the consumption of an alcoholic beverage
by a minor as set forth in subsection C1 of this section.
      3.   Alcoholic Beverages Between Minor And Guardian: This section shall
not apply to conduct involving the use of alcoholic beverages that occurs
exclusively between a minor and his or her parent or legal guardian.
      4.   Alcohol During Family Activity: Nothing in this section should be
interpreted to prohibit any family activity held in the confines of the family
home from providing the use of alcohol to immediate family members within the
supervision of parents and guardians. However, if a minor leaves such a family
gathering intoxicated and is found in public then said providers of alcohol
will be held responsible in the same manner as a nonfamily gathering.
      5.   Religious Practices: Nothing in this section should be interpreted
to prohibit any religious practice which includes the use of alcohol. However,
if a minor leaves such a religious gathering intoxicated and is found to be in
public then said providers of alcohol will be held responsible in the same
manner as a nonreligious gathering.
      6.   Premises Licensed To Dispense Alcohol: This section shall not apply
to any premises licensed by the state of Oklahoma to dispense alcoholic
beverages.
      7.   Penalty: Any person who shall violate the provisions of this section
shall be deemed guilty of an offense against the city and upon conviction
thereof shall be punished for violation of a class A offense, with fine of five
hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment not exceeding sixty (60) days, or
by both such fine and imprisonment, plus all court costs and statutory
penalties, as set forth in section
10-701 of this part.
      8.   Reservation Of Legal Options: Violations of this section may be
prosecuted by the city of Grove criminally, civilly, and/or administratively as
provided by this code. The city may seek administrative fees and response costs
associated with enforcement of this section through all remedies or procedures
provided by statute, ordinance, or law. This section shall not limit the
authority of peace officers or private citizens to make arrests for any
criminal offense arising out of conduct regulated by this section, nor shall
they limit the city's ability to initiate and prosecute any criminal offense
arising out of the same circumstances necessitating the application of this
section.
      9.   Local Authority: This section shall not apply where prohibited or
preempted by state or federal law. (Ord. 605, 12-7-2010)
CHAPTER 5
OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS
SECTION:
10-501: Assault and battery prohibited.
10-501: ASSAULT AND BATTERY PROHIBITED:
   A.   It is unlawful to commit an assault or an assault and battery within
the city.
   B.   For the purposes of this section, an assault is any wilful and unlawful
attempt or offer with force or violence to do a corporal hurt to another. A
battery is any wilful and unlawful use of force or violence upon the person of
another. (Prior Code, Chapter 14)
CHAPTER 6
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC AUTHORITY
SECTION:
10-601: Resisting An Officer
10-602: Refusing Or Failing To Assist An Officer
10-603: Assault Or Battery Upon Police Or Other Law Officer
10-604: Rescuing Prisoners
10-605: Escape Of Prisoners
10-606: Impersonating An Officer Or Employee
10-607: False Alarms
10-608: False Representation To An Officer
10-609: Barricades
10-610: Resisting Public Officials
10-601: RESISTING AN OFFICER:
   A.   It is unlawful to resist, oppose or assault, or in any way interfere
with the police chief or any person duly authorized to act as such, while the
officer or person is discharging or attempting to discharge his official duties
within the limits of the city.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to warn or signal another so as to assist
such other person to flee, escape or evade an officer seeking to make an arrest
or for any person to bar or lock any door or barrier in the face of or in front
of an approaching officer.
   C.   Resisting an officer is the intentional opposition or resistance to, or
obstruction of, an individual acting in his official capacity, and authorized
by law to make a lawful arrest or seizure of property, or to serve any lawful
process or court order, when the offender knows or has reason to know that the
person arresting, seizing property, or serving process is acting in his
official capacity.
   D.   The words "obstruction of" shall, in addition to their common meaning,
include:
      1.   Flight by one sought to be arrested before the arresting officer can
restrain him and after notice is given that he is under arrest;
      2.   Any violence toward or any resistance or opposition to the arresting
officer after the arrested party is actually placed under arrest and before he
is under arrest; or
      3.   Refusal by the arrested party to give his name and make his identity
known to the arresting officer. (Prior code ch. 14)
10-602: REFUSING OR FAILING TO ASSIST AN OFFICER:
   A.   An officer of the city making or about to make an arrest, or executing
or about to execute a warrant or other process, in accordance with the
ordinances of the city or with state or federal law, or suppressing or about to
suppress a riot, affray or unlawful assembly, may call upon person or persons
to assist him in making such arrest, executing such process or suppressing such
riot, affray or unlawful assembly.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person lawfully called upon thus to assist an
officer of the city to refuse or fail to do so. (Prior code ch. 14)
10-603: ASSAULT OR BATTERY UPON POLICE OR OTHER LAW OFFICER:
It is unlawful for any person, without justifiable or excusable cause, to
knowingly commit any assault, battery or assault and battery upon the person of
a police officer or other officer of the law while in the performance of his
duties. (Prior code ch. 14)
10-604: RESCUING PRISONERS:
It is unlawful for any person, in any illegal manner, to set at liberty, rescue
or attempt to set at liberty, any prisoner or prisoners, from any officer or
employee of the city having legal custody of the same or from the city jail or
other place of confinement by the city, or to assist such prisoner in any
manner to escape from such prison or custody either before or after conviction,
including escape from a vehicle of confinement. (Prior code ch. 14)
10-605: ESCAPE OF PRISONERS:
It is unlawful for any person confined in the city jail or other place of
confinement by the city, or working upon the streets or other public places of
the city in pursuance of any judgment, or otherwise held in legal custody by
authority of the city, to escape or attempt to escape from any such jail,
prison or custody. (Prior code ch. 14)
10-606: IMPERSONATING AN OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE:
It is unlawful for any person to impersonate any officer or employee of the
city, falsely represent himself to be an officer or employee of the city, or
exercise or attempt to exercise any of the duties, functions or powers of an
officer or employee of the city without being duly authorized to do so. (Prior
code ch. 14)
10-607: FALSE ALARMS:
It is unlawful for any person to turn in a false alarm of any nature or in any
manner to deceive or attempt to deceive the fire department or police
department or any officer or employee thereof with reference to any fire alarm
or reported fire, accident or other emergency or knowingly to cause the fire
department or police department or its officers or employees to make a useless
run. (Prior code ch. 14)
10-608: FALSE REPRESENTATION TO AN OFFICER:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, or any agent or employee
thereof, knowingly to make any material misrepresentation to any officer,
employee or agency of the city government in any official application to, or
official dealing or negotiation with, such officer or agency; or to commit
perjury before any tribunal or officer of the city. (Prior code ch. 14)
10-609: BARRICADES:
   A.   Removal Of Barricades: It is unlawful for any person except by proper
authority to remove any barricade or obstruction placed by authority of the
city to keep traffic off any pavement, street, curb, sidewalk or other area.
(Prior code ch. 14; amd. Ord. 624, 9-6-2011)
   B.   Emergency Barricades: If any individual goes through the barricade, the
court may order restitution in an amount equal to the actual costs of the
emergency response and repair or replacement of any damaged or lost emergency
equipment. (Ord. 624, 9-6-2011)
10-610: RESISTING PUBLIC OFFICIALS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person knowingly or wilfully to:
      1.   Resist, oppose or obstruct the chief of police, any other police
officer, the municipal judge, or any other officer or employee of the city in
the discharge of his official duties;
      2.   Threaten or otherwise intimidate or attempt to intimidate any such
officer or employee from the discharge of his official duties; or
      3.   Assault or beat, or revile, abuse, be disrespectful to, use abusive
or indecent language toward or about, any such officer or employee while such
officer or employee is in the discharge of his official duties. (1983 Code)
CHAPTER 7
PENALTIES
SECTION:
10-701: General penalties.
10-701: GENERAL PENALTIES:
Any violation of the provisions of this part is punishable by fine or
imprisonment as provided in Section
1-108 of this code. (Prior Code, Chapter 14)
PART 11
PARKS, RECREATION AND CULTURAL AFFAIRS
CHAPTER 1
RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
SECTION:
   Article A. Recreation Generally
11-101: Rules For Recreational Facilities
11-102: Fees To Be Determined
11-103: Penalty
   Article B. Recreational Commission
11-110: Creation Of Recreational Commission
11-111: Terms Of Members Of Recreational Commission
11-112: Purpose Of Recreational Commission
11-113: Definition
11-114: Vacancies In The Office Of Board Members
11-115: Rules And Regulations
11-116: Duties And Powers
11-117: Procedure
11-118: Expenditures
11-119: Meetings
ARTICLE A. RECREATION GENERALLY
11-101: RULES FOR RECREATIONAL FACILITIES:
The city council shall promulgate, invoke, create, amend and enforce such
rules, regulations, and other requirements as it deems necessary or expedient
in connection with fishing and fishing privileges, hunting and hunting
privileges, boating and boating privileges, and swimming, and the use of all
other recreational facilities owned or operated by the city. (Prior Code, Sec.
15-1)
11-102: FEES TO BE DETERMINED:
The city shall provide by rules, from time to time, the fees charged for any
such recreational privileges on any property or facility for recreational
purposes owned or operated by the city. (Prior Code, Sec. 15-2)
11-103: PENALTY:
It is unlawful for any person to use any of such recreational facilities or to
hunt, fish, swim or use any boat in connection with any of the recreational
facilities owned or operated by the city without having to comply with the
rules and regulations promulgated by the city council in connection therewith.
Anyone violating any of the rules and regulations, or failing to comply with
such, shall be guilty of an offense and on conviction thereof, shall be fined
not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) plus court costs and penalties.
(Ord. 454, 5-16-2000)
ARTICLE B. RECREATIONAL COMMISSION
11-110: CREATION OF RECREATIONAL COMMISSION:
There is hereby created in the city a recreational commission for the city to
be comprised of five (5) residents of the county. There is also established the
office of recreational superintendent who is appointed as outlined in section
33-107 of title 11 of the Oklahoma Statutes. (Ord. 302, 6-4-1985)
11-111: TERMS OF MEMBERS OF RECREATIONAL COMMISSION:
   A.   The mayor shall nominate one member to serve for a period of one year,
two (2) members to serve for a period of two (2) years, two (2) members to
serve for a period of three (3) years. Such nominees shall be confirmed by a
majority of the city council. The members of the board of recreational
commissioners appointed upon the passage and approval of this chapter shall all
serve an interim term to July 1, 1985, on which date the respective terms of
office of the commission are so appointed shall begin. The mayor, upon
nomination of such commission, shall designate which member shall serve for a
period of one year, which members shall serve for a period of two (2) years,
which shall serve for a period of three (3) years. The members of the board of
recreational commissioners shall be appointed from residents of the county. An
effort shall be made to secure the services of persons best qualified to plan
for the future growth, development and improvements of recreational facilities
for the city as a whole. The members of the board of recreational commissioners
shall serve without salary, and in the event of a vacancy on the board for any
reason, a successor shall be appointed as herein provided for the unexpired
term only of such vacancy.
   B.   Immediately after the appointment and qualification of the members of
the board of recreational commissioners, the board shall meet and elect one of
their number as chairman and one of their number as secretary. Such officers
when so elected, shall serve in their respective capacity until July 1, 1985,
at which time a chairman and secretary shall be elected for a term of one year,
or until their successors are elected and qualified. (Ord. 302, 6-4-1985)
11-112: PURPOSE OF RECREATIONAL COMMISSION:
The purpose of the commission is to promote the establishment, operation and
support of public recreational facilities for the welfare of the people in and
for the city, and to establish a comprehensive plan for the orderly development
for recreational facilities in and for the city. (Ord. 302, 6-4-1985)
11-113: DEFINITION:
The term "recreational facilities" as used in this chapter shall include, but
not be limited to, those facilities dealing with outdoor activities such as
hunting, fishing, swimming, sports and camping areas. (Ord. 302, 6-4-1985)
11-114: VACANCIES IN THE OFFICE OF BOARD MEMBERS:
If any member appointed to the board of recreational commissioners shall desire
to resign from the membership of the board, the member shall give the board a
resignation in writing with at least ten (10) days' notice. Upon receipt of the
notice, the members of the board shall notify the mayor who shall appoint
another member to serve the unexpired term created by the vacancy. (Ord. 302,
6-4-1985)
11-115: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The board of recreational commissioners shall prescribe rules and regulations
governing and controlling the transaction of business before it, and shall
determine a date each month for regular meetings. Special meetings may be
called at any time by the chairman of the board. (Ord. No. 302, 6/4/85)
11-116: DUTIES AND POWERS:
The duties and powers of the board of recreational commissioners shall be as
follows:
      1.   To investigate and recommend to the mayor and council suitable
recreational ordinances for the city;
      2.   To investigate and make recommendations concerning the physical
development, growth, improvement, convenience, and beautification of the city
as it relates to recreational facilities;
      3.   To investigate all matters relating to the location and development
of recreational places, location and design of buildings regarding recreational
facilities and to make a report of their findings on any proposed or
contemplated project relative to recreational facilities to the city council;
and
      4.   All findings and recommendations of the board affecting private
property shall be submitted in writing to the city council for its examination,
approval or rejection.
(Ord. No. 302, 6/4/85)
11-117: PROCEDURE:
All projects or matters that fall within the purview of the duties of the board
of recreational commissioners, as herein specified, that may come before the
city council shall be referred to the board of recreational commissioners for
investigation and report before any final action can be taken thereon. However,
if the board of recreational commissioners shall fail to make an investigation
and report on any matter or subject referred to it for a period of sixty (60)
days, such failure shall be considered a refusal to approve the proposed plan
or project, and the city council may thereupon act upon such proposal, plan or
project as though such matter had not been referred to the board of
recreational commissioners. (Ord. No. 302, 6/4/85)
11-118: EXPENDITURES:
The board of recreational commissioners shall, as required, make application to
the city council for the funds that may be necessary for such board to expend
in order to carry out its duties as herein specified. Commencing with the next
fiscal Year following the enactment of this chapter, the board of recreational
commissioners shall make application to the city council for an appropriation
to be set up for its use in carrying out its duties. The city shall, if
possible, include such appropriation in its budget and appropriations. (Ord.
No. 302, 6/4/85)
11-119: MEETINGS:
There shall be held, besides the regular meetings of the recreational
commission, joint meetings with the recreational board and the board of park
commissioners at least once every six (6) months in order for both boards or
commissions to exchange ideas for the orderly development and establishment of
comprehensive plans for both park and recreational facilities within the city.
(Ord. No. 302, 6/4/85)
CHAPTER 2
PARK BOARD
SECTION:
11-201: Creation of board of park commissioners.
11-202: Terms of members of board of park commissioners.
11-203: Purpose of park board.
11-204: Definition.
11-205: Vacancies in the office of board members.
11-206: Rules and regulations.
11-207: Duties and powers.
11-208: Procedure.
11-209: Expenditures.
11-210: Land included in park.
11-211: Restrictions.
11-201: CREATION OF BOARD OF PARK COMMISSIONERS:
There is hereby created in the city, a Board of Park Commissioners for the
Grove Springs Park located in the city to be comprised of five (5) residents of
the county. There is also established the office of park superintendent who is
appointed and removed by the city manager. (Ord. No. 220, 10/3/78)
11-202: TERMS OF MEMBERS OF BOARD OF PARK COMMISSIONERS:
   A.   The mayor shall nominate one member to serve for a period of one year,
two (2) members to serve for a period of two (2) years, two (2) members to
serve for a period of three (3) years. Such nominees shall be confirmed by a
majority of the city council. The members of the board of park commissioners
appointed upon the passage and approval of this chapter shall all serve an
interim term to July 1, 1979, on which date the respective terms of office of
the commission are so appointed shall begin. The mayor, upon nomination of such
commission, shall designate which member shall serve for a period of one year,
which members shall serve for a period of two (2) years, which shall serve for
a period of three (3) years. The members of the board of park commissioners
shall be appointed from residents of the county. An effort shall be made to
secure the services of persons best qualified to plan for the future growth,
development and improvements of recreational facilities for the city as a
whole. The members of the board of park commissioners shall serve without
salary, and in the event of a vacancy on the board for any reason, a successor
shall be appointed as herein provided for the unexpired term only of such
vacancy.
   B.   Immediately after the appointment and qualification of the members of
the board of park commissioners, the board shall meet and elect one of their
number as chairman and one of their number as secretary. Such officers, when so
elected, shall serve in their respective capacity until July 1, 1979, at which
time a chairman and secretary shall be elected for a term of one year, or until
their successors are elected and qualified. (Ord. No. 220, 10/3/78)
State Law Reference: Public recreation boards or commissions creation in
cities, membership, etc., 11 O.S. Section 33-105.
11-203: PURPOSE OF PARK BOARD:
The purposes of the board are to promote and establish park facilities for the
city, for the benefit of the public and to eliminate fire hazards by keeping
the land designated as park use cleared of unnecessary timber and underbrush,
and to conserve soil and land and eliminate stagnant water pools, all of which
will benefit the public and the residents of the city, which will protect their
health and welfare by eliminating all health hazards now presently located on
the land designated for park use. (Ord. No. 220, 10/3/78; Ord. No. 302, 6/4/85)
11-204: DEFINITION:
The term "park facilities" as used in this chapter shall include but not be
limited to those facilities dealing with parks, picnic areas and camping areas.
(Ord. No. 220, 10/3/78; Ord. No. 302, 6/4/85)
11-205: VACANCIES IN THE OFFICE OF BOARD MEMBERS:
If any member appointed to the board of park commissioners shall desire to
resign from the membership of the board, the member shall give the board a
resignation in writing with at least ten (10) days notice. Upon receipt of the
notice, the members of the board shall notify the mayor who shall appoint
another member to serve the unexpired term created by the vacancy. (Ord. No.
220, 10/3/78)
11-206: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The board of park commissioners shall prescribe rules and regulations governing
and controlling the transaction of business before it, and shall determine a
date each month for regular meetings. Special meetings may be called at any
time by the chairman of the board. (Ord. No. 220, 10/3/78)
11-207: DUTIES AND POWERS:
The duties and powers of the board of park commissioners shall be as follows:
      1.   To investigate and recommend to the mayor and council suitable park
ordinances for the city;
      2.   To investigate and make recommendations concerning the physical
development, growth, improvement, convenience and beautification of the city as
it relates to park facilities;
      3.   To investigate all matters relating to the location and development
of parks, location and design of buildings regarding park facilities and to
make report of their findings on any proposed or contemplated project relative
to park facilities to the city council and to the board of recreational
commissioners for the city; and
      4.   All findings and recommendations of the board affecting private
property shall be submitted in writing to the city council for its examination,
approval or rejection.
(Ord. No. 220, 10/3/78; Ord. No. 302, 6/4/85)
11-208: PROCEDURE:
All projects or matters that fall within the purview of the duties of the board
of park commissioners, as herein specified, that may come before the city
council shall be referred to the board of park commissioners for investigation
and report before any final action shall be taken thereon. However, if the
board of park commissioners shall fail to make an investigation and report on
any matter or subject referred to it for a period of sixty (60) days, such
failure shall be considered a refusal to approve the proposed plan or project,
and the city council may thereupon act upon such proposal, plan or project as
though such matter had not been referred to the board of park commissioners.
(Ord. No. 220, 10/3/78)
11-209: EXPENDITURES:
The board of park commissioners shall, as required, make application to the
city council for the funds that may be necessary for such board to expend in
order to carry out its duties as herein specified. Commencing with the next
fiscal year following the enactment of this chapter, the board of park
commissioners shall make application to the city council for an appropriation
to be set up for its use in carrying out its duties. The city shall, if
possible, include such appropriation in its budget and appropriations. (Ord.
No. 220, 10/3/78)
11-210: LAND INCLUDED IN PARK:
The following described real property situated in Delaware County, State of
Oklahoma, is hereby designated as Grove Springs Park:
      1.   Lots 5, 6, 7 and 8, Block 7, Original Town of Grove, Delaware
County, Oklahoma;
      2.   Lots 1, 2, 3 and 7, Block 8, Original Town of Grove, Delaware
County, Oklahoma;
      3.   Tracts Nos. 28 GR-D 1500B; 1501; and 1502 as owned by the Grand
River Dam Authority in Section 6, TWP. 24 North, Range 24 East, Delaware
County, Oklahoma;
      4.   A tract comprising 1.99 acres donated by Eva Elliott in Lot 4,
Section 5, Township 24 North, Range 24 east; and
      5.   A tract comprised of .19 acres donated by Owen Butler and Harry
Halterman of Lot 7, Block 10, original Town of Grove.
The land described in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this section constitute 2.941
acres. (Ord. No. 220, 10/3/78, as amended)
11-211: RESTRICTIONS:
The real property described as the park is to be used for recreational purposes
only as per a warranty deed dated October 31, 1975, wherein Wayne Heffelman and
Mildred Heffelman, husband and wife, transferred the ownership for the benefit
of the city as long as the land was used for recreational, park facilities. The
remainder of the land was leased to the city by the Grand River Dam Authority
with the lease to expire on May 17, 1980, but the lease is to remain in full
force and effect as long as the land is used for recreational purposes. (Ord.
No. 220, 10/3/78)
CHAPTER 3
LIBRARY SERVICES
SECTION:
11-301: Financing And Supervision
11-302: Operation Of Public Library
11-303: Local Library Board
11-304: Powers And Duties Of Library Board; Expenditures And Receipts; Library
Fund; Personnel
11-305: Location
11-306: Grounds And Building
11-307: Library Board May Impose Fines Or Penalties
11-308: Donations
11-309: Annual Report Of Board
11-301: FINANCING AND SUPERVISION:
The Eastern Oklahoma District Library System has been established to serve
Adair, Cherokee, Delaware, MacIntosh, Muskogee, and Sequoyah Counties in
accordance with provisions of the Oklahoma Library Code to improve the Grove
Public Library by providing the operating budget with personnel, books, films,
equipment and other library materials and services and aid in the support of
said Library. (Ord. 432, 10-6-1998)
11-302: OPERATION OF PUBLIC LIBRARY:
The City hereby establishes and maintains a building and facilities for the use
and benefit of the citizens of the City. The City may establish branch
libraries in different parts of the Municipality to accommodate the citizens of
the Municipality, and as such, shall operate the Grove Public Library to the
benefit of the people of the City, in conjunction with Eastern Oklahoma
District Library System in conjunction with the Oklahoma Library Code. (Ord.
432, 10-6-1998)
11-303: LOCAL LIBRARY BOARD:
The Municipal governing body may, in its discretion and by ordinance, place the
management and control of the Public Library under a Library Board of
Directors. The Library Board shall consist of at least five (5) but not more
than nine (9) directors, chosen by the Municipal governing body from the
citizens of the Municipality with the reference to their fitness for such
office. No director shall receive compensation as such. Directors appointed to
the Library Board shall hold office for a term of five (5) years from May 1
following their appointment, and their terms shall be staggered. The Municipal
governing body may remove any director for misconduct or neglect of duty.
Vacancies in the Library Board of Directors shall be filled in the same manner
as original appointments.
The Library Board, immediately after the appointment and qualification of its
directors, shall meet and organize by electing one director as president, one
director as vice president/treasurer, and by electing such other officers as
the Board may deem necessary. (Ord. 432, 10-6-1998)
11-304: POWERS AND DUTIES OF LIBRARY BOARD; EXPENDITURES AND RECEIPTS; LIBRARY
FUND; PERSONNEL:
The Library Board shall adopt rules and regulations for its own guidance and
for the governance and operation of the Municipal Library, not inconsistent
with section 31-104, title 11, Oklahoma Statutes, which shall be subject to the
approval of the Municipal governing body. The Library Board shall have control
of the expenditure of all monies collected and placed to the credit of the
Library Fund, and of the construction of any library building, and of the
supervision, care and custody of the grounds, rooms or buildings constructed,
leased, or set apart for the Library. All money received by the Board on
account of the operation of the Library, or otherwise, shall be paid by the
Board to the Municipal Treasurer, who shall deposit the same in a special
account, separate and apart from other money in the Municipal Treasury, to be
designated the "Library Fund". Such money shall be paid out only upon warrants
authorized by the Library Board. The Library Board shall have authority to
establish a petty cash fund not to exceed the sum of one hundred dollars
($100.00) at any one time for use in maintaining the Library, which money shall
be expended by the librarian on forms prescribed and authorized by the Library
Board. (Ord. 432, 10-6-1998)
11-305: LOCATION:
The Grove Public Library is incorporated in the Eastern Oklahoma Library System
and the City will provide maintenance and necessary utility services at the
Library quarters; and the Eastern Oklahoma Library System will assume the
responsibility of improving the Grove Public Library by providing the operating
budget with personnel, books, films, equipment, and other library materials and
services, and will assume support of the Grove Public Library except that the
City shall continue to maintain suitable quarters for the Library and provide
maintenance and necessary utility services for the Library quarters, and may,
from time to time, at its option, appropriate funds for the operation and/or
improvement of said Grove Public Library. (Ord. 432, 10-6-1998)
11-306: GROUNDS AND BUILDING:
The Library Board shall have the power, with the approval of the Municipal
governing body, to purchase grounds and erect thereon a suitable building for
the use of the Municipal Library and to suitably equip the same, and to lease
rooms or buildings for the use of the Library. The title to any grounds so
purchased or leased, as well as any building thereon, shall be taken in the
name of the Municipality as grantee. (Ord. 432, 10-6-1998)
11-307: LIBRARY BOARD MAY IMPOSE FINES OR PENALTIES:
The Library Board may impose fines or suitable penalties for loss of, failure
to return, or damage to Library materials, subject to ordinances which the
Municipal governing body may enact. (Ord. 432, 10-6-1998)
11-308: DONATIONS:
Any person desiring to make donations for money, personal or real property for
the benefit of the Municipal Library shall have the right to vest the title to
such money or property in the Municipality, to be held and controlled by the
Municipality, when accepted, according to the terms of the donation. The
Municipality shall be held and considered to be a special trustee as to such
property or money donated. (Ord. 432, 10-6-1998)
11-309: ANNUAL REPORT OF BOARD:
The Library Board shall make, on or before July 31 in each year, at the
minimum, a preliminary annual report to the Municipal governing body stating:
   A.   The condition of its trust on June 30 of that year;
   B.   The various sums of money and property received from the Library Fund
and other sources, and how such monies have been expended and for what
purposes;
   C.   The budget for the Library for the next fiscal year;
   D.   Statistics on the general character and number of books and periodicals
which:
      1.   Are on hand;
      2.   Are lost or missing;
      3.   Have been added by purchase, gift or otherwise during the year; and
      4.   Have been loaned out during the year;
   E.   The number of persons making use of the Library during the year; and
   F.   Such other information, statistics and suggestions as it may deem of
general interest. (Ord. 432, 10-6-1998)
CHAPTER 4
CEMETERIES
SECTION:
11-401: Definitions; Application Of Chapter
11-402: Proper Conduct For Sacred Place
11-403: When Open To The Public; Business Hours
11-404: Entry, Parking And Use Of Avenues, Roads, Walks And Alleys
11-405: Enforcement Of Chapter And Cemetery Rules, Regulations, Etc.
11-406: Responsibilities Of City Clerk
11-407: Purchase Of Certificate Of Burial Rights
11-408: Schedule Of Charges
11-409: Perpetual Cemetery Maintenance Fund
11-410: Interment
11-411: Disinterment
11-412: Cremated Remains
11-413: Monuments
11-414: Landscaping And Decorations
11-401: DEFINITIONS; APPLICATION OF CHAPTER:
As used in this chapter:
BURIAL PERMIT: A permit that entitles said purchaser to have a grave opened on
a designated lot by a bonded contractor.
CEMETERY: The Buzzard Cemetery, Olympus Cemetery, and Olympus North Cemetery
owned and operated by the city of Grove, Oklahoma.
CERTIFICATE OF BURIAL RIGHTS: A certificate that entitles the owner thereof to
use the designated space as a place of burial within the lot boundaries for any
person they choose.
CITY: The city of Grove, Oklahoma, and the city government in all its forms,
including not only all city departments but also any agency, public trust,
commission, board or other person or entity acting for or on behalf of the city
of Grove.
CITY CLERK: The city clerk of the city of Grove, Oklahoma.
DECORATIONS: Any item(s) of temporary nature, placed on or around any grave,
space or lot including, but not limited to, ribbons, pictures, floral designs,
flowers, plants, trees, landscaping, rocks, stones, etc.
DIRECT BURIAL: The body is transferred from the place of death to the funeral
home, placed in a casket and then delivered directly to the burial site.
Interment of human remains shall be done within twenty four (24) hours after
death, or within a time frame established by the state of Oklahoma.
DISINTERMENT: The act of removing the remains of a person previously buried.
INDIGENT: A person without the financial means to pay the fees hereby
established.
INTERMENT: The act of burying the remains of a person.
MONUMENT: Memorials, grave markers, headstones, tombstones, private estate
family markers or any other type of commemorative permanent object intended to
be erected or placed on any grave or lot.
SEXTON: The superintendent of Buzzard Cemetery, Olympus Cemetery, and Olympus
North Cemetery.
VETERAN'S MEMORIAL MARKER: A permanent marker placed on a deceased person's
grave honoring their military service.
The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to establish the
administration, maintenance, management, and operation of the cemetery. The
city of Grove, Oklahoma, city council reserves the right to amend this chapter
when deemed appropriate. (Ord. 675, 1-7-2014)
11-402: PROPER CONDUCT FOR SACRED PLACE:
It is of utmost importance that there should be strict observance of the
properties of the cemetery. Hence, all persons within the cemetery should avoid
conduct unbecoming a sacred place. The following conduct is prohibited within
the cemetery:
   A.   Loud or boisterous talking;
   B.   Loitering on the grounds or in any of the buildings;
   C.   Peddling or soliciting the sale of any commodity within the cemetery;
   D.   Placing of signs, notices or advertisements of any kind within the
cemetery;
   E.   Bringing of dogs or cats into the cemetery or any of its buildings
unless on a leash and properly cleaned up after;
   F.   Children under sixteen (16) years of age unless accompanied by a
responsible adult;
   G.   Throwing of rubbish on the drives and paths or on any part of the
grounds or in the buildings of the cemetery;
   H.   Bringing of firearms into the cemetery except by a military escort
accompanying a veteran's funeral or attending a memorial service; and
   I.   Bringing of alcoholic beverages in the cemetery or buildings. (Ord.
675, 1-7-2014)
11-403: WHEN OPEN TO THE PUBLIC; BUSINESS HOURS:
The cemetery shall be open to the public during all daylight hours. Cemetery
personnel will be available for business only from eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
until four o'clock (4:00) P.M. during normal workdays. No person may enter the
cemetery at any time other than these established hours. (Ord. 675, 1-7-2014)
11-404: ENTRY, PARKING AND USE OF AVENUES, ROADS, WALKS AND ALLEYS:
   A.   Entry upon the cemetery premises shall be made by use of the drives
provided and indicated upon the recorded plat of the cemetery.
   B.   Visitor parking is allowed on paved cemetery roads only.
   C.   Persons within the cemetery shall use the avenues, roads, walks and
alleys and no one is permitted to walk upon or across lots or lawns unless it
is necessary to do so to gain access to one's own lot. The cemetery expressly
disclaims liability for any injuries sustained by anyone violating this rule.
   D.   No person may drive any motor vehicle of any kind in any cemetery
except upon the main roads and avenues provided therein for vehicular traffic.
No person may drive any motor vehicle or park any motor vehicle in any cemetery
unless in attendance at burial services or otherwise engaged in activities
consistent with the use of a cemetery. Excluded from this prohibition are any
types of equipment necessary for grave preparation or monument setting. (Ord.
675, 1-7-2014)
11-405: ENFORCEMENT OF CHAPTER AND CEMETERY RULES, REGULATIONS, ETC.:
The cemetery sexton, as well as other employees of the city of Grove, shall be
responsible for maintenance of the cemeteries, and enforcing rules and
regulations. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter or fails to comply with any of the requirements
hereof shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction shall be punished by
fines and costs as provided in section
1-108 of this code.
In addition, any person, firm or corporation found guilty of violations of any
provisions of this chapter may be prohibited from use of all cemeteries owned
by the city of Grove. In the case of prearrangements for a service, funeral or
burial being made prior to any person, firm or corporation being found guilty
of violations of this chapter and being prohibited from use of the cemeteries;
the owner of the certificate of burial rights may provide proof of
prearrangements and submit a written request for a onetime waiver of the
prohibition. Only upon approval of the city manager shall the prohibition be
waived. The onetime prohibition waiver does not give the violator the right to
use the cemetery until the prohibition is removed by the city manager. (Ord.
675, 1-7-2014)
11-406: RESPONSIBILITIES OF CITY CLERK:
   A.   Sale and collection of fees of all cemetery lots;
   B.   Issuance of a certificate of burial rights which shall entitle said
purchaser to all the rights and responsibilities herein provided, but shall not
give title to said purchaser of said lot or lots;
   C.   Issuance of a burial permit, which shall entitle said purchaser to have
a grave opened on the designated lot by a bonded contractor;
   D.   Keep a complete set of records as required by the state of Oklahoma
relating to cemeteries, burials and removal of the dead, etc.;
   E.   Keep a complete plat or map of the cemetery, showing the exact location
of said cemetery, and describing or indicating all sections, lots, interments,
etc., of said cemetery, and all other information as may be required by law or
ordinance;
   F.   Keep a complete record of all lots that have been sold and all
certificates of burial rights issued and the names and addresses of all
purchasers;
   G.   Keep a complete record of all burial permits issued, fees paid, and the
names and addresses of all persons buying said permits;
   H.   Keep a complete record of all disinterments made and fees paid
therefor;
   I.   Keep a book, furnished and owned by the city, known as the cemetery
burial record, in which shall be recorded the descendant's age and the date of
death, and number of the lot and block of burial, copies of burial or removal
permits, and all other information which may be required by law or ordinance;
and
   J.   Keep any other records which the city clerk shall deem important or
necessary. (Ord. 675, 1-7-2014)
11-407: PURCHASE OF CERTIFICATE OF BURIAL RIGHTS:
   A.   The sale of certificate of burial rights for a lot or lots located in
Buzzard Cemetery and Olympus Cemetery ceased on January 4, 2009. Sale of
certificate of burial rights for a lot or lots located in North Olympus
Cemetery began on January 5, 2009.
   B.   The purchaser of certificate of burial rights of any lot or lots agrees
to abide by all provisions of all laws and ordinances of this state and city in
force at any time relating to the cemetery, including all amendments hereafter
adopted, and all rules and regulations adopted in connection with said
cemetery. The purchaser hereby agrees that no transfer of the certificate of
burial rights of any cemetery lot or lots shall be made in whole or any part
thereof, to any other person without notice to and approval of the city. The
purchaser may relinquish the certificate of burial rights of any cemetery lot
or lots to the city as hereinafter provided. Said agreement shall be made at
the time of purchase.
   C.   Any person desiring to purchase a certificate of burial rights for a
cemetery lot or lots shall do so by paying the required fee to the city clerk
for such lot or lots desired. The certificate of burial rights for the lots in
such cemetery shall be sold according to the plans and specifications on file
in the city clerk's office. The cost of any certificate of burial rights for
any cemetery lot or lots shall be paid in full by check, cash, credit or debit
card. Upon the full payment of the required fee for the purchase of a cemetery
lot or lots, the city clerk shall issue to the purchaser a certificate of
burial rights.
   D.   The certificate of burial rights entitles the owner thereof (i.e., the
purchaser) to use the designated spaces as a place of burial within the lot
boundaries for any person they choose. The certificate shall identify the
purchaser and the specific lots and plots to which the certificate applies. No
other rights are granted except as explicitly stated in these rules. Title to
the real estate remains with the city of Grove.
   E.   Upon approval of written request to the city clerk, owners of the
certificate of burial rights may transfer the certificate to a new owner. If an
owner wishes to relinquish an unused certificate of burial rights for a
cemetery lot or lots, he or she can sell it back to the city of Grove at the
total price originally paid. No person may sell or exchange any certificate of
burial rights for a profit or gain.
   F.   Upon the death of the owner of a certificate of burial rights, all
rights evidenced by such a certificate shall pass to the owner's heirs,
legatees, or devisees in the same manner as other interests in personal
property. (Ord. 675, 1-7-2014)
11-408: SCHEDULE OF CHARGES:
A. Certificate of burial rights for cemetery lot       
   prices:
  1. Buzzard and Olympus Cemeteries:                  
   Standard grave                                    $ 75.00
  2. Olympus North Cemetery:                          
   Section A - Inground cremations - 5' x 5'         250.00
   Section B - Standard grave - 5' x 10'             250.00
   Section C - Scattering garden for a memorial      Cost plus 25%
     space on the section C common monument wall
   Section D - Standard grave - 5' x 10'             $ 250.00
   Section E - Standard grave - 5' x 10'             250.00
   Section F - Standard grave - 5' x 10'             250.00
   Section G - Baby land - 5' x 5'                   125.00
   Section H - Standard grave - 5' x 10'             250.00
   Section I - Standard grave - 5' x 10'             250.00
   Section EA and EB is for 8 standard graves - 5'   4,000.00
     x 10'
B. Burial permit fee                                   75.00
C. Interment and/or disinterment charges:              
  Monday through Friday 8:00 A.M. to 4:00 P.M.:       
   Inground cremations                               150.00
   Scattering garden                                $100.00 (interment only)
  After 4:00 P.M., weekend or holiday:                
   Inground cremations                              $250.00
   Scattering garden                                $200.00 (interment only)
D. Fee for marking gravesite area prior to interment   
   and/or disinterment:
  Monday through Friday 8:00 A.M. to 4:00 P.M.        No charge
  After 4:00 P.M., weekend or holiday                $100.00
  Failure to provide 24 hour advance notice          100.00
 
(Ord. 675, 1-7-2014)
11-409: PERPETUAL CEMETERY MAINTENANCE FUND:
   A.   In all cemeteries owned by the city of Grove where grave spaces, lots,
mausoleum crypts or niches are sold, whether above or below the surface of the
ground, not less than twenty five percent (25%) of the purchase price thereof
shall be segregated and set aside as a permanent trust fund to be known as the
"perpetual cemetery maintenance fund".
   B.   The perpetual cemetery maintenance fund shall be invested as allowed in
the city of Grove accounting policy and procedures, and the income shall be
used in improving, caring for, and embellishing the lots, walks, drives, parks
and other improvements in such cemetery and maintenance of office and care of
records.
   C.   The perpetual cemetery maintenance fund shall not be merged with any
other fund of said city. (Ord. 675, 1-7-2014)
11-410: INTERMENT:
   A.   Indigent interment will only be allowed in available lots at the
Olympus and Buzzard Cemeteries. Available lots will be determined by the
cemetery sexton.
   B.   For a person to be eligible for indigent interment, the funeral home
director or family must submit documentation and a written notice to the city
manager requesting an individual be considered as indigent. Upon review of
documentation, the city manager will make the final determination.
   C.   Prior to any interment being made, the funeral director, owner, or
purchaser of the lot on which the interment is to be made, shall make
application for a burial permit to the city clerk at least twenty four (24)
hours prior thereto, and the city clerk shall be informed at such time of the
size of the outside case to be used, the location of the grave on the lot, who
is to be buried and any other information necessary to comply with state and
local laws and ordinances.
      1.   If the application is found to be in order, and fees have been paid,
the city clerk shall issue a burial permit.
      2.   In the event a "direct burial", as defined herein, is performed and
only under such circumstances that do not allow adequate time to obtain a
burial permit from the city clerk, the cemetery sexton or his/her designee may
approve the application, collect the fee and provide a burial permit.
   D.   Only contractors that are bonded and licensed to perform work within
the city of Grove shall be eligible to open a grave. No grave shall be opened
without a burial permit being first issued and record made thereof. Any person
may make said application only when the lot owner or purchaser has given his
permission for interment, and said applicant must be able to furnish proof of
such permission to the city clerk or funeral director at the time the
application is made.
   E.   No service, funeral, or burial shall take place within the cemetery
except by a funeral director who is licensed to perform work within the state
of Oklahoma and the city of Grove.
      1.   Funeral directors are encouraged to schedule services, funerals or
burials between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and four o'clock (4:00)
P.M. on Monday through Friday. Although discouraged, Saturday, Sunday and
holiday services, funerals or burials are allowed in time of an emergency.
   F.   All interments, including cremations, shall be placed in the
appropriate section of the cemetery according to the plans and specifications
on file in the city clerk's office and approved by the city.
   G.   The city shall be notified a minimum of twenty four (24) hours in
advance of any service, funeral or burial for which a grave shall be marked
prior to opening. If such notice is not given there will be an additional
service fee. Marking of graves prior to opening shall be accomplished according
to the specifications and shall be marked by the cemetery sexton, or other
designated city representative.
   H.   All graves shall be level with surrounding areas and no mounds shall be
allowed. Each burial plot shall be limited to the following:
      1.   Buzzard Cemetery: The interment of one human body.
      2.   Olympus Cemetery: The interment of one human body.
      3.   Olympus North: Determined by section:
         a.   Standard grave: The interment of one human body; and with city
approval may also include one cremation urn in a manner consistent with the
applicable laws of the state of Oklahoma.
         b.   Inground cremations: The interment of no more than four (4)
cremation urns.
         c.   Baby land: The interment of one infant body less than one year
old.
         d.   Scattering garden: Scattered cremations of one human body for
each memorial plaque space on the section C common monument wall.
      4.   Vaults shall be located at least six inches (6") inside of the lot
boundary as follows:
 
         Standard Graves Inground Cremations Baby Land
                                           
Lot size 5' x 10'        5' x 5'             5' x 5'
Opening  42" x 8'        Container size      Container size
Depth    5' - 51/2'      21/2' - 3'          21/2' - 3'
 
In order to maintain a high standard of care and to eliminate sunken graves
caused by the collapse of caskets or urns, and to give peace of mind to the
remaining bereaved families all burials, except for scattered cremations in the
scattering garden, must be made in high strength reinforced concrete vaults,
which may be procured from any source, provided they are high strength
reinforced concrete. No wooden, polypropylene, fiberglass, metal or other
nondurable vaults shall be allowed for placement of any casket or urn.
   I.   Anyone planning to make improvements on lots or gravesites shall
receive written permission from the city before the project is started. No
curbing of cemetery lots will be allowed. No crushed rock or quartz shall be
placed on any grave. (Ord. 675, 1-7-2014)
11-411: DISINTERMENT:
   A.   Disinterment must be lawfully authorized and conducted under any one of
the following conditions:
      1.   The city is directed to make a disinterment by the order of a court
of competent jurisdiction and a certified copy of such order has been filed
with the city clerk.
      2.   The county coroner directs the disinterment for the purpose of
holding an inquest and has filed with the city clerk his signed authorization
to release the body to himself and his lawful agents. In such case the coroner
or his lawful agents must make the disinterment.
   B.   The city of Grove assumes no liability for any damage including damage
to any casket, vault or urn incurred in making the removal. Board of health
burial/transit permit is required for all disinterments.
   C.   The city reserves, and shall have, the right to correct any errors. In
the event an error shall involve the interment of the remains of any person,
the city reserves, and shall have, the right to remove and transfer such
remains, following city and state procedures. When a removal is to be made from
a single grave to another grave therein, the formerly occupied single grave
space and all rights therein revert to the city. If no concrete vault has been
used for the original interment, one must be furnished. (Ord. 675, 1-7-2014)
11-412: CREMATED REMAINS:
No person shall scatter cremated remains within the cemetery, except in the
designated scattering garden area, and under the supervision of the cemetery
sexton or other designated city representative.
Inground cremations shall be buried in the designated inground cremation area
and disposed of in a manner consistent with applicable laws of the state of
Oklahoma.
Upon city approval, one cremation urn may be buried in a standard grave as
allowed by the state of Oklahoma. (Ord. 675, 1-7-2014)
11-413: MONUMENTS:
   A.   The "monument" (as defined herein) size, location on lot, foundation,
kind of stones and other materials to be used shall comply with rules and
regulations established by the city. No monument shall be placed on any lot or
grave until approved by the cemetery sexton. The city, without any liability,
shall have the right to correct, remove, or have removed any monument placed
without the approval of the cemetery sexton or that does not comply with the
rules and regulations established herein.
   B.   The funeral director, owner or purchaser of the lot or a representative
of the monument company, shall contact the city clerk or cemetery sexton twenty
four (24) hours in advance to schedule a time and date for placement of any
monument. Scheduling and placement of monuments shall be done Monday through
Friday from eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to three o'clock (3:00) P.M.
   C.   If any monument or marker becomes unsafe, unsightly, in need of repair
or resetting, the city shall attempt to notify the owner of the relevant
certificate of burial rights of such condition and shall request such person to
make any needed repairs under the cemetery sexton's supervision. If the owner
does not make the needed repairs, the city shall have the right at the expense
of the monument company, the lot owner or purchaser to remove, replace, or
repair any monument or marker.
      1.   Monument installation shall be by the owner's bonded contractor
under the supervision of the cemetery sexton.
      2.   Monuments shall be composed of marble, granite or bronze.
      3.   No monument shall contain anything that is determined by the city to
be offensive.
      4.   A maximum of one monument and one veteran's memorial marker shall be
allowed per standard grave.
      5.   Veteran's memorial marker used as a second marker on a standard
grave must be flush with the ground and centered at the east end of the lot.
      6.   Each monument must be mounted on a concrete foundation and shall be
done by the owner's bonded contractor under the supervision of the cemetery
sexton.
      7.   A standard grave monument shall be placed on a concrete base that
measures two feet deep by four feet wide and four inches thick (2' x 4' x 4");
the monument must be a minimum of four inches (4") thick and shall not exceed
the size of the base. The placement of a standard grave monument and concrete
base shall be centered at the west end of the lot.
      8.   A monument shared by two (2) standard graves side by side (i.e.,
husband and wife) shall be placed on a concrete base that measures two feet
deep by eight feet wide and four inches thick (2' x 8' x 4"); the monument must
be a minimum of four inches (4") thick and shall not exceed the size of the
base. The placement of a monument and concrete base shared by two (2) standard
graves shall be centered at the west end of the lot.
      9.   Detailed information of the deceased shall be engraved on the side
of the monument facing east, and one family surname may be engraved on the side
of the monument facing west in Olympus Cemetery North.
      10.   All engraving on monuments must be approved by the cemetery sexton
prior to placement of the monuments.
      11.   The placement and dimensions of a monument on standard graves shall
conform to the layout in Olympus Cemetery North overall burial sections map.
      12.   The placement of up to four (4) markers shall be allowed per
inground cremation lot. Markers shall not exceed the size of eight and one-half
inches long by five and one-half inches wide, and four inches thick (81/2" x
51/2" x 4") including base.
      13.   The placement and dimensions of a monument on Baby Land graves and
on the inground cremation lots shall conform to the layout in Olympus Cemetery
North overall burial sections map.
      14.   Monuments shall be of a design appropriate to the cemetery and
approved by the cemetery sexton prior to placement.
      15.   In sections EA and EB the placement of private estate family
monuments shall be of a layout, size and design appropriate to the cemetery and
approved by the cemetery sexton.
   D.   If any person shall, unlawfully, remove from its place any monument of
marble, stone, brass, wood, or other material, erected for the purpose of
designating the spot where any dead body is interred, or for the purpose of
preserving and perpetuating the memory, name, fame, birth, age, or death of any
person, whether situated in or out of the common burying ground, or shall
unlawfully break or deface such a monument, or alter the letters, marks, or
inscription thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 675, 1-7-2014)
11-414: LANDSCAPING AND DECORATIONS:
   A.   No person may plant, prune, or remove any tree, shrub, flower, grass or
other plant of any kind located within the cemetery.
      1.   The planting of shrubs, ornamental grasses, vines or trees or the
erection of any aboveground structure such as trellises, benches, birdbaths,
etc., is prohibited.
      2.   The city is authorized to remove any items on or around any grave,
space or lot that hinders the maintenance of the cemetery, any items that do
not comply with these rules and any items that become deteriorated or
unsightly.
      3.   Enclosures of any kind, such as fence, coping, hedge, ditch, or the
like, on or around any grave, space, or lot is prohibited.
      4.   Grave mounds of any description are prohibited.
      5.   No grave or grave space shall be raised above the established grade
of surrounding terrain.
      6.   Wire (common in artificial flowers), glass, and other materials that
might present a hazard if hit by the mower are prohibited.
      7.   Decorations commemorating the funeral service, birthday of the
deceased, anniversary of date of death of the deceased, Mother's Day, Memorial
Day, Father's Day, Independence Day, Veterans Day and Christmas are permitted.
Other special events may be commemorated by placement of decorations when
requested in writing to the city of Grove prior to placement and are subject to
approval by the city of Grove.
      8.   Cemetery patrons are encouraged to remove the decorations within ten
(10) days following the event or holiday. The city will remove and dispose of
any decorations that remain after the ten (10) day period.
      9.   Placement of decorations is limited to graves only; no decorations
of any type shall be placed on or attached to natural features (such as trees
or rocks), utility poles or fences.
      10.   Cemetery patrons are cautioned to avoid leaving costly or
irreplaceable items at grave locations. The city is not responsible for stolen
items. (Ord. 675, 1-7-2014)
CHAPTER 5
GRAND RIVER ARCHIVES SOCIETY BOARD OF COMMISSION
SECTION:
11-501: Creation of board of commission.
11-502: Terms of member of board of commission.
11-503: Purpose of board of commission.
11-504: Vacancies in the office of board members.
11-505: Rules and regulations.
11-506: Duties and powers.
11-507: Procedure
11-508: Expenditures.
11-501: CREATION OF BOARD OF COMMISSION:
There is hereby created in the city, a Board of Commission for the Grand River
Archives Society located in the city, to be comprised of seven (7) residents of
the county. (Ord. No. 214, 6/15/82)
11-502: TERMS OF MEMBERS OF BOARD OF COMMISSION:
   A.   The mayor of the city shall nominate one member to serve for a period
of one year, two (2) members to serve for a period of two (2) years, two (2)
members to serve for a period of three (3) years, and two (2) members to serve
for a period of four (4) years. Such nominees shall be confirmed by a majority
of the city council of the city. The members of the board of commission
appointed upon the passage and approval of this Ordinance shall all serve an
interim term for 1982; thereafter the respective terms of office of the
commission so appointed shall begin. The mayor, upon nomination of such
commission, shall designate which member shall serve for a period of two (2)
years, which shall serve for a period of three (3) years, and which shall serve
for a period of four (4) years. The members of the board of commission shall be
appointed from residents of the county and an effort is to be made to secure
the services of persons best qualified to plan for the future growth,
development and improvement of the Grand River Archives Society. The members of
the board of commission shall serve without salary, and in the event of a
vacancy on the commission for any reason, a successor shall be appointed as
herein provided for the unexpired term only of such vacancy.
   B.   Immediately after the appointment and qualification of the members of
the board of commission, the commission shall meet and elect one of their
number as chairman and one of their number as secretary. Such officers, when so
elected, shall serve in their respective capacity until the interim terms of
the initial members expire, at which time a Chairman and Secretary shall be
elected for a term of one year, or until their successors are elected and
qualified. (Ord. No. 274, 6/15/82)
11-503: PURPOSE OF BOARD OF COMMISSION:
The purpose of the board of commission is to:
      1.   Bring together those people interested in history and genealogy,
especially in the history of the towns and communities of the area, especially
in the history of the city. Understanding the history of our community is basic
to our democratic way of life, gives us a better understanding of our nation
and promotes a better appreciation of our american heritage;
      2.   Accept, collect and discover any and all material which may help to
establish or illustrate the history of the towns and communities of the area;
their exploration, settlement, development, activities in peace and war; their
progress in population, wealth, cultural, educations, arts, science,
agriculture, manufactures, trade and transportation. It will collect records,
including public records, of all kinds, printed material such as histories,
genealogies, biographies, descriptions, gazetteers, directories, newspapers,
pamphlets, catalogs, circulars, handbills, programs and posters; manuscript
material such as letters, diaries, journals, memoranda, reminiscences, rosters,
service records, account books, books, charts, surveys and field books; museum
material such as pictures, photographs, paintings, portraits, scenes,
aboriginal relics and material objects illustrative of life, conditions,
events, and activities of the past and the present;
      3.   Provide for the preservation of such material and for its
accessibility, as far as may be feasible, to all who wish to examine or study
it;
 1       4.   Cooperate with other officials in recommending the preservation
and accessibility to the general public, the records and archives of the towns,
counties, communities and institutions of the area. To strive for the
preservation of declared historic buildings, monuments and markers as
recommended by state or local historical societies;
      5.   Foster an interest in history, cultural arts, humanities, genealogy
and related fields amoung its members and the general public through meetings,
workshops, lecturers, examination of records, publication of newsletters and
journals, and similar manace to educate the members and the public; to
encourage others to preserve records and artifacts of all kinds pertinent to
our American heritage;
      6.   Provide for purchase, exchange and public access of historical and
genealogical information among the members, general public, and other
historical and genealogical societies, libraries and/or archives through
publications or as so decided feasible by the board of directors; and
      7.   All correspondence, materials and records of any kind and nature
pertaining to the society shall be maintained at the principal office or
location of the society, unless approved by the board of directors.
(Ord. No. 274, 6/15/82)
 
Notes
1 material??
11-504: VACANCIES IN THE OFFICE OF BOARD MEMBERS:
If any member appointed to the board of commission shall desire to resign from
the membership of the board, the member shall give the board a resignation in
writing with at least ten (10) days notice. Upon receipt of the notice, the
members of the board shall notify the mayor of the city who shall appoint
another member to serve the unexpired term created by the vacancy. (Ord. No.
274, 6/15/82)
11-505: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The board of commission shall prescribe rules and regulations governing and
controlling the transaction of business before it, and shall determine a date
each month for regular meetings. Special meetings may be called at any time by
the chairman of the commission. (Ord. No. 274, 6/15/82)
11-506: DUTIES AND POWER:
Duties and powers of the board of commission shall be as follows:
      1.   To investigate and recommend to the mayor of the city suitable
historical ordinances for the city;
      2.   To investigate and make recommendations concerning the physical
development, growth, improvement, convenience and beautification of the city as
it relates to historical facilities;
      3.   To investigate all matters relating to the location and development
of a historical society, location and design of buildings regarding the
historical facilities and to make report of their findings on any proposed or
contemplated project relative to historical facilities to the mayor of the city
council of the city; and
      4.   All findings and recommendations of the board of commission
affecting private property shall be submitted in writing to the city council of
the city, for their examination, approval or rejection.
(Ord. No. 274, 6/15/82)
11-507: PROCEDURE:
All projects or matters that fall within the purview of the duties of the board
of commission, as herein specified, that may come before the city council of
the city, shall be referred to the board of commission for investigation and
report before any final action shall be taken thereon. However, if the board of
commission shall fail to make an investigation and report on any matter or
subject referred to it for a period of sixty (60) days, such failure shall be
considered a refusal to approve the proposed plan or project, and the city
council of the city may thereupon act upon such proposal, plan or project as
though such matter had not been referred to the board of commission. (Ord. No.
214, 6/15/82)
11-508: EXPENDITURES:
The board of commission shall, as required, make application to the city
council of the city for the funds that may be necessary for such board of
commission to expend in order to carry out its duties as herein specified.
Commencing with the next fiscal year after June 15, 1982, the board of
commission shall make application to the city council for an appropriation to
be set up for its use in carrying out its duties, and the city shall, if
possible, include such appropriation in its estimate to be approved by the
council or excise board.
PART 12
PLANNING, ZONING AND DEVELOPMENT
CHAPTER 1
PLANNING COMMISSIONS
SECTION:
ARTICLE A
CITY PLANNING COMMISSION
12-101: Planning commission created.
12-102: Term of office; provision for vacancies.
12-103: Ex officio members.
12-104: Quorum.
12-105: Appointment and confirmation.
12-106: Meetings; organization and rules.
12-107: Power to employ staff; duties.
12-108: Powers and duties, subdivision of land.
12-109: Uniformity of regulations.
12-110: Comprehensive plan; purpose of regulations and matters considered.
12-111: Additional authority.
12-112: Planning commission to act as zoning commission.
ARTICLE B
REGIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION
12-120: Regional planning commission created.
12-121: Quorum.
12-122: Organization and rules.
12-123: Jurisdiction of the regional planning commission.
12-124: Power to employ staff.
12-125: Powers and duties of the Grove Regional Planning Commission.
12-126: Public improvements and plats of land.
12-127: Violation and penalty.
ARTICLE A
CITY PLANNING COMMISSION
12-101: PLANNING COMMISSION CREATED:
There is hereby created within and for the city a planning commission, which
shall consist of five (5) citizens of the city area as hereinafter provided.
The members of the commission shall be nominated and appointed solely with
reference to their fitness and without reference to party affiliation, and
shall serve without compensation except as hereinafter provided. (Prior Code,
Sec. 13-1)
State Law Reference: Planning commissions may be established, duties and,
powers, 11 O.S. Sections 45-101 et seq.
12-102: TERM OF OFFICE; PROVISION FOR VACANCIES:
Members of the city planning commission shall hold office for a term of three
(3) years with the exception that in the first instance two (2) shall be
appointed to serve a term of one year, two (2) for a term of two (2) years and
one appointed for a term of three (3) years; appointments thereafter shall be
made for a term of three (3) years, except when a vacancy occurs when the
appointment shall be made to fill the unexpired term. (Prior Code, Sec. 13-2)
12-103: EX OFFICIO MEMBERS:
The mayor and the city engineer shall be ex officio members of the city
planning commission, but shall receive no compensation other than their affixed
salary as such officials. (Prior Code, Sec. 13-1)
12-104: QUORUM:
Three (3) members of the city planning commission shall constitute a quorum for
the transaction of business. However, no action shall be taken and be binding
upon the city planning commission unless concurred in by not less than a
majority of all members comprising the city planning commission. (Prior Code,
Sec. 13-4)
12-105: APPOINTMENT AND CONFIRMATION:
The mayor shall appoint the members of the city planning commission subject to
approval and confirmation by the city council. (Prior Code, Sec. 13-5)
12-106: MEETINGS; ORGANIZATION AND RULES:
The members of the city planning commission shall meet within two (2) weeks
after their appointment and confirmation and organize by electing from their
members a chairman, vice-chairman, and secretary, and shall adopt from time to
time such bylaws, rules, and regulations and amendments thereto as may be
necessary to effectuate the purposes of this chapter. (Prior Code, Sec. 13-6)
12-107: POWER TO EMPLOY STAFF; DUTIES:
The members of the city planning commission shall serve without pay, and it is
the duty of such commission to prepare from time to time plans for the
systematic development and betterment of the municipality as a place of
residence or for business. It shall have the power and authority to employ
engineers, attorneys, clerks and a secretary, or other help deemed necessary,
subject to the approval of the city council. The salary and compensation of
such employees shall be fixed by the city council and shall be paid out of the
city treasury as other officers and employees, and the necessary expenses
incurred by the commission shall be paid out of the city treasury as other
legal expenses of the city government. (Prior Code, Sec. 13-7)
12-108: POWERS AND DUTIES, SUBDIVISION OF LAND:
   A.   The planning commission may consider and investigate any subject matter
tending to the development and betterment of the city, and make recommendations
as it may deem advisable concerning the adoption thereof to any department of
the municipal government, and for any purpose make, or cause to be made,
surveys, maps or plans. Before final action shall be taken by the city council,
or any department of the city government, on the location and designs of any
public building, statue, memorial, park, parkway, boulevard, street and alley,
playgrounds, public grounds, bridge, or the change in location of any street or
alley, or the grade thereof, such question shall be submitted to the city
planning commission for investigation and report.
   B.   The planning commission may prepare and recommend to the city council
the adoption of rules and regulations governing the subdivision of land within
the corporate limits of the city. All plans, plats, or other portions of the
same intended to be dedicated to public or private use within the corporate
limits of the city shall first be submitted to the planning commission for its
recommendation, approval, or rejection.
   C.   The disapproval of any such plan, plat, or replat by the city council
of the city shall be deemed a refusal of the purported dedication shown
thereon.
12-109: UNIFORMITY OF REGULATIONS:
The planning commission may recommend the division of the city into districts
of such number, size, and area as may be deemed best suited to carry out the
zoning purpose. All such regulations shall be uniform for each class or kind of
buildings throughout each district, but the regulations in one district may
differ from those in other districts.
12-110: COMPREHENSIVE PLAN; PURPOSE OF REGULATIONS AND MATTERS CONSIDERED:
Such regulations shall be made in accordance with a comprehensive plan and
designed to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire,
panic, and other dangers; to promote health and the general welfare; to provide
adequate light and air; to prevent overcrowding of land; to avoid undue
concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate provisions of
transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public requirements.
Such regulations shall be made with reasonable consideration, among other
things, as to the character of the district and its peculiar suitability for
particular uses, with a view to conserving the value of buildings and
encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the city.
12-111: ADDITIONAL AUTHORITY:
The city planning commission shall have additional authority and responsibility
as the city council shall from time to time prescribe.
12-112: PLANNING COMMISSION TO ACT AS ZONING COMMISSION:
The city planning commission also shall act as the zoning commission and shall
have the power to prepare and recommend to the city council zoning district
boundaries and appropriate regulations relating to the height, number of
stories, and size of buildings and other structures, the percentage of lot that
may be occupied, the size of yards, courts, and other open spaces, the density
of population, the location and use of buildings, structures, and land for
trade, industry, residences, and other purposes.
ARTICLE B
REGIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION
12-120: REGIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION CREATED:
In addition to the city planning and zoning commission created and established
in the city, there is hereby created the regional planning commission under the
authority granted by Section 46-101 of Title 11 of the Oklahoma Statutes. The
regional planning commission shall be composed of the membership of the city
planning commission. The mayor of the city, the city engineer of the city, the
chairman of the board of county commissioners of the county, and the county
engineer of the county. All officers serving ex officio, including the members
of the city planning commission, shall be entitled to voting membership on the
regional planning commission. The members of the regional planning commission
shall serve without pay. (Ord. No. 293, 6/5/84)
12-121: QUORUM:
Four (4) members of the regional planning commission shall constitute a quorum
for the transaction of business, providing however, that no action shall be
taken which is binding upon the regional planning commission unless concurred
in by not less than a majority of all members comprising the regional planning
commission. (Ord. No. 293, 6/5/84)
12-122: ORGANIZATION AND RULES:
The regional planning commission shall operate with the same organization and
rules as may from time to time be established for the city planning commission.
The officers of the city planning commission shall be the officers of the
regional planning commission. The regional planning commission shall keep a
record of its regulations, transactions, findings and determinations, which
record shall be a public record. (Ord. No. 293, 6/5/84)
12-123: JURISDICTION OF THE REGIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION:
The regional planning commission shall have jurisdiction over a regional
district which shall be construed to mean any land outside the incorporated
limits of any municipality whose any one boundary, at any one point, shall be
within a distance of three (3) miles from the incorporated limits of this city.
(Ord. No. 293, 6/5/84)
12-124: POWER TO EMPLOY STAFF:
The regional planning commission shall have the power and authority upon
approval of the city manager or city council to employ planners, engineers,
attorneys, clerks and other help and to pay for their services, and to pay for
such other expenses as the regional planning commission may legally incur,
including the necessary disbursements incurred by its members in the
performance of their duties as members of the commission. The financial
commitments that may be undertaken by the regional planning commission shall be
limited to the amount of funds that may from time to time be appropriated for
such uses by public bodies. It shall be lawful for the board of county
commissioners of the county to appropriate money for the expenses of the
regional planning commission. (Ord. No. 293, 6/5/84)
12-125: POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE GROVE REGIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION:
The regional planning commission shall prepare from time to time plans for the
systematic development and betterment of the regional district for residence,
manufacturing and business purposes. It may consider investigate any subject
matter tending to the development and betterment of such regional district and
make recommendations as it may deem advisable concerning the adoption thereof
to any department of the government of the city or the county, and for any
purpose make or cause to be made surveys, maps or plans. (Ord. No. 293, 6/5/84)
12-126: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS AND PLATS OF LAND:
   A.   Before final action shall be taken by any municipal or county
government or department thereof on the location and design of any buildings,
statue, memorial, park, parkway, boulevard, playground, public grounds, or
bridge within such regional district the question shall be submitted to the
regional planning commission for investigation and report.
   B.   All plans, plats or replats of land laid out in lots or blocks and the
streets, alleys, or other portions of the same intended to be dedicated to
public or private use, within such regional district, shall be first submitted
to the regional planning commission and approved by it before it shall be
entitled to record in the office of the county clerk. The regional planning
commission shall prepare and recommend to the city council of the city uniform
regulations for the guidance of the development and subdivision of land
throughout the regional district. It shall be unlawful to receive or record any
such plan, plat, or replat in any public office unless the same shall bear
thereon, by endorsement or otherwise, the approval of the regional planning
commission. The disapproval of any such plan, plat, or replat by the regional
planning commission shall be deemed a refusal of the proposed dedication shown
thereon.
   C.   The development and subdivision of lands within the regional district
which are not served by water and sewer facilities by any governmental entity
shall be guided and regulated according to the regulations established by the
regional planning commission and as set out in Section 46-104 C of Title 11 of
the Oklahoma Statutes. (Ord. No. 293, 6/5/84)
12-127: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
Any person, partnership or corporation violating any of the provisions of the
regional planning commission established under the authorities of Sections 46-
101 through 46-104 of Title 11 of the Oklahoma Statutes, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished by fine in the sum of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00)
plus court costs. (Ord. No. 293, 6/5/84)
CHAPTER 2
ZONING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
12-201: Zoning regulations adopted.
12-202: Comprehensive plan adopted.
12-201: ZONING REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
   A.   Pursuant to the authority granted to the city by the Oklahoma Statutes,
the city hereby adopts the revised zoning ordinance text and the revised zoning
map as the zoning ordinance of the city, all as adopted by Ordinance Number
310, November 19, 1985, and all amendments thereto.
   B.   A true copy of this zoning ordinance, both text and map, shall be kept
on file in the office of the city clerk of the city.
   C.   The zoning ordinance is self contained as to provisions relating to the
division of the city into zones and the regulations relating thereto, and the
administration thereof. The provisions of this zoning ordinance, and all
amendments thereto, are adopted by reference hereto. The zoning ordinance may
be published separate from the remainder of the city code.
   D.   There is hereby also created a zoning board of adjustment and that the
members of the present board of adjustment shall serve as the members of the
board of adjustment as established under the revised zoning ordinance. (Ord.
No. 235, 6/17/80; Ord. No. 310, 11/19/85)
Cross Reference: See zoning map amendments in the Appendix and Listing of
Special Ordinances (zoning) for ordinances amending the zoning ordinance.
State Law Reference: State laws applicable to zoning, 11 O.S. Sections 43-101,
44-101 and 45-101 et seq.
12-202: COMPREHENSIVE PLAN ADOPTED:
   A.   Many citizens of the city have participated in the work of preparing a
comprehensive plan reviewed and recommended by the planning and zoning
commission.
   B.   The planning and zoning commission has recommended that the city
council adopt the comprehensive plan for the future of the city.
   C.   The city council of the city does hereby adopt the comprehensive plan,
and all amendments thereto, by reference. A true copy of this comprehensive
plan and amendments shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk of
the city. (Ord. No. 308, 11/5/85)
CHAPTER 3
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
SECTION:
12-301: City subdivision regulations adopted.
12-302: Regional subdivision regulations adopted.
12-301: CITY SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
Pursuant to the authority granted to the city by the Oklahoma Statutes, the
city hereby adopts regulations for the subdivision of land within the corporate
limits of the city, and all amendments thereto.
   B.   A true copy of these regulations, and all amendments thereto, shall be
kept on file in the office of the city clerk of the city together with copies
of all sheets of the detail drawings for standard land development which shall
be a supporting part of the regulations.
   C.   These regulations are self contained as to their jurisdiction,
authority, purpose and intent, policy, administration and amendment. It is the
intent of the city council of the city that the provisions of these regulations
and amendments thereto are fully adopted by reference hereto, and that these
regulations and amendments thereto may be published separate from the remainder
of the Grove City Code. (Ord. No. 244, 2/17/81; Ord. No. 311, 11/19/85)
State Law Reference: Powers to adopt subdivision regulations, 11 O.S. Sections
43-102 to 43-109, 45-104.
12-302: REGIONAL SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
   A.   In accordance with the authority granted to the city by the Oklahoma
Statutes the city has created the regional planning commission for the purpose
of securing orderly development of lands surrounding the city. The regional
planning commission has promulgated regulations for the subdivision of land
within the jurisdiction of the regional planning commission.
   B.   The city council of the city hereby endorses and adopts by reference
the Regional Planning Commission Subdivision Regulations, and all amendments
thereto, fully applicable as if printed at length in this code. (Ord. No. 312.
11/19/85)
CHAPTER 4
AIRPORT ZONING ORDINANCE
SECTION:
12-401: Airport Zoning Ordinance Adopted
12-401: AIRPORT ZONING ORDINANCE ADOPTED:
The city's airport zoning ordinance, passed, approved and amended from time to
time by the city council, is continued in full force and effect and is hereby
adopted by reference. A copy of the airport zoning ordinance is on file in the
office of the city clerk. (Ord. 528, 8-16-2005)
CHAPTER 5
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
SECTION:
12-501: Findings Of Fact
12-502: Statement Of Purpose
12-503: Methods Of Reducing Flood Losses
12-504: Definitions
12-505: Lands To Which This Chapter Applies
12-506: Basis For Establishing The Areas Of Special Flood Hazard
12-507: Establishment Of Development Permit
12-508: Compliance
12-509: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
12-510: Interpretation
12-511: Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability
12-512: Floodplain Administrator
12-513: Permit Procedures
12-514: Variances
12-515: General Standards For Flood Hazard Reduction
12-516: Specific Standards For Flood Hazard Reduction
12-517: Standards For Subdivisions
12-518: Floodways
12-519: Floodplain Management Fee Schedule
12-520: Penalties For Noncompliance
12-521: Certification
12-501: FINDINGS OF FACT:
   A.   The flood hazard areas of the city of Grove are subject to periodic
inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely
affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
   B.   These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions
in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by
the occupancy of flood hazards areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous
to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or
otherwise protected from flood damage. (Ord. 599, 6-1-2010)
12-502: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
   A.   Protect human life and health;
   B.   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
   C.   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   D.   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   E.   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in
floodplains;
   F.   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood
blight areas; and
   G.   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood
area. (Ord. 599, 6-1-2010)
12-503: METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES:
   A.   In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following
methods:
      1.   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or
property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or
velocities;
      2.   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
      3.   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
      4.   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage; and
      5.   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands. (Ord. 599, 6-1-2010)
12-504: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall
be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give
this chapter its most reasonable application.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A structure which is on the same parcel of property as the
principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the
principal structure. Examples of accessory structures include, but are not
limited to, garages and storage sheds.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: The land in the floodplain within the city of
Grove subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given
year.
BFE: Base flood elevation.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION: The elevation in feet above mean sea level of the base
flood or one percent (1%) chance flood.
BASEMENT: Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENTS: A board appointed by the city council, and which is
authorized to make special exceptions to this chapter (i.e., variances), and to
hear and decide any appeals that allege error in an order, requirement,
decision or determination made by the floodplain administrator.
CFR: Code of federal regulations.
CRITICAL FEATURE: An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood
protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire
system would be compromised.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change in improved and unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
DEVELOPMENT PERMIT: A permit issued by the city of Grove floodplain
administrator which authorizes development in a special flood hazard area in
accordance with this chapter.
ELEVATED BUILDING: A nonbasement building built, in the case of a building in
zones AE, A, and X, to have the top of the elevated floor adequately anchored
so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood up
to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of zones AE, A, and X,
"elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid
foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movement of floodwaters.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION: For the purposes of determining rates, structures for
which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the
FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing
construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures".
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before August 4, 1972.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).
FEMA: The federal emergency management agency.
FIRM: Flood insurance rate map.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP: An official map of the city of Grove on which FEMA
has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium
zones applicable to the city of Grove.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: The official report provided by FEMA for city of Grove
which contains flood profiles, water surface elevation of the base flood, as
well as the floodway width, section area and mean velocity.
FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
   A.   The overflow of inland or tidal waters, or
   B.   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source.
FLOOD PROOFING: Any combination of structural and non-structural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM: Those physical structural works for which funds have
been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed
specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas
within city of Grove subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the
depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal
barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying
works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR: A person accredited by the OWRB and designated by the
city council of the city of Grove to administer and implement laws, ordinances
and regulations relating to the management of floodplains.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT: The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to,
emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management
regulations.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS: Zoning codes and ordinances, subdivision
regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose regulations
and ordinances (such as floodplain, grading and erosion control regulations and
ordinances) and other applications of police power. The term describes such
state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards
for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD PRONE AREA: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by
water from any source (see definition of Flood Or Flooding).
FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated
height. A floodway is located within areas of special flood hazard established
in section
12-506 of this chapter. A floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the
velocity of floodwaters that carry debris and potential projectiles.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE: A use that cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term
includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair
facilities, but does not include long term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
   A.   Listed individually in the national register of historic places (a
listing maintained by the department of the interior) or preliminarily
determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the national register;
   B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as
a registered historic district;
   C.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary
of the interior; or
   D.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
      1.   By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the
interior; or
      2.   Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved
programs.
LEVEE: A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control,
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
LEVEE SYSTEM: A flood protection system which consists of a levee or levees and
associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are
constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirement of section 60.3 of title 44 CFR.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
"manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL: For purposes of the national flood insurance program, the North
American vertical datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood
elevations shown on the city of Grove's flood insurance rate map are
referenced.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures
for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date
of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes
any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management
purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of
construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
management regulation adopted by the city of Grove city council and includes
any subsequent improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of floodplain management regulations adopted by the city of Grove.
OWRB: The Oklahoma water resources board.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle which is:
   A.   Built on a single chassis;
   B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
   C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
   D.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: For other than new construction or substantial
improvements under the coastal barrier resources act (public law 97-348),
includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one
hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the
installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for
basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms;
nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural
part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank
that is principally aboveground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent
(50%) of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of
the improvement. This includes structures that have incurred "substantial
damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either:
   A.   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary conditions; or
   B.   Any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration
would not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic
structure".
VARIANCE: A grant of relief by the city of Grove board of adjustment to a
person from the terms of this chapter when specific enforcement would result in
unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or
development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. (For full
requirements see section 60.6 of title 44 CFR.)
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION: The height, in relation to the North American vertical
datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various
magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
(Ord. 599, 6-1-2010; amd. Ord. 774, 8-6-2019)
12-505: LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES:
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the city of Grove, Oklahoma. (Ord. 599, 6-1-2010)
12-506: BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD:
The areas of special flood hazard identified by FEMA in a scientific and
engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study For Delaware County,
Oklahoma And Incorporated Areas" dated August 5, 2010, with the accompanying
flood insurance rate map (FIRM) is hereby adopted on August 5, 2010, by
reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. However, until this date
the current effective flood maps for Delaware County dated April 16, 2003,
shall be used for this purpose until August 5, 2010. (Ord. 599, 6-1-2010)
12-507: ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
A development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 599, 6-1-2010)
12-508: COMPLIANCE:
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use
changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other
applicable regulations. (Ord. 599, 6-1-2010)
12-509: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and any
other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 599, 6-
1-2010)
12-510: INTERPRETATION:
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
   A.   Considered as minimum requirements;
   B.   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   C.   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state
statutes. (Ord. 599, 6-1-2010)
12-511: WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the city of Grove or any official or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 599, 6-1-
2010)
12-512: FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR:
   A.   Designation: The city council of the city of Grove designates the
building inspector as floodplain administrator to administer and implement the
provisions of this chapter and other appropriate sections of national flood
insurance program regulations in title 44 CFR pertaining to floodplain
management. In the absence of the building inspector, the public works director
will serve as the floodplain administrator.
   B.   Duties And Responsibilities: Duties and responsibilities of the
floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
      1.   Become accredited by the OWRB in accordance with 82 Oklahoma
Statutes sections 1601-1618, as amended.
      2.   Review permit applications to determine whether the proposed
building sites, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be
reasonably safe from flooding.
      3.   Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits
required by this chapter.
      4.   Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits
have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies
from which prior approval are required.
      5.   Make the necessary interpretation where interpretation is needed as
to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards
(for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary
and actual field conditions).
      6.   Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the OWRB
prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of
such notification to the FEMA.
      7.   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained.
      8.   In the absence of FEMA BFE, The City of Grove shall require the
applicant or developer to provide the base flood elevation and other elevation
data on the FEMA Elevation Certificate in order to administer the provisions of
Sections
12-515 through
12-518 of this chapter.
      9.   When a floodway has not been designated, the floodplain
administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements,
or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zone AE as
delineated on the Delaware County FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the
cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than one foot (1') at any point within the
city of Grove.
      10.   After a disaster or other type of damage occurrence to structures
in the city of Grove, determine if the residential and nonresidential
structures and manufactured homes have been substantially damaged, and enforce
the substantial improvement requirement.
      11.   Maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal from a
decision of the city council.
      12.   Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining
to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 599, 6-1-2010; amd. Ord. 774, 8-6-
2019)
12-513: PERMIT PROCEDURES:
   A.   An application for a development permit shall be presented to the
floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not
be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location,
dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and
proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the
location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard.
Additionally, the following information is required:
      1.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; and
      2.   Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural
drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.
   B.   Approval or denial of a development permit by the floodplain
administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the
following relevant factors:
      1.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      2.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      3.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      4.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      5.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      6.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems;
      7.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site;
      8.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
      9.   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use; and
      10.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for
that area.
   C.   The floodplain administrator or city manager, as applicable, may
approve certain development in zones A or AE delineated on the Delaware County
FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than
one foot (1'), provided that the applicant for the development permit in that
case first complies with 44 CFR section 65.12. (Ord. 599, 6-1-2010)
12-514: VARIANCES:
   A.   General provisions:
      1.   The city of Grove board of adjustments may grant variances for uses
which do not satisfy the requirements of the Oklahoma floodplain management act
or this chapter, if the applicant for the variance presents adequate proof
that: a) compliance with this chapter will result in an arbitrary and
unreasonable taking of property without sufficient benefit or advantage to the
people and b) satisfies the pertinent provisions of this section. However, no
variance shall be granted where the effect of the variance will be to permit
the continuance of a condition which unreasonably creates flooding hazards.
      2.   Any variance so granted shall not be construed as to relieve any
person who receives it from any liability imposed by the Oklahoma floodplain
management act or by other laws of the state.
      3.   In no case shall variances be effective for a period longer than
twenty (20) years.
      4.   Any person seeking a variance shall file a petition with the board
of adjustment, accompanied by a filing fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
      5.   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size
contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below
the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in subsection 12-513B of
this chapter and provisions of this section have been fully considered. As the
lot size increases beyond the one-half (1/2) acre, the technical justification
required for issuing the variance increases.
      6.   Any person seeking a variance to build a structure below the base
flood elevation will be issued a notice signed by the chairman of the board of
adjustments which states that: a) the cost of flood insurance will be
commensurate with the increased risk resulting from permitting the structure to
be built lower than the base flood elevation, and b) such construction below
the base flood level increases risks to life and property.
      7.   At such time as the city deems the petition ready for notification
to the public, the board of adjustment shall schedule a hearing and direct the
applicant to publish notice thereof in a newspaper of general circulation in
Delaware County at least thirty (30) days prior to the hearing.
      8.   The board of adjustment shall conduct the hearing and make
determinations in accordance with the applicable provisions of this section.
The board of adjustment shall exercise wide discretion in weighing the equities
involved and the advantages and disadvantages to the applicant and to the
public at large when determining whether the variance shall be granted.
      9.   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         a.   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         b.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant;
         c.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the
public, or conflict with existing local laws, regulations or ordinances; and
         d.   A determination that the variance is the minimum necessary,
considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
      10.   Upon consideration of the factors stated in this section and the
intent of this chapter, the board of adjustment may attach such conditions to
the granting of a variance as it deems necessary to further the purposes and
objectives stated in section
12-502 of this chapter.
      11.   The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all
variance actions, including justification for their issuance; and a copy of any
variance issued by the board of adjustment shall be sent by the floodplain
administrator to the OWRB and FEMA within fifteen (15) days after issuance of
the variance.
   B.   Special provisions:
      1.   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed on the national register of historic places or
the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set
forth in the remainder of this chapter.
      2.   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
      3.   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and
the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and
design of the structure.
      4.   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a
functionally dependent use provided that:
         a.   The criteria of subsections A5, A9, B2, and B3 of this section
are met, and
         b.   The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats
to public safety. (Ord. 599, 6-1-2010)
12-515: GENERAL STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION:
In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for
all new construction and substantial improvements:
   A.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or
modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy;
   B.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
   C.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials resistant to flood damage;
   D.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment
and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding;
   E.   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
   F.   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge
from the systems into floodwaters; and
   G.   On site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding. (Ord. 599, 6-1-2010)
12-516: SPECIFIC STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION:
In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required:
   A.   Residential Construction: New construction and substantial improvement
of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated at least two feet (2') above the base flood elevation. A registered
professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification
to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection is
satisfied.
   B.   Nonresidential Construction: New construction and substantial
improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at least two feet
(2') above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer,
architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain
administrator that the standard of this subsection is satisfied.
   C.   Enclosures: New construction and substantial improvements, with fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of
vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which
are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
      1.   A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided;
      2.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1')
above grade; and
      3.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
   D.   Manufactured Homes:
      1.   Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on
the Delaware County FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices that
minimize flood damage and have the bottom of the I-beam elevated at least
thirty six inches (36") above grade or at least at or above the base flood
elevation. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be
elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. This
requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements
for resisting wind forces. The home shall be installed by a licensed installer
according to Oklahoma state law and compliance herewith shall be certified in
writing to the floodplain administrator by said installer prior to habitation
of the manufactured home.
      2.   Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially
improved within zone AE on the Delaware County FIRM on sites: a) outside of a
manufactured home park or subdivision, b) in a new manufactured home park or
subdivision, c) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision, or d) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on
which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a
flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the bottom of the I-beam
for the manufactured home is elevated at least one foot (1') above the base
flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. A licensed
installer shall install the home in accordance with state law and compliance
herewith shall be certified in writing to the floodplain administrator by said
installer prior to habitation of the manufactured home.
      3.   Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved
on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within zone AE on
the Delaware County FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of this
subsection D be elevated so that the bottom of the I-beam of the manufactured
home is at least one foot (1') above the base flood elevation and be securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement. A licensed installer shall install the home in
accordance with state law and compliance herewith shall be certified in writing
to the floodplain administrator by said installer prior to habitation of the
manufactured home.
   E.   Recreational Vehicles: Require that recreational vehicles placed on
sites within zones A and AE on the Delaware County FIRM either:
      1.   Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive
days,
      2.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or
      3.   Meet the permit requirements of section
12-513 of this chapter, and the elevation and anchoring requirements for
"manufactured homes" in subsection D of this section. A recreational vehicle is
ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to
the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has
no permanently attached additions.
   F.   Accessory Structure: Accessory structures to be placed on sites within
Zones A and AE on the Delaware County FIRM shall comply with the following:
      1.   The structure shall be unfinished on the interior;
      2.   The structure shall be used only for parking and limited storage;
      3.   The structure shall not be used for human habitation. Prohibited
activities or uses include but are not limited to working, sleeping, living,
cooking, or restroom use;
      4.   Structures exceeding 600 square feet in size will be required to
meet all applicable standards of Chapter 3 Section 3.3, Chapter 4, Section 4.4,
Chapter 5, Sections 5.1 and 5.2, including relevant subsections.
      5.   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment must be
elevated to or above the BFE;
      6.   The structure shall be constructed and placed on the building site
so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters;
      7.   The structure shall be designed to have low flood damage potential
and constructed with flood resistance materials;
      8.   The structure shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement;
      9.   Floodway requirements must be met in the construction of the
structure;
      10.   Openings to relieve hydrostatic pressure during a flood shall be
provided below the BFE; and
      11.   The structure shall be located so as not to cause damage to
adjacent and nearby structures. (Ord. 599, 6-1-2010; amd. Ord. 774, 8-6-2019)
12-517: STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISIONS:
   A.   The applicant for a development permit for any subdivision located in
zones A and AE which is fifty (50) or more lots or greater than five (5) acres
shall generate the base flood elevation data for that subdivision.
   B.   All subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
   C.   All subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate
flood damage. (Ord. 599, 6-1-2010; amd. Ord. 775, 8-20-2019)
12-518: FLOODWAYS:
The following provisions shall apply to floodways:
   A.   Encroachments, including, but not limited to, fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other development are prohibited within the
adopted floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and
hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice
that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels
within the city of Grove during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
   B.   If subsection A of this section is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of sections
12-515 through
12-518 of this chapter.
   C.   The city of Grove may permit encroachments within the adopted floodway
that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the
applicant for the development permit complies with all of 44 CFR section 65.12.
(Ord. 599, 6-1-2010)
12-519: FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT FEE SCHEDULE:
The City of Grove City Council establishes the following fee schedule not to
exceed $200.00 for any one service:
   A.   Floodplain development permit application review: $200.00.
   B.   Floodplain development permit fee: $50.00.
   C.   Inspection fee - per inspection: $50.00. (Ord. 599, 6-1-2010; amd. Ord.
774, 8-6-2019)
12-520: PENALTIES FOR NONCOMPLIANCE:
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. A structure or other development without the
elevation certificate or other certifications required in this chapter is
presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
Violation of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any of
its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established
in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who
violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall
upon conviction thereof be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00)
per day or imprisoned for not more than one year or both and in addition shall
pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day a violation occurs
shall be deemed a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the
city council of the city of Grove or its city attorney from taking such other
lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord. 599, 6-
1-2010)
12-521: CERTIFICATION:
   A.   It is hereby found and declared by the City Council of the City of
Grove that severe flooding has occurred in the past within its jurisdiction and
will certainly occur within the future; that flooding is likely to result in
infliction of serious personal injury or death, and is likely to result in
substantial injury or destruction of property within its jurisdiction; in order
to effectively comply with minimum standards for coverage under the National
Flood Insurance Program, and in order to effectively remedy the situation
described herein, it is necessary that this ordinance become effective
immediately.
   B.   The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in the current scientific and engineering report entitled,
“Delaware County Oklahoma and Incorporated Areas” effective September 13, 2019
with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps dated September 13, 2019, and any
revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of
this ordinance including the following panels:
 
40041CIND0C; 40041C0040F; 40041C0045F; 40041C0155F;
40041C0160F; 40041C017F;  40041C0180F   
 
(Ord. 774, 8-6-2019)
CHAPTER 6
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND TOURISM COMMISSION
SECTION:
12-601: Purpose
12-602: Membership
12-603: Duties
12-604: Officers, Meetings
12-601: PURPOSE:
The Economic Development and Tourism Commission's purpose is to encourage and
promote economic development, particularly industry, tourism, retirement, and
recreation in and around the City. (Ord. 357, 6-16-1992)
12-602: MEMBERSHIP:
The Economic Development and Tourism Commission shall be composed of seven (7)
members appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council. Insofar as it
is practical, the Commission's membership shall include representation from the
Grove City Council, Grove Chamber of Commerce, retirement community, tourism
community, and commercial businesses. Members shall serve one year terms. (Ord.
357, 6-16-1992)
12-603: DUTIES:
The duties of the Economic Development and Tourism Commission shall be to be
informed concerning the means to encourage and promote the development of
industry, tourism, recreation and retirement, and to recommend to the City
Council actions needed to encourage and promote these developments in the most
effective manner; to monitor progress towards the accomplishment of these
objectives; and, as the Commission may deem advisable, to recommend any changes
in the City's economic development program that may be needed. (Ord. 357, 6-16-
1992)
12-604: OFFICERS, MEETINGS:
The Economic Development and Tourism Commission shall create and fill such
offices as it may determine are necessary for the performance of its functions.
It shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and shall keep a record of
its resolutions, transactions and determinations. (Ord. 357, 6-16-1992)
CHAPTER 7
PENALTY
SECTION:
12-701: Violation and penalty.
12-701: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
   A.   No building permit shall be issued for any new structure or change,
improvement or alteration of any existing structure on any tract of land which
does not comply with all the provisions of the regulations adopted in this
part.
   B.   A violation of any of the regulations adopted in this part shall be
deemed a misdemeanor and upon conviction, thereof shall be punishable by a fine
of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00), plus court costs. (Prior Code, Section 16-4;
Ord. No. 290, 2/21/84)
PART 13
PUBLIC SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
FIRE PREVENTION
SECTION:
13-101: Fire Code And Regulations
13-102: Fire Department To Enforce Code
13-103: Limits Within Which Storage Of Flammable Liquids In Outside Aboveground
Tanks Is Prohibited (Rep. by Ord. 531, 11-1-2005)
13-104: Limits In Which Bulk Storage Of Liquefied Petroleum Gases Is To Be
Restricted (Rep. by Ord. 531, 11-1-2005)
13-105: Limits In Which Storage Of Explosives And Blasting Agents Are
Prohibited (Rep. by Ord. 531, 11-1-2005)
13-106: Modifications
13-107: New Materials, Processes, Or Occupancies Which May Require Permits
13-108: Appeals
13-109: Penalties
13-110: Transportation Of Inflammable Liquids
13-111: Outside Burning
13-112: Emergency Vehicle Detector System Required For Gated Communities
13-113: High Security Key Box Required
13-114: Applicable NFPA Codes
13-101: FIRE CODE AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   The regulations of the latest edition of the International Fire Code
and its appendices and any revisions or amendments as adopted by the Oklahoma
Uniform Building Code Commission pursuant to 59 Oklahoma Statutes 1000.23 and
adopted and modified by the State of Oklahoma Fire Marshal are hereby adopted
by the City governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and
explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous
substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or
property in the occupancy of buildings and premises as herein provided;
providing for the issuance of permits and collections of fees therefor; and
each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of
said International Fire Code on file in the Office of the City Clerk are hereby
referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this
section.
   B.   The regulations of the latest edition of the National Fire Protection
Association (NFPA) Life Safety Code 101, one copy of which has been and now is
filed in the Office of the City Clerk and the same, and any future amendments
thereto, are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length
herein, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the
City.
   C.   Where any provisions contained within the International Fire Code or
the National Fire Protection Association Life Safety Code and its appendices is
in conflict with the provisions contained within this Code, the most stringent
provision shall prevail. (Ord. 759, 9-4-2018)
13-102: FIRE DEPARTMENT TO ENFORCE CODE:
   A.   The Fire Code shall be enforced by the Fire Department of the City,
under the supervision of the Chief of the Fire Department. (Prior Code § 8-2;
amd. Ord. 531, 11-1-2005)
   B.   The Chief of the Fire Department may detail such members of the Fire
Department as inspectors as may from time to time be necessary. (Prior Code §
8-2)
13-103: LIMITS WITHIN WHICH STORAGE OF FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS IN OUTSIDE ABOVEGROUND
TANKS IS PROHIBITED:
(Rep. by Ord. 531, 11-1-2005)
13-104: LIMITS IN WHICH BULK STORAGE OF LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GASES IS TO BE
RESTRICTED:
(Rep. by Ord. 531, 11-1-2005)
13-105: LIMITS IN WHICH STORAGE OF EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING AGENTS ARE
PROHIBITED:
(Rep. by Ord. 531, 11-1-2005)
13-106: MODIFICATIONS:
The Chief of the Fire Department, with the approval of the City Council, shall
have power to modify any of the provisions of the Fire Code upon application in
writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are
practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the Code
provided that the spirit of the Code shall be observed, public safety secured,
and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification when granted
or allowed and the decision of the Fire Chief and Council thereon shall be
entered upon the records of the Council, and a signed copy shall be furnished
the applicant. (Prior Code § 8-5; amd. Ord. 531, 11-1-2005)
13-107: NEW MATERIALS, PROCESSES, OR OCCUPANCIES WHICH MAY REQUIRE PERMITS:
The Chief of the Fire Department and two (2) persons appointed by the Mayor
with the approval of the Council shall act as a committee to determine and
specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new
materials, processes, or occupancies, which shall require permits, in addition
to those now enumerated in said Code. The Fire Chief shall post such list in a
conspicuous place in his office, and distribute copies thereof to interested
persons. (Prior Code § 8-7)
13-108: APPEALS:
Whenever the Chief of the Fire Department shall disapprove an application or
refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions
of the Code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the Code have
been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the
decision of the Chief of the Fire Department to the City Council within thirty
(30) days from the date of the decision appealed. (Prior Code § 8-6)
13-109: PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person who violates any of the provisions of the Fire Code hereby
adopted or fails to comply therewith, or who violates or fails to comply with
any order made thereunder, or who builds in violation of any detailed statement
of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any
certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been
taken, or who fails to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the
City Council or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed
therein, shall severally for every such violation and noncompliance
respectively, be guilty of an offense, punishable by a fine as provided in
section
1-108 of this Code. The imposition of one (1) penalty for any violation shall
not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall
be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable
time. When not otherwise specified, each ten (10) days that prohibited
conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. (Prior Code § 8-
8; amd. Ord. 531, 11-1-2005)
   B.   The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the
enforced removal of prohibited conditions. (Prior Code § 8-8)
13-110: TRANSPORTATION OF INFLAMMABLE LIQUIDS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to transport, to
deliver, unload or transfer at any point within the City any gasoline, kerosene
or other inflammable or combustible substance in or from a tank, tank truck,
transport or vehicle. However, such transporting, delivering, unloading or
transferring may be done with and from a tank truck if the following safety
precautions are observed:
      1.   The tank vehicle during unloading or loading must have the driver
thereof in attendance at the shutoff valve at all times during such operation;
      2.   No person shall smoke or be permitted to smoke in the vicinity of
such vehicle during the unloading or transferring operations; and
      3.   No unloading or transferring from any tank truck shall be made to
any storage tank within the fire limits unless such storage tank has above the
ground level a vent pipe of at least eight feet (8') in height. (1983 Code)
13-111: OUTSIDE BURNING:
   A.   Definitions:
    CONTROLLED STRUCTURE BURN: Burning of any structure.
   OPEN BURNING: Burning of natural vegetation including, but not limited to,
trees, limbs, grass, shrubs, and leaves; does not include burning of
structures.
   PUBLIC NUISANCE: Conditions detrimental to the health, safety, and welfare
of the inhabitants of the City.
   RECREATIONAL BURNING: Burning for the enjoyment of residents in residential
outdoor firepits, fireplaces, charcoal or gas grills, etc.
   B.   Controlled Structure Burn: Controlled structure burn is prohibited,
unless permission is granted by the Fire Chief or his designee, and
firefighters are on site.
   C.   Open Burning: Open burning is prohibited on any premises within the
City limits unless a burn permit has been issued by the Grove Police
Department. Recreational burning does not require a permit.
   D.   Burn Permit Regulations: The Fire Chief or his designee shall create
and amend as needed burn permit regulations. A copy of the regulations shall be
provided to each burn permit applicant at the time the applicant is issued a
permit. Each applicant shall comply with the burn permit requirements.
   E.   Violations: Any person who fails to obtain a burn permit or who
violates the burn permit regulations shall be punished by a fine, of not
exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00), plus court costs and penalties, or by
imprisonment for not more than ten (10) days, or both such fine and
imprisonment. Each day or any portion of a day during which a violation of this
section shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
   F.   Charges: Failure to comply with the burn permit regulations which
necessitates the Fire Department extinguishing the fire, a minimum charge of
five hundred dollars ($500.00) per unit, per hour and twenty dollars ($20.00)
per person, per hour shall be billed to the applicant. The applicant shall be
responsible for any injuries or damage to property which occur due to
noncompliance of the burn permit regulations. These costs are in addition to
the fines and cost listed in subsection E of this section. (Ord. 668, 7-16-
2013)
13-112: EMERGENCY VEHICLE DETECTOR SYSTEM REQUIRED FOR GATED COMMUNITIES:
   A.   Definitions: For the purpose of this chapter the following terms shall
be defined as:
    GATED COMMUNITY: A group of homes that are surrounded by a gated wall or
fence designed to restrict entrance usually by means of physical barriers, a
private security force and/or a controlled gate.
   EMERGENCY VEHICLE DETECTOR SYSTEM: A system that detects an emergency
vehicle siren and activates the gate opener allowing emergency vehicles/
personnel access to the gated community.
   B.   Requirement: All gated communities established after passage of this
section shall be required to install an emergency vehicle detector system
approved by the Grove Fire Department on the entrance to the community. (Ord.
738, 7-18-2017)
13-113: HIGH SECURITY KEY BOX REQUIRED:
   A.   For the purpose of this chapter the following term shall be defined as:
    HIGH SECURITY KEY BOX: A security box that holds keys, access cards and
other small items necessary for emergency entrance that is designed to allow
emergency personnel access to the buildings.
   B.   Requirements: All commercial and industrial buildings, schools, public
buildings, and apartment complexes are encouraged to install a high security
key box.
All commercial and industrial buildings, schools, public buildings and
apartment complexes constructed after the passage of this section are required
to install a high security key box approved by the Grove Fire Department. (Ord.
738, 7-18-2017)
13-114: APPLICABLE NFPA CODES:
   A.   The following codes are applicable to fire prevention and safety and
made a part of this section:
      1.   NFPA - 307;
      2.   NFPA - 303;
      3.   NFPA - 211;
      4.   NFPA - 30;
      5.   NFPA - 30A;
      6.   NFPA - 10;
      7.   NFPA - 13;
      8.   NFPA - 13A;
      9.   NFPA - 96; and
      10.   NFPA - 101. (Ord. 738, 7-18-2017)
CHAPTER 2
FIRE DEPARTMENT AND SERVICE
SECTION:
13-201: Fire Department Created
13-202: Duties Of The Fire Department
13-203: Volunteer Fire Department Established
13-204: Duties Of The Fire Chief
13-205: Duties Of The Assistant Chief
13-206: Company Officers
13-207: The Secretary-Treasurer
13-208: New Members
13-209: Bylaws
13-210: Meetings
13-211: Rules And Regulations
13-212: Use Of Fire Equipment; Inventory And Repair
13-213: Authority For Firefighting Outside City Limits
13-214: Fee For Service
13-215: Officers Retain Regular Status
13-216: Service As Agent Of State, Immunity
13-201: FIRE DEPARTMENT CREATED 1 :
There shall be a Fire Department, the head of which shall be the Chief of the
Fire Department. The Chief shall be appointed for an indefinite term by the
City Manager and may be removed by the City Manager. There shall be such
Assistant Chiefs, firefighters and other personnel as may be appointed or
approved. The Chief and other personnel may be removed only for cause. (Prior
Code § 1-21)
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS § 29-101 et seq.
13-202: DUTIES OF THE FIRE DEPARTMENT:
   A.   It is the duty of the Fire Department, among others, to extinguish
fires; to rescue persons endangered by fire; to resuscitate, and to administer
first aid to, persons injured in or about burning structures, or elsewhere in
case of an emergency; to promote fire prevention; and unless otherwise
provided, to enforce all ordinances relating to fires, fire prevention, and
safety of persons from fire in theaters, stores and other public buildings.
   B.   The Chief shall keep the City Manager informed regarding the Fire
Department and its needs and shall make such reports as the City may require.
(Prior Code § 1-31)
13-203: VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED 1 :
   A.   The Fire Department of the City is a volunteer Fire Department which is
comprised of not less than twelve (12) nor more than twenty five (25) volunteer
firefighters. (Ord. 733, 2-21-2017)
   B.   For the purpose of this chapter, a volunteer firefighter shall be
considered as one who is enrolled as a member of the Fire Department and who
serves in that capacity without receiving a regular salary. (Prior Code §§ 1-
22, 1-23)
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS § 29-201 et seq.
13-204: DUTIES OF THE FIRE CHIEF:
   A.   The Chief shall be at the head of the department, subject to the laws
of the State, ordinances of the City, and the rules and regulations adopted in
this chapter. The Chief shall have supervision and control of the department,
subject to the City Manager, and have the following powers and duties:
      1.   The Chief shall be responsible for the general condition and
efficient operation of the department, the training of members, and the
performance of all other duties imposed upon him;
      2.   The Chief may inspect or cause to be inspected by members of the
department, the fire hydrants, cistern and other sources of water supply at
least twice each year;
      3.   The Chief shall maintain a library or file of publications on fire
prevention and fire protection and shall make use of it to the best advantage
of all members;
      4.   The Chief shall make every effort to attend all fires and direct the
officers and members in the performance of their duties;
      5.   The Chief shall see that the citizens are kept informed on fire
hazards in the community and on the activities of the department;
      6.   The Chief shall see that each fire is carefully investigated to
determine its cause, and in the case of suspicion of incendiarism shall notify
proper authorities and secure and preserve all possible evidence for future use
in the case;
      7.   The Chief is authorized to enter any building or premises in the
City at any reasonable hour for the purpose of making inspections and to serve
written notice upon the owner or occupant to abate, within a specified time,
any and all fire hazards that may be found. Any person so served with a notice
to abate any fire hazard shall comply therewith and promptly notify the Chief;
      8.   The Chief shall see that complete records are kept of all fires,
inspections, apparatus and equipment, personnel and other information of the
department and shall make reports to the City Manager as he may require; and
      9.   The Chief or the person acting in his absence shall have full power,
control, and command over all persons whomsoever present at fires. He shall
direct the use of all fire apparatus and equipment, and command all firemen in
the discharge of their duties. He shall take such measures as may be necessary
in the preservation and protection of property and the extinguishing of fires.
(Prior Code §§ 1-24, 1-33 to 1-36)
13-205: DUTIES OF THE ASSISTANT CHIEF:
In the absence of the Chief, the Assistant Chief on duty shall command the
department and be held responsible therefor in all respects with the full
powers and responsibilities of the Chief. The Assistant Chief shall be elected
from among the members of the Fire Department. (Prior Code § 1-25)
13-206: COMPANY OFFICERS:
   A.   Company officers shall be selected by the Chief based upon the
following criteria:
      1.   Knowledge of firefighting;
      2.   Leadership ability; and
      3.   Knowledge of firefighting equipment. (Prior Code § 1-26)
13-207: THE SECRETARY-TREASURER:
   A.   One (1) member elected by the members of the Fire Department shall be a
Secretary-Treasurer. His duties shall consist of the following:
      1.   Calling the roll at the opening of each meeting;
      2.   Keeping the minutes of each meeting; and
      3.   Collecting any money due the department by the members. (Prior Code
§ 1-27)
13-208: NEW MEMBERS:
New members of the department shall be appointed by the Chief and shall be on
probation for one (1) year after their appointment. Upon completion of their
probation period, new members must be approved by the majority of the other
members of the Fire Department. (Prior Code § 1-28)
13-209: BYLAWS:
   A.   The bylaws of the department shall include the following:
      1.   All volunteer Fire Department members are required, when notified,
to respond to alarms of fire and other emergencies;
      2.   A member is required to be present at all regular meetings, called
meetings and schools presented for the benefit of the firefighters;
      3.   At least one (1) regular business meeting of the members shall be
held each month;
      4.   Any member having two (2) unexcused absences in succession or three
(3) unexcused absences in a period of three (3) months will be dropped from the
Fire Department rolls;
      5.   Any member leaving the City for an extended period of time is
required to notify the Chief;
      6.   Any member refusing to attend training classes provided for members
of the department will be dropped; and
      7.   Any member of the Fire Department may be dropped from the rolls for
the following offenses:
         a.   Conduct unbecoming a firefighter;
         b.   Any act of insubordination;
         c.   Neglect of duty;
         d.   Any violation of rules and regulations governing the Fire
Department;
         e.   Conviction of a felony; or
         f.   By majority vote of the members of the company and approval of
the City Manager. (Prior Code § 1-29)
13-210: MEETINGS:
Regular company meetings shall be held. One (1) such meeting shall be a regular
business meeting. Special meetings may be held on the written request of five
(5) members or the Fire Chief. The object of the meeting shall be inserted in
the call and no business shall be transacted which is not mentioned in the call
or provided in the constitution. (1983 Code)
13-211: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The City Council by motion or resolution may adopt and change regulations
relating to the Fire Department, its organization, operation and compensation.
(Prior Code § 1-32)
13-212: USE OF FIRE EQUIPMENT; INVENTORY AND REPAIR:
   A.   Use of fire equipment will be as authorized by the Chief or Assistant
Chief of the Fire Department to be used under supervision of at least one
firefighter. No person shall enter any place where fire apparatus is housed or
handle any apparatus or equipment belonging to the department unless
accompanied by, or having the special permission of, an officer or authorized
member of the department.
   B.   The Fire Department shall prepare and keep a complete inventory of all
property belonging to the Fire Department.
   C.   The Chief shall report to the City Manager any necessary repairs,
alterations or improvements needed by the Fire Department with an estimate of
their probable cost, and shall superintend the making of the repairs,
alterations or improvements, and if any apparatus shall become disabled for
immediate use, he shall repair the same and report his action to the Council.
(1983 Code)
13-213: AUTHORITY FOR FIREFIGHTING OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS 1 :
   A.   The City is hereby authorized and empowered to provide fire protection
outside the corporate limits of the City within an area hereinafter referred
to. The Fire Department of the City is hereby authorized and directed to answer
all calls outside the City limits within a distance from the nearest fire
station as approved by the City Manager, and such further distance as has been
approved by prior action of the Council or as may be hereafter approved by the
City Manager, unless in the opinion of the Fire Chief it is inexpedient to do
so on account of another fire in the City, broken apparatus, impassable or
dangerous highways, or other physical conditions.
   B.   The Fire Department shall respond to mutual aid requests as authorized
by the Fire Chief. (1983 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS §§ 29-106 - 29-108.
13-214: FEE FOR SERVICE:
   A.   Outside City: Any service rendered by the City to an individual owner,
firm, private corporation or association for aid outside the corporate limits
shall be billed to such entity by the City for such apparatus and personnel at
rates established by the Council and set-forth by resolution. All monies
received from the calls shall go into the City's General Fund. Such charges
shall be billed to the owner or lessee of the property for services provided.
Any individual owner, firm, private corporation or association who has a
current paid to date yearly fire subscription with the City of Grove Fire
Department will not be billed for said services; only their insurance company
will be billed. Said subscription contract with the Grove Fire Department is
for the fire district outside the City of Grove's corporate limits.
   B.   Mutual Aid: Mutual aid calls outside the corporate limits shall be
billed by the City for such fire apparatus and personnel at rates established
by the Council and set-forth by resolution. All monies received from the calls
shall go into the City's General Fund. Such charges shall be billed to the
owner or lessee of the property for services provided.
Any individual owner, firm, private corporation or association who has a
current paid to date yearly fire subscription contract with the Fire
Department/district that is receiving mutual aid from the City of Grove Fire
Department will not be billed for said services provided; only their insurance
company will be billed. (Ord. 749, 3-6-2018)
   C.   Abnormal Expenditures: The City reserves the right to bill and collect
any abnormal expenditures for firefighting supplies incurred by the Fire
Department while performing its duty. This shall apply to all Fire Department
incidents both inside and outside the corporate City limits. (Ord. 456, 6-6-
2000)
   D.   Bill Insurance Company: The City reserves the right to bill and collect
from the insurance company of all parties receiving service from the City of
Grove Fire Department.
Any individual owner, firm, private corporation or association residing within
the City limits or any individual owner, firm, private corporation or
association residing outside the City limits but within the Grove fire district
who has a current fire paid to date subscription will not be billed for
services provided; only their insurance company will be billed.
Any individual owner, firm, private corporation or association residing outside
the City limits but within the Grove fire district who does not have a current
paid to date fire subscription will be charged the balance for services
provided that are not paid by their insurance company. (Ord. 664, 5-21-2013)
   E.   Fire Training:
      1.   Open burning of humanmade structures for the purpose of fire
training is allowed as provided for in Oklahoma clean air act, 27A Oklahoma
Statutes section 2-5-106.1.
      2.   The fire chief or his designee shall determine if the structure is
safe for training prior to performing a controlled open burn.
      3.   Controlled open burns on dilapidated or condemned structures shall
be charged and billed to the property owner(s) at a rate of one thousand five
hundred dollars ($1,500.00) per structure or as otherwise set by the governing
body.
      4.   Prior to the fire department personnel performing a controlled open
burn on a dilapidated or condemned humanmade structure for the purpose of
training the property owner(s) are required to:
         a.   Provide proof of ownership;
         b.   Sign a release and indemnification agreement;
         c.   Provide proof the entire structure has been examined according to
the Oklahoma clean air act, 27A Oklahoma Statutes section 2-5-106.1 for the
presence of asphalt, asbestos, and lead-containing materials;
         d.   Provide proof that all asphalt, asbestos and lead-containing
materials have been removed from the structure prior to the fire training;
         e.   Provide proof all asphalt, asbestos and lead-containing materials
have been disposed of at a facility approved for handling of hazardous
materials;
         f.   Inspection, removal and disposal of any hazardous materials shall
be conducted according to the requirements of federal law;
         g.   Property owner(s) are responsible for the cost of testing,
removal and disposal of hazardous materials;
         h.   Provide proof that all utilities have been disconnected;
         i.   Identify underground hazards such as basements, cellars, septic
tanks.
      5.   Following the completion of fire training, property owner(s) shall
be responsible for the removal and proper disposal of all remaining debris
within thirty (30) days. The property owner(s) shall provide the Grove fire
department proof the debris has been disposed of at an approved facility.
         a.   Failure to remove and properly dispose of all debris shall be
punishable by a fine of not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00), plus
court costs and penalties, or by imprisonment for not more than ten (10) days,
or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day or any portion of a day during
which a violation of this subsection shall continue shall constitute a separate
offense. (Ord. 672, 10-15-2013)
13-215: OFFICERS RETAIN REGULAR STATUS:
All firefighters of the city attending and serving at fires or doing fire
prevention work outside the corporate limits of the city as herein provided
shall be considered as serving in their regular line of duty as fully as if
they were serving within the corporate limits of the city. The firefighters
shall be entitled to all the benefits of any fire pensions and relief fund in
the same manner as if the firefighting or fire prevention work was being done
within the corporate limits of the city. (1983 Code)
13-216: SERVICE AS AGENT OF STATE, IMMUNITY:
The fire department answering any fire alarm, or call, or performing any fire
prevention services outside the corporate limits of the city shall be
considered as an agent of the state and acting solely and alone in a
governmental capacity. The municipality shall not be liable in damages for any
act of commission, omission, or negligence while answering or returning from
any fire, or reported fire, or doing any fire prevention work under and by
virtue of this chapter. (1983 Code)
CHAPTER 3
CIVIL DEFENSE
SECTION:
13-301: Purpose of civil defense organization.
13-302: Department of civil defense created.
13-303: Director of civil defense; powers and duties.
13-304: Further powers and duties.
13-305: Civil defense; emergency powers.
13-306: Enforcement of laws and ordinances.
13-307: Compensation; liability.
13-301: PURPOSE OF CIVIL DEFENSE ORGANIZATION:
The purpose of this chapter is to create a civil defense organization for the
city to be prepared for, and to function in the event of, emergencies
endangering the lives and property of the people of such city. The duty of such
civil defense organization shall be the protection of the lives and health of
the citizens of the city and of property rights, both private and public, and
to perform all functions necessary and incident thereto. (Prior Code, Section
1-40)
State Law Reference: Local civil defense organizations, 63 O.S. Sections
683.11, 683.12.
13-302: DEPARTMENT OF CIVIL DEFENSE CREATED:
There is hereby established under the executive branch of the government of the
city a department of civil defense which shall consist of a director of civil
defense who shall be appointed by the mayor of the city and serve at his
pleasure. (Prior Code, Section 1-41)
13-303: DIRECTOR OF CIVIL DEFENSE; POWERS AND DUTIES:
The director of civil defense shall be the executive head of the department of
civil defense, and shall be responsible for carrying out the civil defense
program of the city. He shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed
for expenses incurred in the performance of his duties. It is the duty of the
director of civil defense, as soon as practicable after his appointment, to
perfect an organization to carry out the purposes set forth in this chapter. He
shall have all necessary power and authority to form committees or other bodies
and to appoint and designate the chairman or chief officer of such bodies as
may be necessary to perfect such an organization. He shall have such further
duty and responsibility to cooperate with all civil defense agencies of other
governmental units including the state and federal government. (Prior Code,
Section 1-42)
13-304: FURTHER POWERS AND DUTIES:
The director of civil defense is further authorized to formulate written plans
and gather information and keep written records thereof to govern the functions
of the civil defense organization. (Prior Code, Section 1-43)
13-305: CIVIL DEFENSE; EMERGENCY POWERS:
In the event of an enemy-caused emergency or emergency resulting from natural
causes, the director of civil defense, after due authorization from the city
council of the city, shall have the power and authority to enforce all rules
and regulations relating to civil defense and, if necessary take control of
transportation, communications, stocks of fuel, food, clothing, medicine, and
public utilities for the purpose of protecting the civilian population. He
shall cooperate in every way with the activities of other governmental agencies
or civil defense organizations. If required by the mayor, he shall have control
over any and all funds allocated from any source for the purpose of alleviating
distress conditions in the city. (Prior Code, Section 1-44)
13-306: ENFORCEMENT OF LAWS AND ORDINANCES:
The director of civil defense and other members of the civil defense
organization created by him shall have the power and authority to enforce the
laws of the state and ordinances of the city during the period of emergency,
and shall at such time have the further power to make arrests for violations of
such laws or ordinances. (Prior Code, Section 1-45)
13-307: COMPENSATION; LIABILITY:
All members of the civil defense organization created hereunder shall serve
without compensation. The town shall not be liable for any personal injury
received by any member of such organization while acting in the line of duty.
(Prior Code, Section 1-46)
CHAPTER 4
POLICE DEPARTMENT AND SERVICES
SECTION:
13-401: Police Department And Chief
13-402: Duties
13-403: Assistance To Another Community
13-404: Assistance To Sheriff's Office Or Highway Patrol
13-405: Reimbursement
13-401: POLICE DEPARTMENT AND CHIEF 1 :
There shall be a police department, the head of which shall be the chief of
police, appointed by the city manager for an indefinite term, and shall be
removable by the city manager. The chief of police shall be an officer of the
city, and shall have supervision and control of the police department. There
may be such additional police officers as the mayor and council may authorize.
All police officers shall be officers of the city. (Ord. 550, 1-15-2008)
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS § 34-101 et seq.
13-402: DUTIES:
It is the duty of the police department to apprehend and arrest on view or on
warrant and bring to justice all violators of the ordinances of the city; to
suppress all riots, affrays and unlawful assemblies which may come to their
knowledge, and generally to keep the peace; to serve all warrants, writs,
executions and other processes properly directed and delivered to them; to
apprehend and arrest persons violating federal or state law as provided by law,
and to turn them over to proper authorities; and in all respects to perform all
duties pertaining to the offices of policemen. The police department shall have
control and operation of the city jail, however the council may make
arrangements with the board of county commissioners for use of the county jail
for city purposes. (1983 Code)
13-403: ASSISTANCE TO ANOTHER COMMUNITY 1 :
Approval is hereby given for services of the regular police department of this
city, upon request of the mayor or his designees, or chief of police or his
designees, of any other municipality to serve as police officer in the
municipality requesting their assistance. (Ord. 346, 11-20-1990)
 
Notes
1 2. 11 OS § 34-103.
13-404: ASSISTANCE TO SHERIFF'S OFFICE OR HIGHWAY PATROL:
Approval is hereby given for services of the regular police department of this
city, upon request of a county sheriff or his designees, including district
attorney or assistant district attorney, or upon request by a member of the
Oklahoma highway patrol to serve as police officer in a county requesting their
assistance. (Ord. 346, 11-20-1990)
13-405: REIMBURSEMENT:
While so serving in another municipality or county, such police officer shall
have the same powers and duties as though employed by the requesting law
enforcement agency and when so acting, they shall be deemed to be acting within
the scope of employment of the requesting law enforcement agency except
salaries, insurance, and other benefits shall be provided in their regular
manner by the municipality in which the police officer is regularly employed.
(Ord. 346, 11-20-1990)
CHAPTER 5
UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
SECTION:
13-501: Unclaimed Property In Possession Of Police Department
13-502: Application
13-503: Value Of Property
13-504: Order Of Court
13-505: Money Or Legal Tender
13-506: Dangerous Or Deadly Weapons
13-507: "Lost And Found" Property
13-508: Finder's Fee
13-501: UNCLAIMED PROPERTY IN POSSESSION OF POLICE DEPARTMENT 1 :
   A.   All personal property which comes into the possession of a member of
the police department during the normal course of the member's duties and which
cannot be expeditiously returned to the rightful owner shall be placed in the
custody of the police chief, who shall cause an accurate record to be
maintained to identify the property, the date of its acquisition and the
circumstances under which it was acquired by the department. This record shall
also disclose the subsequent disposal of said property including the date of
the disposition, the circumstances of the disposition, the purchaser, address
and amount of the sale if the property was sold.
   B.   The chief of police is authorized to sell personal property other than
money or legal tender of the United States, which has come into his possession
in any manner, if:
      1.   The owner of the personal property is unknown, cannot be
satisfactorily established, or does not claim the property;
      2.   The property has been in the custody of the chief of police for at
least six (6) months; and
      3.   The property or any part thereof is no longer needed to be held as
evidence or for any other purpose in connection with litigation.
   C.   Any personal property found by a private person shall be reported to
the police department by presenting identifying information concerning the
personal property to any police officer, in order for the police department to
attempt to locate its true owner. Reporting this information to the police
department with identifying information, including the opportunity for the
department to examine the personal property itself, shall not deprive the
reporting person of any possessory interest he may have. However, if the
reporting person turns the found property over to the police department and
leaves it with the department for a period in excess of six (6) months, he
shall be presumed to have abandoned the possession of the property, thereby
making it eligible for disposition under subsection B of this section.
   D.   If any property is sold as provided for in this section, and the owner
thereof takes and recovers possession of same from the purchaser, the amount
paid therefore shall be returned to the purchaser, upon verified claim being
submitted and approved by the city council. (Ord. 511, 11-18-2003)
 
Notes
1 1. 15 OS § 511 et seq.; 22 OS §§ 1261, 1321 et seq.
13-502: APPLICATION:
   A.   The chief of police shall file an application in the district court of
Delaware County, requesting the authority of said court to conduct a sale of
such personal property which has a fair market value of more than its face
value. Said chief of police shall attach to his application a list describing
such property including any identifying numbers and marks, the date said
property came into his possession, and the name of the owner and the person in
last possession, if different, and his address, if known. The court shall set
said application for hearing not less than ten (10) days nor more than twenty
(20) days after filing of said application. (Ord. 390, 10-17-1995)
13-503: VALUE OF PROPERTY:
   A.   In any instance where said property has an actual or apparent value of
more than twenty five dollars ($25.00), at least ten (10) days prior to date of
said hearing, notice of said hearing shall be sent by certified mail to each
owner at his address as listed in said application. If the owner of any
property with an actual or apparent value exceeding five hundred dollars
($500.00) is unable to be served notice by said certified mail, notice shall be
provided by one publication in the newspaper of general circulation in the
county where the property is in custody. Said notice shall contain a brief
description of the property of said owner and the place and date of the
hearing. Said notice shall be posted at the assigned place for the posting of
municipal notices, and at two (2) other public places in the municipality.
(Ord. 390, 10-17-1995)
13-504: ORDER OF COURT:
   A.   If no owner appears and establishes ownership to said property at the
hearing, the court shall enter an order authorizing the chief of police to sell
said personal property for cash to the highest bidder, after at least five (5)
days' notice of said sale has been published. The chief of police shall make a
return of said sale and the order of the court confirming said sale shall vest
title to said property in the purchaser. After payment of court costs and other
expenses, the remainder of money received from the sale of said personal
property shall be deposited in the municipal general fund. (Ord. 390, 10-17-
1995)
13-505: MONEY OR LEGAL TENDER:
   A.   All money or legal tender which has come into the possession of the
chief of police pursuant to the circumstances provided for in section
13-501 of this chapter shall be transferred by the chief of police to the
municipal clerk for deposit in the municipal general fund. Prior to any such
transfer, the chief of police shall file an application in the district court
requesting the court to enter an order authorizing him to transfer said money
for deposit in the municipal general fund. The application shall describe the
money or legal tender, any serial numbers, the date the same came into his
possession, and pursuant to section
13-502 of this chapter, a hearing shall be set not less than ten (10) days nor
more than twenty (20) days from the filing of the application. Notice of said
hearing shall be given as provided for in section
13-503 of this chapter. The notice shall state that upon failure of anyone to
appear or to prove ownership to said money or legal tender, the court shall
order the same to be deposited in the municipal general fund. The notice may be
combined with a notice to sell personal property as provided in section
13-503 of this chapter. If no one appears to claim and prove ownership to said
money or legal tender at the hearing, the court shall order the same to be
transferred to the municipal general fund as provided in this section. (Ord.
390, 10-17-1995)
13-506: DANGEROUS OR DEADLY WEAPONS:
   A.   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any dangerous or
deadly weapons, narcotic or poisonous drugs, explosives, or any property of any
kind or character, of which the possession is prohibited by law. By order of
the trial court, any such property filed as an exhibit or held by the
municipality shall be destroyed or sold or disposed of, pursuant to the
conditions prescribed in such order. (Ord. 390, 10-17-1995)
13-507: "LOST AND FOUND" PROPERTY:
   A.   The municipality is hereby authorized to establish a procedure for the
registration of "lost and found" property. Such procedure shall give the finder
of any property the option to relinquishing any future claim to found property
at the time its possession is surrendered to the police or other agent of the
municipality, or of retaining possession of the property after registering its
description and the finder's identity with the police department or other agent
of the municipality. Only property in which the finder relinquishes any future
claim to its ownership will be stored in municipal police property rooms. (Ord.
390, 10-17-1995)
13-508: FINDER'S FEE:
   A.   Any person who finds unclaimed personal property or money or legal
tender, delivers it to, or registers it with, the chief of police or other
agent of the municipality, is entitled to fifty percent (50%) of said money or
legal tender deposited in the municipal general fund as a finder's fee for
services rendered to said person. (Ord. 390, 10-17-1995)
PART 14
STREETS AND PUBLIC WORKS
CHAPTER 1
USE AND OBSTRUCTION OF STREETS
SECTION:
14-101: Trees And Shrubbery To Be Trimmed
14-102: Penalty For Violation Of Section
14-101 Of This Chapter
14-103: Unlawful To Injure Trees And Shrubbery
14-104: Unlawful To Obstruct Sidewalks, Parkways, Streets And Alleys With
Merchandise
14-105: Unlawful To Unduly Obstruct Sidewalks, Parkways, Streets And Alleys
14-106: Littering
14-106.1: Reward For Information Leading To Littering Arrests
14-107: Unlawful To Play On Sidewalks And In Streets
14-108: Vehicles Not To Be Washed On Street
14-109: Water, Mud From Vehicle Not To Drain Into Street
14-110: Water From Filling Stations And Other Businesses
14-111: Owner Or Occupant Not To Permit Sidewalk Or Sidewalk Area To Become A
Hazard
14-112: Street Not To Be Obstructed So As To Interfere With Drainage
14-113: Penalty
14-101: TREES AND SHRUBBERY TO BE TRIMMED:
   A.   The owner or occupant of any premises abutting on any street or alley
of this city shall trim all trees and shrubbery growing in the parking, between
the sidewalks and the roadway, of any such street, and all trees and shrubbery
growing on any part of the premises adjacent to the sidewalks or any street or
alley, in such a manner that the boughs or limbs thereof shall not obstruct
free and convenient passage and travel along the streets, sidewalks and alleys.
Such trees and shrubbery shall be trimmed so that the lowest branches or
foliage shall not be lower than fourteen feet (14') above the roadway of a
street or alley, nor lower than nine feet (9') above the sidewalk.
   B.   The owner or occupant of any premises located at an intersection shall
maintain the shrubbery within fifty feet (50') in each direction from the
intersection at a height not to exceed two feet (2').
   C.   The owner or occupant of any premises abutting a public right of way
and/or easement shall maintain the public right of way and/or easement in such
a manner that the vegetation, brush, grass or weeds do not grow in excess of
twelve inches (12") in height, and keep the right of way and/or easement clear
of obstacles and permanent structures. (Ord. 684, 4-1-2014)
14-102: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF SECTION 14-101 OF THIS CHAPTER:
Any owner or occupant who shall fail, refuse or neglect to trim trees and
shrubbery as provided in section
14-101 of this chapter, after receiving five (5) days' notice from the head of
the department in charge of streets to do so, shall be guilty of an offense
against the city. Every day that the said owner or occupant shall fail, refuse
or neglect to trim said trees or shrubbery, after the expiration of the five
(5) days' notice, shall be a separate offense. (Prior code § 19-2)
14-103: UNLAWFUL TO INJURE TREES AND SHRUBBERY:
It is unlawful for any person to injure any tree or shrubbery on a street or
alley in the city; provided that this shall not prohibit the lawful and proper
care and removal of such trees and shrubbery. (Prior code § 19-3)
14-104: UNLAWFUL TO OBSTRUCT SIDEWALKS, PARKWAYS, STREETS AND ALLEYS WITH
MERCHANDISE:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person, business, firm or corporation to place
upon or permit to be placed upon the sidewalks, parkways, streets and alleys of
the city any goods, wares, articles of merchandise or any other obstruction,
and leave same thereon; or to use the same as a place to carry on a business or
trade.
   B.   Exceptions may be authorized by the city manager of the city of Grove,
Oklahoma, on a case by case basis to allow temporary partial use of sidewalks,
parkways, streets and alleys for community wide activities and events. Partial
use as provided herein shall be such as, deemed appropriate by the city
manager, which minimizes the temporary encroachment on the sidewalk, parkway,
street, alley or public way so as to allow for the preservation of pedestrian
access and movement thereon. Under no circumstances will any areas of
sidewalks, parkways, streets or alleys be authorized for use if they are in
disrepair such as will cause a safety hazard. (Ord. 626, 9-20-2011)
14-105: UNLAWFUL TO UNDULY OBSTRUCT SIDEWALKS, PARKWAYS, STREETS AND ALLEYS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person, business, firm or corporation to use or
obstruct the sidewalks of the city in any manner so as to interfere unduly with
pedestrian traffic thereon, or to use or obstruct the sidewalks, parkways,
streets and alleys of the city in any manner so as to interfere unduly with
lawful traffic and parking thereon.
   B.   Exceptions may be authorized by the city manager of the city of Grove,
Oklahoma, on a case by case basis to allow temporary partial use of sidewalks,
parkways, streets and alleys for community wide activities and events. Partial
use as provided herein shall be such as, deemed appropriate by the city
manager, which minimizes the temporary encroachment on the sidewalk, parkway,
street, alley or public way so as to allow for the preservation of pedestrian
access and movement thereon. Under no circumstances will any areas of
sidewalks, parkways, streets or alleys be authorized for use if they are in
disrepair such as will cause a safety hazard. (Ord. 626, 9-20-2011)
14-106: LITTERING:
   A.   Any person who deliberately places, throws, drops, deposits or discards
any garbage, trash, waste, rubbish, refuse, debris or other deleterious
substance on any public property or on any private property of another without
consent shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   B.   Any person convicted of violating the provisions of subsection A of
this section shall be punished by a fine of not less than twenty five dollars
($25.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) plus cost, or by
imprisonment in the city jail for not more than thirty (30) days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment.
   C.   In addition to the penalty prescribed by subsection B of this section,
the court may direct the person to make restitution to the property owner
affected; to remove and properly dispose of the garbage, trash, waste, refuse
or debris from the property; to pick up, remove and properly dispose of
garbage, trash, waste, rubbish, refuse, debris and other nonhazardous
deleterious substances from public property; or any combination of the
foregoing which the court, in its discretion, deems appropriate. The dates,
times and locations of such activities shall be scheduled by the chief of
police pursuant to the order of the court in such a manner as not to interfere
with the employment or family responsibilities of the person.
   D.   In addition to the penalty prescribed in subsection B of this section
and the restitution prescribed in subsection C of this section, the court may
order the defendant to pay into the reward fund as prescribed in section
14-106.1 of this chapter an amount not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00).
   E.   Any full time peace officer in the city upon investigation of the
disposal of any substance in violation of this section which contains three (3)
or more items bearing a common address in a form which tends to identify the
latest owner of the items shall create a rebuttable presumption that all
competent persons residing at such address committed the unlawful act. The
discovery or use of such evidence shall not be sufficient to qualify for the
reward provided in section
14-106.1 of this chapter. (Prior code § 19-6; amd. Ord. 336, 1-3-1989)
14-106.1: REWARD FOR INFORMATION LEADING TO LITTERING ARRESTS:
   A.   The city may offer and pay a reward, from funds set aside for that
purpose, in an amount not less than fifty percent (50%) of the fine imposed,
for the arrest and conviction or for evidence leading to the arrest and
conviction of any person who violates the provisions of section
14-106 of this chapter.
   B.   The city may create and maintain a reward fund in the city treasury
which shall be a revolving fund not subject to fiscal year limitations, from
which to pay the rewards provided for in subsection A of this section. Any
monies for which no claim is filed within the period provided in subsection C
of this section, shall revert to the general fund. Any monies remaining in the
reward fund after all claims have been paid or denied shall revert to the
general fund.
   C.   Claims for rewards shall be on forms provided by the city and shall be
submitted to the prosecuting attorney of the city no later than thirty (30)
days after sentencing of the defendant. The prosecuting attorney shall
investigate the validity of the claim and make a nonbinding written
recommendation to the city.
   D.   All claims relating to a conviction shall be considered together at the
next regular meeting of the city following receipt of the prosecuting
attorney's report.
   E.   In determining the amount of the reward, the city shall have sole
discretion to honor or deny the claim, but shall consider:
      1.   The severity of the offense;
      2.   The size of the fine imposed;
      3.   The number of persons claiming a reward and the degree to which each
claimant was responsible for the arrest or conviction;
      4.   The burden, if any, incurred by the claimant including cost to
appear at trial; and
      5.   Other factors which the city deems appropriate.
   F.   No reward shall be authorized and no debt shall accrue to the city upon
the depletion of the reward fund authorized by this section.
   G.   The reward authorized by this section shall be in lieu of any other
city reward.
   H.   Full time peace officers of this city shall not be eligible for the
reward provided by this section.
   I.   As used in this section, "litter" means any flaming or glowing
substances except those which by law may be placed upon highway rights of way,
any substance which may cause a fire, any bottles, cans, trash, garbage, or
debris of any kind. As used in this section, "litter" shall not include trash,
garbage, or debris placed beside a public road for collection by a garbage
collection agency, or deposited upon or within public property designated by
the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions as an appropriate
place for such deposits if the person making the deposit is authorized to use
the property for such purpose. (Ord. 336, 1-3-1989)
14-107: UNLAWFUL TO PLAY ON SIDEWALKS AND IN STREETS:
It is unlawful for any person to play on the sidewalks or upon the main
traveled portion of the streets and alleys of the city, except as may be
authorized by ordinance. (Prior code § 19-8)
14-108: VEHICLES NOT TO BE WASHED ON STREET:
The washing of an automobile or other vehicle in any street of the city is
hereby prohibited. (Prior code § 19-9)
14-109: WATER, MUD FROM VEHICLE NOT TO DRAIN INTO STREET:
No automobile or other vehicle shall be washed at any place within the city
where the water, dirt, mud or other substances removed therefrom by or during
the washing thereof, shall drain into or upon any street or sidewalk of the
city. (Prior code § 19-10)
14-110: WATER FROM FILLING STATIONS AND OTHER BUSINESSES:
It is unlawful for any owner or operator of a filling station or other place of
business, or any agent or employee thereof, to cause or allow water, grease or
other fluid to flow or drain into, upon, over or across any sidewalk, parking,
street, alley or other public way. (Prior code § 19-11)
14-111: OWNER OR OCCUPANT NOT TO PERMIT SIDEWALK OR SIDEWALK AREA TO BECOME A
HAZARD:
It is unlawful for the owner or occupant of property abutting upon a sidewalk
area to permit the sidewalk or sidewalk area adjacent to the property to become
a hazard to persons using the sidewalk, or sidewalk area. (Prior code § 19-12)
14-112: STREET NOT TO BE OBSTRUCTED SO AS TO INTERFERE WITH DRAINAGE:
It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to obstruct any street,
sidewalk, or alley, by placing any approach driveway or other obstruction or
substance whatever that will obstruct or prevent the natural flow of water,
into the storm sewers or drains, or dam the same so as to back any water upon
the streets, alleys, sidewalks, or gutter. (Prior code § 19-7)
14-113: PENALTY:
Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter
shall be guilty of an offense, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined as
provided in section
1-108 of this code. (Ord. 454, 5-16-2000)
CHAPTER 2
STREET DEFINITIONS, LANE AND RIGHT OF WAY
SECTION:
14-201: Definitions
14-202: Local Streets
14-203: Collector Streets
14-204: Arterial Streets
14-205: Naming Of Streets
14-201: DEFINITIONS:
To the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning
respectively ascribed to them in this section:
ARTERIAL STREET: A street primarily intended to move traffic through a
community and connect areas throughout the region to the major highway systems.
COLLECTOR STREET: A street serving internal traffic movements, collecting and
distributing traffic from internal streets to access streets or directly to
traffic designations.
LOCAL STREET: A facility having the sole function of providing access to
immediately adjacent land. Designed to be eliminated as a potential
thoroughfare. (Ord. 236, 6-17-1980)
14-202: LOCAL STREETS:
All local streets are to have a right of way width of fifty feet (50')
consisting of two (2) traffic lanes of twenty six feet (26'). (Ord. 236, 6-17-
1980)
14-203: COLLECTOR STREETS:
All collector streets shall have a right of width of sixty feet (60') and a
paving width of thirty two feet (32'), comprised of two (2) traffic lanes.
(Ord. 236, 6-17-1980)
14-204: ARTERIAL STREETS:
All arterial streets shall have a right of way width of one hundred feet (100')
and a paving width of forty four feet (44'), comprised of two (2) traffic
lanes. (Ord. 236, 6-17-1980)
14-205: NAMING OF STREETS:
   A.   A written request to name a new street or change the name of an
existing street within the corporate limits shall be submitted to the city
council for consideration.
   B.   The naming of all new streets or the name change of an existing street
within the corporate limits shall be designated or changed only by an ordinance
approved by the city council.
   C.   Street names of territory annexed to the city of Grove shall be
designated only by an ordinance approved by the city council.
   D.   The naming of all streets within the corporate limits shall conform to
the existing 911 addressing system. (Ord. 633, 11-15-2011)
CHAPTER 3
CUTTING STREETS AND ALLEYS
SECTION:
14-301: Unlawful to cut streets, alleys, curbs, notice to city.
14-302: Fees.
14-303: Penalty.
14-301: UNLAWFUL TO CUT STREETS, ALLEYS, CURBS, NOTICE TO CITY:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to cut, alter, mutilate or change in any
manner for any purpose any paved or traveled portion of any street or alley, or
any curb, gutter, catch basin or any other appurtenance of any street or alley,
or any sidewalk in the city, except employees of the street department of the
city acting under the direct supervision of the street superintendent. Any
person, company, including utility companies, corporation, or business desiring
to install any lines, including electrical, water, sewer, cable or telephone,
shall be required to give reasonable notice to the city as to when they desire
to have a particular street, to be cut, altered or changed; the person or
company or corporation or business shall give at least three (3) days notice to
the city which shall constitute a reasonable notice. Any street cuts not
perpendicular or longitudinal to the main trafficway will require a separate
contract with fees to be negotiated with the city.
   B.   On contracts under direct supervision of the Grove Municipal Services
Authority (GMSA), the street department will perform the work only if crossing
is perpendicular to the main travel way of the roadway. Perpendicular will be
considered as crossing within 15° (fifteen degrees) of perpendicular. All other
crossings will be considered longitudinal and will be performed to the GMSA
contractor under direct inspection by the street department.
   C.   On contracts with street superintendent, the Grove Municipal Services
Authority will furnish one inspector who will be present while the street is
being cut and during replacement of backfill and surface. Backfill will be
compacted limestone and surface will be asphalt or concrete to match existing
previously cut surface. (Ord. No. 260, 12/1/81)
14-302: FEES:
The city shall charge a fee for the services, which fee shall be set by the
city council of the city. The council may from time to time, change the rate
schedule as they so desire. (Ord. No. 260, 12/1/81)
14-303: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter
shall be guilty of an offense, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined as
provided in Section
1-108 of this code. (Ord. No. 260, 12/1/81)
CHAPTER 4
CONSTRUCTION WITHIN RIGHTS-OF-WAY
SECTION:
14-401: Definitions
14-402: Permit Required
14-403: Access Driveway Standards
14-404: Access Driveways Prohibited In Certain Areas
14-405: Sight Distance
14-406: Enforcement And Exceptions
14-407: Penalty
14-401: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning
respectively ascribed to them in this section:
ACCESS DRIVEWAY: Any driveway which connects with a public street.
NON-CONFORMING DRIVEWAY: An access driveway that was constructed or established
according to City codes and building regulations of the time, but which because
of subsequent changes it does not meet current City code and building
regulations.
SIGHT DISTANCE: The minimum distance necessary for a vehicle traveling at the
posted speed to come to a complete stop prior to reaching the access driveway.
(Ord. 747, 2-20-2018)
14-402: PERMIT REQUIRED:
All construction including access driveways within City rights- of-way requires
submittal of a rights-of-way permit application and review by the City of Grove
prior to commencement of construction. Design plans must be submitted with the
rights-of- way permit application.
Exceptions: Organizations with franchise agreements with the City of Grove.
(Ord. 747, 2-20-2018)
14-403: ACCESS DRIVEWAY STANDARDS:
   A.   Contractors or property owners shall obtain a Driveway Permit and shall
meet with the Public Works Director or his designee prior to any construction
being started. Contractor shall follow direction of the Public Works Director
and shall comply with the driveway standards. Failure to construct the driveway
in a manner as instructed by the Public Works Director or in a manner that is
not compliant with this Ordinance will require the contractor to remove and
replace the driveway in a manner that is compliant, all at the owner's expense.
   B.   All access driveways shall be constructed in accordance with the most
current Roadway Standard Specifications, and subsequent amendments, thereto, as
prepared by the Oklahoma State Department of Transportation (ODOT).
      1.   Driveways intersecting a public street shall have adequate drainage,
inspected and approved by the City of Grove.   
      2.   Driveways shall have either a drivable swale or a culvert pipe. The
swale shall be no greater than fifteen to one (15:1) or six and a half percent
(6.5%). If these criteria cannot be met a culvert pipe constructed of
corrugated high-density poly ethylene (HDPE) shall be used with a culvert end
treatment. The culvert end treatment shall meet the requirements set forth in
the most current ODOT Roadway Standards Specifications, and subsequent
amendments.
      3.   Driveways for properties located in the city limits shall be
constructed from the edge of the street to a house, garage or other type of
structure AND Driveways for properties located outside the city limits that
abut a city street requires a Driveway Permit and shall be constructed from the
edge of the street through the Rights-of-Way. All driveways shall be
constructed of:
         a.   A stabilized sub-grade with four inch (4") type A aggregate base
with adequate compactions, as determined by the City of Grove. The aggregate
base shall meet the requirements of the most current ODOT Roadway Standard
Specifications and subsequent amendments, thereto.
         b.   The aggregate base shall be covered with four inches (4") of 3500
psi Class A concrete or type B 64-22 OK asphalt. Driveway in-turns shall be
covered with six inches (6") of 3500 psi Class A concrete or type B 64-22 OK
asphalt for a distance of six feet (6') from the edge of the street. The
asphalt and concrete shall meet the requirements of the most current ODOT
Roadway Standard Specifications and subsequent amendments, thereto.
      4.   Driveway gradation shall meet the requirements of the most current
ODOT Roadway Standard Specifications and subsequent amendments, thereto.
   C.   All testing required per the most current ODOT Roadway Standard
Specifications and subsequent amendments, thereto, must be inspected and
approved by the City of Grove and will be at the sole expense of the property
owner.
   D.   Driveways constructed on property located outside the city limits that
abuts a city street
(Ord. 747, 2-20-2018; amd. Ord. 782, 11-19-2019; Ord. 813, 5-17-2022; Ord. 830,
5-16-2023)
14-404: ACCESS DRIVEWAYS PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN AREAS:
   A.   Construction of access driveways shall be prohibited in areas as
determined by the Chief of Police or his designee to be unsafe:
      1.   All intersections;
      2.   Areas with sharp curves or steep grades;
      3.   Areas where sight distance is not adequate for safe traffic
operations;
      4.   Areas that will interfere with or cause hazards to the free movement
of normal street traffic or will cause traffic congestions on the roadway;
      5.   Areas that will interfere with the placement or proper functioning
of street signs, signals, lighting or other devices that affect traffic
operations;
      6.   Any other areas determined to be unsafe. (Ord. 747, 2-20-2018)
14-405: SIGHT DISTANCE:
   A.   All access driveways must meet the sight distance requirements in the
following table.
Posted Speed Limit Sight Distance
(mph)              (Feet)
Posted Speed Limit Sight Distance
(mph)              (Feet)
15                 170
20                 225
25                 280
30                 335
35                 390
40                 445
45                 500
50                 555
 
(Ord. 747, 2-20-2018)
14-406: ENFORCEMENT AND EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Enforcement: These standards shall apply to construction of access
driveways completed after March 1, 2018 under the following conditions:
      1.   Construction of new driveways which connect with a public street;
      2.   Re-construction of existing non-conforming driveways which connect
with a public street and are associated with a remodeling project valued over
fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00).
   B.   Exceptions:
      1.   Any existing non-conforming driveway that does not comply with the
sight distance table may be allowed to remain in its current location if the
Chief of Police or his designee determines there is not an alternate location
on the property. Whether the non- conforming driveway is re-located or remains
in its current location, the non-conforming driveway shall be constructed to
comply with the other access driveway standards hereby set-forth in this
chapter.
      2.   Any access driveway which connects to a public street, but the
remainder of the property is not located within the corporate limits of the
City of Grove, will be required to comply with the access driveway standards
hereby set-forth in this chapter only in the driveway area from the street to
the edge of the rights- of-way. (Ord. 747, 2-20-2018)
14-407: PENALTY:
Any persons violating any provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of
a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section
1-108, "General Penalty", of this Code. (Ord. 747, 2-20-2018)
CHAPTER 5
CLOSING OF PUBLIC WAYS AND EASEMENTS
SECTION:
14-501: Definitions
14-502: Application For Closing Easements Or Public Ways
14-503: Processing Application
14-504: Reservation Of Rights Upon Closing
14-505: Fees
14-501: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except when the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
CLOSE: A legislative act of the city discontinuing the public use of a public
way or easement without affecting title to such real property.
EASEMENT: A right in real property as established by the laws of the state of
Oklahoma.
PUBLIC WAY: A street, avenue, boulevard, alley, lane or thoroughfare
established or open for public use.
PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR: The public works director of the city of Grove or his/
her designee. (Ord. 629, 11-1-2011)
14-502: APPLICATION FOR CLOSING EASEMENTS OR PUBLIC WAYS:
All applications for closing easements or public ways located within the
corporate limits of the city shall be filed with the director of public works
on forms furnished by the director; and the applicant shall furnish the
following information:
   A.   A plot, plan or other representative sketch or drawing depicting
distances and points of the compass and showing the location and area of the
public way or easement;
   B.   The legal description of the public way or easement to be closed;
   C.   If an easement is being closed, the purpose for which the easement was
originally given;
   D.   If the easement or public way was established by any instrument (other
than a subdivision plat) filed in the office of the Delaware County clerk, a
copy of such instrument duly certified by the Delaware County clerk;
   E.   If the easement or public way was established by statutory dedication
pursuant to a recorded subdivision plat, the name of the subdivision and plat
number;
   F.   If the application seeks to close a public way, the application shall
state whether or not such public way has been open for public use within the
five (5) year period immediately preceding the date of the filing of such
application; if such public way has been open for public use within that period
of time, the applicant shall furnish a list, certified by a bonded abstractor,
containing the names and addresses of all owners of record, as shown by the
current year's tax rolls in the office of the Delaware County treasurer, of
property abutting the public way and such other owners of record whose property
is within three hundred feet (300') in any direction from the public way sought
to be closed; and
   G.   Such additional information as may be determined by the public works
director or his/her designee to be necessary for evaluating the application.
(Ord. 629, 11-1-2011)
14-503: PROCESSING APPLICATION:
Upon receipt of a properly completed application with all required information
attached and the payment of all required fees, the application for the closing
of easements or public ways shall be processed as set forth herein.
   A.   The public works director shall give written notice of the pending
application to all city departments who use public ways or easements and to all
companies whose franchises with the city entitle them to the use of public ways
or easements, as applicable to such application. Such notice shall require that
all comments on the application shall be made in writing to the public works
director within thirty (30) days from the date of the written notice.
   B.   Within a reasonable period of time after the expiration of the thirty
(30) day notice period, the public works director shall recommend to the
governing body of the city action to be taken upon application.
   C.   Upon receipt of the report and recommendation of the public works
director, the governing body of the city may, without giving further notice to
any third party, approve or deny, either in whole or in part, any application
seeking to vacate an easement or close a public way which has not been open for
public use for more than five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the
filing of such application.
If the application seeks to close a public way which has been open for public
use within the five (5) year period immediately preceding the date of the
filing such application, the governing body of the city shall set a date for
public hearing thereon and direct notice to be given by certified mail to all
property owners shown on the list furnished by the applicant. Such notice shall
be given at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the scheduled public hearing,
shall identify the nature of the pending proceeding and shall direct that any
person having an objection to the pending application must appear at the public
hearing to advise the governing body of the city of the nature of his
objection. On the date of the scheduled public hearing, the governing body of
the city shall inquire into the merits of the application and upon
determination of all issues, shall approve or deny, either in whole or in part,
the proposed closing.
   D.   Upon approval of any application, the city manager or his/her designee
shall be directed to prepare a proper ordinance closing the public way or
easement; upon its adoption, the costs for publications of such ordinance shall
be determined, and upon the payment of such costs to the city of Grove by the
applicant, the city shall have the ordinance published. (Ord. 629, 11-1-2011)
14-504: RESERVATION OF RIGHTS UPON CLOSING:
The city shall retain the absolute right to reopen any closed public way or
easement without expense to the city. The closing of any public way or easement
shall not affect the right to maintain, repair, reconstruct, operate or remove
utilities therein, nor shall such closing affect private ways existing by
operation of law. (Ord. 629, 11-1-2011)
14-505: FEES:
A nonrefundable filing fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall accompany each
application to vacate a public way or easement. In addition to such filing fee,
if the application seeks to close a public way which has been open to public
use within the five (5) years preceding the date of the application, the
applicant at time of filing shall pay an additional mailing fee of the actual
cost of a registered letter deposited in the U.S. mail for each property owner
who is entitled to receive notice of the proceeding. In the event the
application is withdrawn prior to the mailing of notices, the mailing fee shall
be refunded to the applicant. (Ord. 629, 11-1-2011)
CHAPTER 6
PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY ACCESSIBILITY GUIDELINES
SECTION:
14-601: Public Rights-Of-Way Accessibility Guidelines Adopted
14-602: Penalty
14-601: PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY ACCESSIBILITY GUIDELINES ADOPTED:
The Department of Justice Public Rights-of-Way Accessibility Guidelines
(PROWAG) in its current draft form are hereby adopted as the minimum standard
guidelines and primary reference for projects and construction occurring within
the public rights-of- way. These guidelines are an equal facilitation to the
ADA Accessibility Guidelines (ADAAG) and will be used in lieu of ADAAG only in
public rights-of-way.
Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of
PROWAG are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part of this Code as fully
and to the same extent as if copied here in full, with all additions,
insertions and changes. (Ord. 767, 2-19-2019)
14-602: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section
1-108, "General Penalty", of this Code. (Ord. 767, 2-19-2019)
PART 15
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
15-101: Citation of chapter.
15-102: Traffic code controlling.
15-103: Definitions.
15-104: Adoption of state traffic code.
15-101: CITATION OF CHAPTER:
This chapter and all amendments hereto may be cited or referred to as the
"Traffic Code, City of Grove" and may so appear upon all official documents,
records or instruments. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-102: TRAFFIC CODE CONTROLLING:
Except as specifically provided by law as set forth in this chapter, the
traffic code shall be controlling in the use of city streets, alleys,
thoroughfares, parks, parkways or any other public right-of-way or municipally
owned land, by pedestrians and by vehicles of every kind whether self-propelled
or otherwise and whether moving or at rest. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-103: DEFINITIONS:
As used herein:
      1.   "Alley" means any narrow highway ordinarily located in the interior
portion of platted blocks and ordinarily used for service or delivery purposes
at the rear of stores, dwellings, or buildings;
      2.   "Ambulance" means a motor vehicle constructed, reconstructed or
arranged for the purpose of transporting ill, sick, or injured persons;
      3.   "Bicycle" means a device propelled by human power upon which any
person may ride, having two (2) tandem wheels;
      4.   "Bus" means every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than ten
(10) passengers and used for the transportation of persons, and every motor
vehicle, other than a taxicab, designed and used for the transportation of
persons for compensation;
      5.   "Business district" means the territory contiguous to, and including
a highway if there are buildings within six hundred (600) feet of the highway
in use for business or industrial purposes, including but not limited to
hotels, banks, or office buildings, railroad stations, and public buildings
which occupy at least three hundred (300) feet of frontage on one side or three
hundred (300) feet collectively on both sides of the highway;
      6.   "Controlled access highway" means every highway, street or roadway
in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons
have no legal right of access to or from the same except at such points only
and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having
jurisdiction over such highway, street or roadway;
      7.   "Commercial vehicles" means every vehicle designed, maintained, or
used primarily for the transportation of property;
      8.   "Center lane" means any clearly marked center lane. If the center
lane is not marked and no cars are parked on the roadway, then the center lane
is equally distanced between the curbs or travelled portion of the roadway. In
the event a vehicle or vehicles are parked on one side of the roadway only,
then the center lane is equally distanced from the side of the parked vehicle
or vehicles toward the street and curb on the opposite roadway. If vehicles be
parked on each side of the roadway, then the center lane is equally distanced
from the edges of the parked vehicles;
      9.   "Cross walk" means that part of a roadway at an intersection
included within the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on
opposite sides of the street measured from the curbs; or in the absence of
curbs from the edges of the traversable roadway. "Cross walk" also means any
portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for
pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface;
      10.   "Double park" means parking or stopping a vehicle on the roadway
side of another vehicle already parked adjacent to the edge or curbing of the
roadway;
      11.   "Driver or operator" means a person who drives or is in actual
physical control of a vehicle;
      12.   "Emergency" means an unforeseeable occurrence of temporary duration
causing or resulting in an abnormal increase in traffic volume, cessation or
stoppage of traffic movement, or creation of conditions hazardous to normal
traffic movement, including fire, storm, accident, riot, or spontaneous
assembly of large numbers of pedestrians in such a manner as to impede the flow
of traffic;
      13.   "Emergency vehicle" means vehicles of the fire department, police
vehicles and ambulances;
      14.   "Highway," see street;
      15.   "Intersection" means:
         a.   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadway
of two (2) streets, which join one another at, or approximately at, right
angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different streets join
at any other angle, may come in conflict; or
         b.   Where a street includes two (2) roadways thirty (30) feet or more
apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided street by an
intersecting street, shall be regarded as a separate intersection. In the event
such intersecting street also includes two (2) roadways thirty (30) feet or
more apart, then every crossing of two (2) roadways of such streets shall be
regarded as separate intersections;
      16.   "Laned roadway" means a roadway which is divided into two (2) or
more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic;
      17.   "Limited access highway," see controlled access highway;
      18.   "Loading zone" means a space adjacent to a curb reserved for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or
material. A freight curb loading zone is a loading zone for the exclusive use
of vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight; a passenger curb
loading zone is a loading zone for the exclusive use of vehicles during the
loading or unloading of passengers;
      19.   "Limit lines" means boundaries of parking areas, loading zones and
nontraffic areas and lines indicating the proper place for stopping where stops
are required;
      20.   "Motorcycle, motor scooter, and motor bicycle" mean a motor
vehicle, other than a tractor, having a seat or saddle for the use of the
driver and designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact with
the ground, but excluding a tractor;
      21.   "Motor vehicle" means every vehicle which is self-propelled;
      22.   "Official time" shall mean whenever certain hours are named herein
they shall mean Central Standard Time, or Daylight Savings Time, as may be in
current use in the city;
      23.   "Official traffic control device" means all signs, signals,
markings, and devices not inconsistent with this ordinance, placed or erected
by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose
of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic;
      24.   "Park or parking" means the standing of a vehicle whether occupied
or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of, and while actually
engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers, providing such
loading and unloading is in an authorized place;
      25.   "Pedestrian" means any person afoot;
      26.   "Police officer" means every officer of the municipal police
department, or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic, or to make
arrests for violation of traffic regulations;
      27.   "Private road or roadway" means a way or place in private ownership
or leading to property in private ownership and used for vehicular traffic by
the owner and those having express or implied permission from the owner;
      28.   "Railroad" means a carrier of persons or property upon cars other
than streetcars operated upon stationary rails;
      29.   "Railroad train" means a steam engine, electric or other motor,
with or without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails, except streetcars;
      30.   "Residence district" means the territory contiguous to and
including a highway not comprising a business district;
      31.   "Right-of-way" means the right of one vehicle or pedestrian to
proceed in a lawful manner in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian
approaching under such circumstances of direction, speed and proximity as to
give rise to danger of collision unless one grants precedence to the other;
      32.   "Roadway" means that portion of a street improved, designed,
ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the shoulders. In the event
a street includes two (2) or more separate roadways, the term roadway, as used
herein, shall refer to any such roadway, separately, but not to all such
roadways, collectively;
      33.   "Safety zone" means the area or space officially set apart within a
roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so
marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times,
while set apart as a safety zone;
      34.   "School zone" means all streets or portions of streets immediately
adjacent to a school, or school ground, where same is adjacent and for a
distance of three hundred (300) feet in each direction;
      35.   "Sidewalk" means that portion of a street between the curblines or
at lateral lines of the roadway and adjacent property lines, intended for use
of pedestrians;
      36.   "Stand" or "standing" means any stopping of a vehicle whether
occupied or not;
      37.   "Stop", when required, shall mean the complete cessation from
movement;
      38.   "Stop or stopping," when prohibited, means any halting even
momentarily of a vehicle whether occupied or not, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a
police officer or traffic signal;
      39.   "Street or highway" means the entire width between the boundary
lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is opened to the
use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel;
      40.   "Through street or highway" means a street, or boulevard or highway
or portion thereof at the entrances to which:
         a.   Vehicular traffic from intersecting streets or highways is
required by law to come to a full stop before entering or crossing; and
         b.   Stop signs are erected as provided in this part;
      41.   "Traffic" means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and
other conveyances, either singularly or together, while using any highway or
street for purpose of travel;
      42.   "Traffic control devices or signals" mean any device legally
authorized and used for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic;
      43.   "Urban district" means the territory contiguous to and including
any street which is built up with structures devoted to business, industry, or
dwelling houses situated at intervals of less than one hundred (100) feet for a
distance of a quarter mile or more;
      44.   "U-turn" means a turn by which a vehicle reverses its course of
travel on the same street; and
      45.   "Vehicle" means every device in, upon, or by which any person or
property is, or may be transported, or drawn, upon a highway or street, except
devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or
tracks.
(Prior Code, Chapter 20)
State Law Reference: Definitions, state traffic code, 47 O.S. Sections
1-101 et seq.
15-104: ADOPTION OF STATE TRAFFIC CODE:
The provisions of the state motor vehicle code, Sections
1-101 et seq. of Title 41 of the Oklahoma Statutes, and the Rules of the Road,
Sections
10-101 et seq. of Title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes, are hereby adopted and
incorporated herein by reference, and are enforceable by the city within the
city limits as fully as if set out at length herein.
State Law Reference: State rules of the road, 47 O.S. Sections 10-101 et seq.;
state motor vehicle code, 47 O.S. Sections 1-101 et seq.
CHAPTER 2
ENFORCEMENT AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
15-201: Enforcement Of Traffic Laws; Establishment Of Traffic Control Division
15-202: Direction Of Traffic By Hand Or Voice
15-203: Direction Of Traffic By Unauthorized Persons
15-204: Obedience To Police And Fire Officials
15-205: Emergency And Experimental Regulations
15-206: Pushcarts, Riding Animals, Or Driving Animal Drawn Vehicles To Comply
With Code
15-207: Use Of Coasters, Roller Skates, And Similar Devices Restricted
15-208: Public Officers And Employees To Obey Traffic Regulations
15-209: Persons Working On Streets, Exceptions
15-210: Maintenance And Construction Zones
15-211: Authorized Emergency Vehicles
15-212: Operation Of Vehicles On Approach Of Authorized Emergency Vehicles
15-213: Following Fire Apparatus Prohibited
15-214: Crossing Fire Hose
15-215: Possession Of Valid Driver's License Required
15-216: Operation Of Vehicle On Invalid License Prohibited
15-217: Unlawful To Operate Vehicle Without State Vehicle License
15-218: Permitting Unauthorized Person To Drive Prohibited
15-219: Accident, Duty To Stop, Leaving Scene Of Accident
15-220: Issuance Of Citation Tags
15-221: Failure To Obey Citation
15-222: Failure To Comply With Traffic Citations Attached To Parked Vehicle
15-223: Presumption In Reference To Illegal Parking
15-224: Illegal Cancellation Of Traffic Citations
15-225: Disposition And Records Of Traffic Citations, Warrants, And Complaints
15-226: Court Records; Abstract To Be Sent To State Department Of Public Safety
15-227: Eluding Police Officer Prohibited
15-228: Insurance Or Certificate Required
15-229: Use Of Brakes Creating Excessive Noise Prohibited
15-201: ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC LAWS; ESTABLISHMENT OF TRAFFIC CONTROL DIVISION:
It is the duty of the officers of the police department or any officers that
are assigned by the chief of police to enforce all street traffic laws of this
city and all the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in this city.
Officers of the department shall make arrests for traffic violations,
investigate accidents, and cooperate with other officers in the administration
of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic
conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon the department
by this part and any other traffic ordinances of this city. (Prior Code,
Chapter 20)
15-202: DIRECTION OF TRAFFIC BY HAND OR VOICE:
   A.   Officers of the police department or any officers designated by the
chief of police are hereby authorized to direct traffic by voice, hand, or
signal in conformance with traffic laws and ordinances. In the event of a fire
or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers
of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require
notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws and ordinances.
   B.   Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, or other
emergency, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic in the
immediate vicinity. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-203: DIRECTION OF TRAFFIC BY UNAUTHORIZED PERSONS:
No unauthorized person shall direct or attempt to direct traffic, except in
case of emergency where no officer is present. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-204: OBEDIENCE TO POLICE AND FIRE OFFICIALS:
No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of a police officer or fire department official. (Prior Code, Chapter
20)
15-205: EMERGENCY AND EXPERIMENTAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   The city manager, subject to any directions which the council may give
by motion or resolution, is empowered to adopt regulations necessary to make
effective the provisions of the traffic ordinances of this city and to make
temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special
conditions. No such temporary or experimental regulation shall remain in effect
for more than ninety (90) days.
   B.   The City Manager may have traffic-control devices tested under actual
conditions of traffic. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-206: PUSHCARTS, RIDING ANIMALS, OR DRIVING ANIMAL-DRAWN VEHICLES TO COMPLY
WITH CODE:
Every person propelling any pushcart or riding an animal upon a roadway, and
every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle, shall be subject to the
provisions of this Part applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those
provisions of this Part which by their very nature can have no application.
(Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-207: USE OF COASTERS, ROLLER SKATES, AND SIMILAR DEVICES RESTRICTED:
No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy
vehicle, skateboard, or similar device, shall go upon any roadway except while
crossing a street on a crosswalk; and when so crossing, such person shall be
subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. This Section shall not
apply upon any street while set aside as a play street as authorized by
ordinances of this City. (Ord. 349, 8-6-1991)
15-208: PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES TO OBEY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS 1 :
The provisions of this Part shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by
or used in the service of the United States Government, any state, county,
city, or governmental unit or agency, as well as to other vehicles. It is
unlawful for any such driver to violate any of the provisions of this Part,
except as otherwise permitted in this Part by State statute. This Part shall
not apply to the military forces of the United States and organizations of the
National Guard when performing any military duty. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 16-103.
15-209: PERSONS WORKING ON STREETS, EXCEPTIONS:
Unless specifically made applicable, the provisions of this Part, except those
relating to reckless driving and driving while intoxicated, shall not apply to
persons, teams, motor vehicles, and other equipment while actually engaged in
work upon the surface of a street, or to persons, motor vehicles, and other
equipment while actually engaged in construction, maintenance, or repair of
public utilities. All street or highway and public utility operations shall be
protected by adequate warning signs, signals, devices, or flagpersons. The
provisions of this Part shall apply to any of the persons and vehicles exempted
by this Section when traveling to and from such work. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-210: MAINTENANCE AND CONSTRUCTION ZONES:
   A.   City personnel or contractors, while repairing or improving the streets
of the City, and City personnel and utility companies, when installing,
improving, or repairing lines or other utility facilities in the streets, are
hereby authorized as necessary, subject to control by the City Clerk, to close
any street or section thereof to traffic during such repair, maintenance, or
construction. In exercising this authority, the appropriate personnel,
contractor or utility company shall erect or cause to be erected proper control
devices and barricades to warn and notify the public that the street has been
closed to traffic.
   B.   When any street has been closed to traffic under the provisions of
subsection A of this Section and traffic- control devices or barricades have
been erected, it is unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle through,
under, over, or around such traffic-control devices or barricades, or otherwise
to enter the closed area. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to
persons entering the closed area or zone for the protection of lives or
property. Persons having their places of residence or places of business within
the closed area may travel, when possible to do so, through the area at their
own risk.
   C.   Whenever construction, repair, or maintenance of any street or utility
line or facility is being performed under traffic, the City personnel,
contractor, or utility company concerned shall erect, or cause to be erected,
traffic- control devices to warn and guide the public. Every person using the
street shall obey all signs, signals, markings, flagpersons, or other traffic-
control devices which are placed to regulate, control, and guide traffic
through the construction or maintenance area. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-211: AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES 1 :
   A.   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an
emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the
law or ordinance or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire
alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in this Section, but subject to
the conditions stated in this Section.
   B.   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may do any of the
following when in pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law or
ordinance or when responding to, but not upon returning from, a fire alarm:
      1.   Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this Part;
      2.   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;
      3.   Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as life or property is not
endangered; or
      4.   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in
specific directions.
   C.   The exemptions granted in this Section to an authorized emergency
vehicle shall apply only when the driver of any such vehicle is making use of
audible and visual signals as required by law, except that an authorized
emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle need not be equipped with or
display a red light visible from in front of the vehicle.
   D.   The provisions of this Section shall not relieve the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the
safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the
consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others.
   E.   It is the responsibility of the owner or driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or when in pursuit of
an actual or suspected violator of the law, or ordinance, or when responding
to, but not upon returning from, a fire alarm to notify the police dispatcher
as to the location and proposed route that the emergency vehicle is to take to
answer the emergency call, before the emergency run is made. (Ord. 207, 10-7-
1975)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 11-106.
15-212: OPERATION OF VEHICLES ON APPROACH OF AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES 1 :
   A.   Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making
use of audible and visual signals meeting the requirements of the laws of this
State, or of a police vehicle properly and lawfully making use of an audible
signal only, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right of way and
shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to,
the right-hand edge or curb of the roadway clear of any intersection, and shall
stop and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle has
passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer.
   B.   This Section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons using the highway. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS §§ 11-106, 11-405, and 12-218.
15-213: FOLLOWING FIRE APPARATUS PROHIBITED 1 :
The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow
any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than five
hundred feet (500') or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where
fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 11-1108(a).
15-214: CROSSING FIRE HOSE 1 :
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of a fire department used
at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire department
official in command. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
 
Notes
1 2. 47 OS § 11-1109.
15-215: POSSESSION OF VALID DRIVER'S LICENSE REQUIRED 1 :
   A.   No person shall operate any motor vehicle on the highways without
having in his possession at all times, when operating such motor vehicle, an
unrevoked or unsuspended operator's or chauffeur's license as required by the
laws of the State, unless such person is specifically exempted from such laws
by the provisions thereof. No person charged with violating this section shall
be convicted if he produces in court an operator's or chauffeur's license
issued to him and valid at the time of his arrest.
   B.   No person shall operate a motor vehicle in any manner in violation of
any restriction that may be imposed in a restricted license issued to him with
respect to the type of, or special mechanical control devices required on a
motor vehicle or any other restriction applicable to the licensee as the State
may determine. (Prior Code ch. 20)
 
Notes
1 3. 47 OS § 6-101.
15-216: OPERATION OF VEHICLE ON INVALID LICENSE PROHIBITED 1 :
No person shall operate a motor vehicle when his privilege to do so is
canceled, suspended, revoked or denied. Any person convicted of violating this
section shall be punished by a fine as provided in section
1-108 of this Code. Each act of driving on the streets or highways as
prohibited by this section shall constitute a separate offense. (Prior Code ch.
20)
 
Notes
1 4. 47 OS § 6-303.
15-217: UNLAWFUL TO OPERATE VEHICLE WITHOUT STATE VEHICLE LICENSE:
It is unlawful to operate a vehicle of any kind upon a street of the City
without a State vehicle license as may be required by law or to fail to display
the State vehicle license as may be required by law, except under the following
conditions:
   A.   All-Terrain Vehicles Allowed During Daytime: All-terrain vehicles owned
by the City may be operated on City streets and operated by City employees
during daytime hours only.
   B.   Daytime Hours Defined: "Daytime hours" shall be defined as from sunrise
to sunset.
   C.   All-Terrain Vehicles Prohibited As Motor Vehicles: All- terrain
vehicles owned by the City are prohibited from being registered as motor
vehicles. (Ord. 443, 8-17-1999)
   D.   Golf Carts Not Owned By City: It is unlawful to operate upon a City
street any golf cart that is not owned by the City of Grove, Oklahoma, except
under the following conditions:
      1.   Golf carts not owned by the City of Grove may operate only on City
streets, alleys or trails established by the City and designated on the
official golf cart map, which is on file in the City. Criteria established to
designate streets as golf cart routes includes the following:
         a.   Only streets in subdivisions that have private, public and/or
community lake access or streets abutting a golf course will be considered for
designation as an approved route on the official Golf Cart Route Map.
         b.   Golf cart routes shall be marked with appropriate signage to
alert the traveling public.
         c.   The speed limit on golf cart routes shall not exceed twenty (20)
mph.
         d.   Golf cart routes shall be prohibited from being on any State or
Federal highway. (Ord. 771, 3-19-2019)
      2.   Additional City streets, alleys and trails, may be added to the
official golf cart map and designated for operation of golf carts not owned by
the City by a majority approval of the City of Grove Mayor and Council.
      3.   Designated streets for operation of golf carts not owned by the City
of Grove shall be marked with appropriate signage designated by the City and
designed to alert the traveling public that golf cart operation is permitted.
      4.   Golf carts not owned by the City of Grove shall be operated on
designated areas only during daytime hours, more specifically no more than
thirty (30) minutes prior to sunrise or thirty (30) minutes after sunset.
      5.   Golf carts not owned by the City of Grove are prohibited from being
registered as a motor vehicle.
      6.   It shall be an offense for any person to travel on a golf cart not
owned by the City of Grove upon any street, alley or location not specifically
designated on the official golf cart map, which is on file in the City.
      7.   Every person operating a golf cart not owned by the City of Grove
shall be granted all rights and shall be subject to all the duties applicable
to the driver of a vehicle by the laws of this State and the traffic provisions
of this Code applicable to the driver of a vehicle.
      8.   Any person operating a golf cart not owned by the City of Grove upon
a designated City street, alley or trail shall obey the instructions of
official traffic control signals, signs and other control devices applicable to
vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
      9.   No person operating a golf cart not owned by the City of Grove shall
ride other than upon the permanent and regular seat affixed thereto.
      10.   Every person operating a golf cart not owned by the city of Grove
upon a designated city street, alley or trail shall ride as near to the right
hand side of the street as practicable, and shall not pass any vehicles being
operated in the same direction of traffic.
      11.   Every person driving a golf cart not owned by the city of Grove on
a designated city street, alley or trail shall ride only one abreast.
      12.   No person operating a golf cart not owned by the city of Grove upon
a designated city street, alley or trail shall engage in a speed contest or
race.
      13.   No person shall operate a golf cart not owned by the city of Grove
upon a designated city street, alley or trail at a speed greater than the
posted speed limit.
      14.   The operator of a golf cart not owned by the city of Grove shall
yield the right of way to all pedestrians and vehicles approaching or traveling
along the designated city street, alley or trail.
      15.   No person shall operate a golf cart not owned by the city of Grove
on a designated city street, alley or trail without having in his/her
possession at all times, an unrevoked and unsuspended operator's or chauffeur's
license as required by the laws of the state of Oklahoma, unless such person is
specifically exempted from such laws by any provisions contained in this
chapter or federal or state law or regulation. (Ord. 554, 5-6-2008)
15-218: PERMITTING UNAUTHORIZED PERSON TO DRIVE PROHIBITED:
No person shall authorize or knowingly permit any vehicle owned by him or under
his control to be driven upon any highway by any person who is not authorized
under the provisions of the laws of the state to operate such vehicle. (Prior
Code, Chapter 20)
15-219: ACCIDENT, DUTY TO STOP, LEAVING SCENE OF ACCIDENT 1 :
   A.   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury
to or death of any person or damage to any vehicle or property shall
immediately stop his vehicle at the scene of such accident, or as close thereto
as possible, return to and remain at the scene of the accident until he has
given his name, address and the registration of his vehicle and shall upon
request exhibit his driver's license to the person injured or the driver or
occupant of, or person attending, any vehicle collided with, and shall render
to any person injured in such accident reasonable assistance, including the
carrying or making arrangement for the carrying of such persons to a physician,
surgeon or hospital for medical and surgical treatment if it is apparent that
this treatment is necessary, or if such is requested by the injured person.
Each such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is
necessary.
   B.   The driver of a vehicle which is in any manner involved in an accident
resulting in bodily injury to or death of any person or in which it is apparent
that damage to one vehicle or to the property is in excess of three hundred
dollars ($300.00) shall, as soon as practicable, report such accident to a
police officer or to the police department. If a driver makes out a written
report of the accident in the office of the police department as soon as
practicable after the accident, which report is to be forwarded to the state
department of public safety in accordance with state law, the driver shall be
deemed to be in compliance with this section.
   C.   Any person failing to stop or to comply with any of the requirements of
this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall
be fined as provided in section
1-108 of this code. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 10-101 et seq.
15-220: ISSUANCE OF CITATION TAGS:
   A.   The chief of police is hereby authorized and directed to supply police
officers with citation tags in sets, each set consisting of an original and at
least two (2) duplicate copies, for the purpose of giving notice to persons
violating any provision of this part.
   B.   Notice may be given by delivering the tag to the violator or by
affixing it to the vehicle involved in the violation.
   C.   Each citation tag shall direct the violator to appear and to present
such tag at a designated place on or before a date and hour specified thereon.
Each tag shall bear the registration number of the vehicle.
   D.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to abridge the power of a
police officer to arrest any violator and take him into custody.
   E.   The city manager may require that the police officers use citation tags
furnished by the finance department and that such tags are serially numbered,
and may regulate the use and handling of the citation tags. (Prior Code,
Chapter 20)
15-221: FAILURE TO OBEY CITATION:
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to violate his written promise to
appear, given to an officer upon the issuance of a traffic citation regardless
of the disposition of the charge for which citation was originally issued.
(Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-222: FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH TRAFFIC CITATIONS ATTACHED TO PARKED VEHICLE:
If a violator of the restrictions on stopping, standing, or parking under the
traffic laws or ordinances does not appear in response to a traffic citation
affixed to such motor vehicle within a period of five (5) days, the clerk of
the municipal court may send to the owner of the motor vehicle to which the
traffic citation was affixed a letter informing him of the violation and
warning him that in the event such letter is disregarded for a period of five
(5) days, a warrant of arrest may be issued. On any occasion where two (2) or
more such traffic citations have been affixed on the same motor vehicle and the
traffic citations have been disregarded, a warrant of arrest may be issued
without sending the letter provided in this section. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-223: PRESUMPTION IN REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING:
   A.   In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation
governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular
vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any law or
regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was
at the time of the parking the registered owner of the vehicle, shall
constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of
the vehicle was the person who parked or placed the vehicle at the point where,
and for the time during which, the violation occurred.
   B.   The presumption in Subsection A of this section shall apply only when
the procedure as prescribed in this chapter has been followed. (Prior Code,
Chapter 20)
15-224: ILLEGAL CANCELLATION OF TRAFFIC CITATIONS:
It is unlawful for any person to cancel or solicit the cancellation of any
traffic citation in any manner other than is provided by this chapter. (Prior
Code, Chapter 20)
15-225: DISPOSITION AND RECORDS OF TRAFFIC CITATIONS, WARRANTS, AND COMPLAINTS:
   A.   Every police officer upon issuing a traffic citation to an alleged
violator of any provision of the motor vehicle laws of this state or any
traffic law of this city shall deposit the original and a duplicate copy of the
citation with his immediate superior officer, who shall cause the original to
be delivered to the municipal court.
   B.   Upon the filing of the original citation in the municipal court, the
citation may be disposed of only by trial in the court or by other official
action by a judge of the court, including forfeiture of bail or by payment of a
fine.
   C.   The chief of police shall maintain a record of all warrants issued by
the municipal court which are delivered to the police department for service,
and of the final disposition of the warrants.
   D.   No member of the police department or other officer or public employee
shall dispose of, alter, or deface a traffic citation or any copy thereof, or
the record of the issuance or disposition of any traffic citation, complaint,
or warrant, in a manner other than as required in this chapter. (Prior Code,
Chapter 20)
15-226: COURT RECORDS; ABSTRACT TO BE SENT TO STATE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC
SAFETY:
   A.   The municipal court clerk shall keep a record of every traffic citation
deposited with or presented to the court and shall keep a record of every
official action by the court or its traffic violations bureau in reference
thereto, including but not limited to a record of every conviction, forfeiture
of bail, judgment of acquittal, and the amount of fine or forfeiture.
   B.   Within ten (10) days after the conviction or forfeiture of bail of a
person upon a charge of violating any provision of this chapter or other law
regulating the operation of vehicles on highways the municipal judge or clerk
of the court in which the conviction was had or bail was forfeited shall
prepare and immediately forward to the State Department of Public Safety a
certified abstract of the court's record of the case. An abstract need not be
made of any conviction involving the illegal parking or standing of a vehicle.
   C.   The abstract must be made upon a form furnished by the State Department
of Public Safety and shall include the name and address of the party charged,
the number of his operator's or chauffeur's license, the registration number of
the vehicle involved, the nature of the offense, the date of hearing, the plea,
the judgment, whether bail was forfeited, and the amount of the fine or
forfeiture. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-227: ELUDING POLICE OFFICER PROHIBITED:
No person operating a motor vehicle who has received a visual or audible signal
directing the operator to bring his vehicle to a stop shall wilfully increase
his speed or extinguish his lights or in any other manner attempt to or
actually elude such law enforcement officer. A visual or audible signal for the
purpose of this section means a red light and a siren from a law enforcement
officer driving a motor vehicle with insignia showing the same to be an
official police, sheriff, or highway patrol car. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-228: INSURANCE OR CERTIFICATE REQUIRED:
   A.   The owner of a motor vehicle registered in this state and operating the
vehicle within the city's boundaries, shall carry in such vehicle at all times
a current owner's security verification form listing the vehicle, or an
equivalent form which has been used by the State Department of Public Safety
which shall be produced by any driver thereof upon request for inspection by
any law enforcement officer and, in case of a collision, the form shall be
shown upon request to any person affected by the collision.
   B.   The following shall not be required to carry an owner's or operator's
security verification form or an equivalent form from the department during
operation of the vehicle and shall not be required to surrender such form for
vehicle registration purposes:
      1.   Any vehicle owned or leased by the federal or state government, or
any agency or political subdivision thereof;
      2.   Any vehicle bearing the name, symbol or logo of the business,
corporation or utility on the exterior and which is in compliance with the
compulsory insurance law according to records of the department of public
safety which reflect a deposit, bond, self-insurance, or fleet policy;
      3.   Any vehicle authorized for operation, under a permit number issued
by the interstate commerce commission, or the Oklahoma corporation commission;
      4.   Any licensed taxicab; and
      5.   Any vehicle owned by a licensed motor vehicle dealer.
   C.   For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
    COMPULSORY INSURANCE LAW: The law requiring liability insurance in
conjunction with the operation of a motor vehicle in this state as found in
article VI, chapter 7, and section 7-606 of title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes.
   OPERATOR'S POLICY: An operator's policy of liability insurance which shall
insure the named person against loss from the liability imposed upon him by law
for damages arising out of the operation or use by him of any motor vehicle not
owned by him, subject to the same limits of liability required in an owner's
policy.
   OWNER'S POLICY: An owner's policy of liability insurance which:
      1.   Shall designate by explicit description or by appropriate reference
all vehicles with respect to which coverage is thereby to be granted;
      2.   Shall insure the person named therein and insure any other person,
except as provided in subsection 3 of this definition, using an insured vehicle
with the express or implied permission of the named insured, against loss from
the liability imposed by law for damages arising out of the ownership,
maintenance, operation or use of such vehicle;
      3.   May provide for exclusions from coverage in accordance with existing
laws; and
      4.   Shall be issued by an authorized carrier providing coverage in
accordance with section 7-204 of title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes.
   SECURITY: 1. A policy or bond meeting the requirements of section 7-204 of
title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes;
      2.   A deposit of cash or securities having the equivalency of limits
required under section 7-204 of title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes as acceptable
limits for a policy or bond; or
      3.   Self-insurance, pursuant to the provisions of section 7-503 of title
47 of the Oklahoma Statutes, having the equivalency of limits required under
section 7-204 of title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes as acceptable limits for a
policy or bond.
   SECURITY VERIFICATION FORM: A form, approved by the state board for property
and casualty rates, verifying the existence of security required by the
compulsory insurance law of the state of Oklahoma.
   D.   Every operator of a motor vehicle registered in this state, shall while
operating or using such vehicle within the city's boundaries, carry either an
operator's or an owner's security verification form issued by a carrier,
providing the operator is not excluded from coverage thereon; or an equivalent
form issued by the department of public safety, reflecting liability coverage.
   E.   An owner or operator who fails to produce for inspection a valid and
current security verification form or equivalent form which has been issued by
the department upon request of any peace officer of the department shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine as
provided in section
1-108 of this code.
   F.   A sentence imposed for any violation of this section may be suspended
or deferred in whole or in part by the court.
   G.   Any person producing proof in court that a current security
verification form or equivalent form which has been issued by the department
reflecting this liability coverage for such person was in force at the time of
the alleged offense shall be entitled to dismissal of such charge.
   H.   Upon conviction, bond forfeiture or deferral of sentence, the court
clerk shall forward an abstract to the state department of public safety within
ten (10) days reflecting the action taken by the court. (Ord. 284, 8-2-1983)
15-229: USE OF BRAKES CREATING EXCESSIVE NOISE PROHIBITED:
   A.   Use Of Certain Vehicle Brakes Prohibited: It shall be unlawful and an
offense within the city limits for any person, firm or corporation to use
vehicle or trailer brakes which create an excessive or unusual noise such as is
created by the use of engine or "jake" brakes.
   B.   Penalty: Any person, firm, association, corporation or copartnership,
who shall violate any of the provisions hereof shall be deemed guilty of an
offense and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine not to
exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) plus court costs. (Ord. 542, 3-6-2007,
eff. 5-1-2007)
CHAPTER 3
VEHICLE EQUIPMENT, INSPECTION
SECTION:
15-301: Certain vehicles prohibited; vehicles injurious to streets.
15-302: Obstructive and dangerous vehicles.
15-303: Equipment.
15-304: Mufflers, cut-outs.
15-305: Width, height, length, and load.
15-306: Vehicles carrying poles.
15-307: Towing.
15-308: Inspection of vehicles.
15-301: CERTAIN VEHICLES PROHIBITED; VEHICLES INJURIOUS TO STREETS:
No vehicle or object which injures or is likely to injure the surface of a
street, shall be driven or moved on any street. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
State Law Reference: Required equipment on vehicles, 47 O.S. Sections 12-101 et
seq.
15-302: OBSTRUCTIVE AND DANGEROUS VEHICLES:
No person shall drive any vehicle in such condition, so constructed, or so
loaded, as to cause delay or be likely to cause delay in traffic, or as to
constitute a hazard to persons or property, except by permit issued by the
chief of police and in accordance with the terms of such permit. (Prior Code,
Chapter 20)
15-303: EQUIPMENT:
Every vehicle operated upon the streets of the city shall be equipped as
required by law. It is unlawful to operate a vehicle upon a street of the city
which is not equipped as required by law. It is unlawful to fail to use such
equipment in the manner required by law, or to use it in a manner prohibited by
law. It is unlawful to operate a vehicle which has equipment prohibited by law
upon a street of the city. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
State Law Reference: For state law relating to equipment, see 47 O.S. Sections
12-201 et seq.
15-304: MUFFLERS, CUT-OUTS:
No motor vehicles with an internal combustion engine shall be operated within
the city unless the exhaust from such engine is muffled by a suitable and
sufficient muffler. No muffler cut-out or exhaust or vacuum whistle shall be
used on any motor vehicle while operating within the city, except that exhaust
whistles may be used on authorized emergency vehicles. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-305: WIDTH, HEIGHT, LENGTH, AND LOAD:
No person shall drive or convey through any street any vehicle the width,
length, height, weight, or load of which exceeds that authorized by state law,
except in accordance with a permit issued by state authority or by the chief of
police. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
State Law Reference: For state law relating to size, weight, and load, see 47
O.S. Sections
14-101 et seq.
15-306: VEHICLES CARRYING POLES:
All vehicles carrying poles or other objects which project more than five (5)
feet from the rear of such vehicle shall, during the period when lights are
required by this part, carry a red light at, or near, the end of the pole or
object so projecting. At other times, a red flag or cloth not less than sixteen
(16) inches square shall be displayed at the end of such projection. (Prior
Code, Chapter 20)
15-307: TOWING:
When one vehicle is being towed by another vehicle, they shall be coupled by a
line so that the two (2) vehicles will be separated by not more than fifteen
(15) feet and there shall be displayed on the tow line a white cloth or paper
so that the same will be clearly visible to other users of the highway. During
the time lights are required by this chapter, the required lights shall be
displayed by both vehicles. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-308: INSPECTION OF VEHICLES:
   A.   No person shall drive or move on any road, street, or highway of this
city any motor vehicle, including motorcycles, trailers, semi-trailers, or pole
trailers, which are licensed by the Oklahoma Tax Commission and operated on the
streets or highways, of this city, or any combination thereof, unless the
vehicle is bearing a valid official inspection sticker issued by an official
inspection station licensed by the Department of Public Safety. The provisions
of this section shall not apply to any housetrailer, which requires a permit to
be moved upon the highways of this state.
   B.   Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall upon
conviction thereof be subject to a fine of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00), plus
court costs. (Prior Code, Chapter 20; Ordinance Number 290, 2/21/84)
CHAPTER 4
SPEED REGULATIONS
SECTION:
15-401: Speed Limits Generally; Exceptions
15-402: School Zones
15-403: Speed Never To Exceed That Which Is Reasonable Or Prudent For Existing
Conditions
15-404: Minimum Speed Requirements; Exception
15-405: Obedience To Maximum And Minimum Speed Limits
15-401: SPEED LIMITS GENERALLY; EXCEPTIONS:
A.   No vehicle shall be driven at a greater speed than twenty-five (25) miles
per hour upon any street or highway within the city except:
   1.   Emergency vehicles being lawfully driven as provided in this code;
   2.   When a different speed limit is otherwise designated and posted; or
   3.   When a different speed limit is established in the code.
B.   The city council, by motion or resolution, may reduce or increase the
speed limits provided in this code, and when it does so, appropriate signs
shall be placed on such streets or parts of streets indicating the lower or
higher speed limit.
C.   No vehicle shall be driven at a greater speed than the speed limits
designated and posted on the following streets:
   1.   Maximum speed - 45 mph:
      Baycrest Avenue - Rockwood to Leisure Lane
      Har-Ber Road - Quail Run Road to 595 Road
      East 13th Street - Shundi to 640 Road
      640 Road - Hwy 10 to 13th Street
      293 Road - 590 Road to 595 Road
   2.   Maximum speed - 35 mph:
      North Quail Run Road - 13th Street to Baycrest
      Baycrest Avenue - 595 Road to Quail Run Road and East of Lookout Point
      Broadway Avenue - Har-Ber Road to State Park Road
      18th Street - Sumac Road to Shundi Road
      Leisure Lane -Highway 59 to Baycrest Avenue
      Har-Ber Road - Leisure Lane to South 590 Road
      Industrial Road/640 - Highway 10 North to Industrial Road 10
      Industrial Road A - North from Highway 10
      Lake Road 3 - Sumac to city limits
      North 3rd Street - Cherokee Street to Lannell Street
      O'Daniel Street - Broadway Avenue to Highway 59
      Shundi Road - 7th Street to 18th Street
   3.   Maximum speed - 30 mph:
      Har-Ber Road - Broadway Avenue to Leisure Lane
      Industrial Road 5
      Shundi South Bound - from 7th Street
      South Quail Run Road - from 13th Street
      East 13th Street - Main to Shundi
      590 Road - 293 Road to 295 Road
      690 Road - 587 to 590
   4.   Maximum speed - 20 mph:
      Sumac Road - from 13th Street to 18th Street
      All streets that are designated Golf Cart Routes
      North 16th Street - Highway 59 to Sunrise Boulevard
      Wolf Creek Parkway
      North Quail Run Road - from Baycrest North
      Evans Drive
      Red Bud
      South Cherokee - 4th Street to 11th Street
      Kayla Road
      Taylor Street
      Shasten Street
      21st Street
      Lee Street
      Hadden Drive
      Cedar Oaks Drive
      Sunset Circle
   5.   Maximum speed - 15 mph:
      Leisure Lane - 7th Street to 10th Street from 7:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. on
days Grove public schools are in session
      7th Street - Leisure Lane to Center Street from 7:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. on
days Grove public schools are in session
      10th Street - Leisure Lane to Center Street from 7:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.
on days Grove public schools are in session
   6.   Maximum speed - 10 mph:
      Center Street - 7th Street to 10th Street from 7:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. on
days Grove public schools are in session
(Ord. 620, 8-2-2011; amd. Ord. 791, 8-18-2020; Ord. 798, 3-16-2021; Ord. 825,
2-7-2023; Ord. 828, 2-21-2023)
15-402: SCHOOL ZONES:
No vehicle shall be driven at a greater speed than posted between the hours
posted on any street adjacent to any school in a designated school zone on days
when school is in session, unless a different speed limit or time is otherwise
designated and posted. (Prior code ch. 20)
15-403: SPEED NEVER TO EXCEED THAT WHICH IS REASONABLE OR PRUDENT FOR EXISTING
CONDITIONS:
No person shall drive a vehicle at a speed greater or less than is reasonable
or prudent under the conditions then existing, taking into consideration among
other things, the conditions of the vehicle, the traffic, roadway surface or
width, the amount of light or darkness, the presence of pedestrians in or near
the roadways, and the obstruction of views. No person shall drive any vehicle
at a speed greater than will permit him to bring it to a stop within the
assured clear distance ahead. (Prior code ch. 20)
15-404: MINIMUM SPEED REQUIREMENTS; EXCEPTION:
No vehicle shall be driven at such an unreasonably slow speed in relation to
the effective maximum speed allowed as to constitute a hazard or to interfere
with the normal movement of other traffic except when the slow speed is
unavoidable. (Prior code ch. 20)
15-405: OBEDIENCE TO MAXIMUM AND MINIMUM SPEED LIMITS:
Where official signs and markings give notice of both maximum and minimum speed
limits in effect on any street, no vehicle shall be driven at rates in excess
of the maximum nor slower than the minimum except as required by an authorized
officer or in obedience to posted official signs. (Prior code ch. 20)
CHAPTER 5
DRIVING, OVERTAKING, PASSING
SECTION:
15-501: Changing Lanes, Marking Lanes, Main Street
15-502: Driving On Right Side Of Roadway Required; Exceptions
15-503: When Overtaking On The Right Is Permitted
15-504: Overtaking A Vehicle On The Left
15-505: Limitations On Overtaking On The Left; Exception
15-506: Passing Vehicles Proceeding In Opposite Directions
15-507: One-Way Roadways And Rotary Traffic Islands
15-508: Following Too Closely
15-509: No Passing Zones
15-510: Driving Through Funeral Or Other Procession Prohibited; Exceptions
15-511: Drivers In A Procession
15-512: Funeral Processions To Be Identified
15-513: Overtaking And Passing In School Zones
15-514: Overtaking And Passing School Bus
15-515: School Bus Requirements; Lights; Signs; Painting
15-516: Driving Of Vehicles On Sidewalk Prohibited; Exception
15-517: Limitations On Backing Vehicle
15-518: Limitation On Use Of Motorcycles, Bicycles And Motor Scooters
15-519: Required Motorcycle Equipment, Headgear
15-520: Special Speed Limitation On Motorcycles And Motor Scooters
15-521: Clinging To Vehicles Prohibited
15-522: Entering And Leaving Controlled Access Highways
15-523: Reckless Driving
15-524: Careless Or Negligent Driving, Stopping, Or Parking
15-525: Requirement Of Any Person Driving A Vehicle On A Public Way To Operate
Same In A Careful And Prudent Manner
15-526: Driving While Under The Influence Of Drugs
15-527: Driving While Under The Influence Of Alcohol
15-528: Operating Under The Influence Of Any Controlled, Dangerous Substance
Prohibited
15-529: Unlawful Transportation Of Intoxicating Beverage; Penalty
15-530: Attention To Driving Required
15-531: Speed Contest Prohibited
15-532: Permits Required For Parades And Processions
15-533: Driving Through Safety Zone
15-534: Starting Parked Vehicle
15-535: Opening And Closing Vehicle Doors
15-536: Obstructions To Driver's View Or Driving Mechanism
15-537: Boarding Or Alighting From Vehicles
15-538: Unlawful Riding
15-539: Railroad Trains Not To Block Streets
15-540: Private Service Drives
15-541: Truck Driving And Route Restrictions
15-542: Loads On Vehicles
15-543: Vehicle Approaching Or Entering Intersection
15-544: Vehicle Turning Left At Intersection
15-545: Vehicle Approaching A "Yield Right-Of-Way" Sign
15-546: Vehicle Entering Through Highway
15-547: Vehicles Facing Stop, Slow, Warning Or Caution Signal
15-548: Through Streets
15-549: Intersections Where Stop Or Yield Required
15-550: Stop Or Yield Sign Construction And Placement
15-551: Vehicle Entering Stop Intersection
15-552: Vehicle Entering Yield Intersection
15-553: Vehicle Entering Highway From Private Road Or Driveway
15-554: Vehicles Entering Traffic From Parking
15-555: Emerging From The Alley, Driveway, Or Building
15-556: Stop When Traffic Obstructed
15-557: Obedience To Signal Indicating Approach Of Train
15-558: Certain Vehicles To Stop At All Railroad Grade Crossings
15-559: Child Passenger Restraints Required
15-560: Approaching A Vehicle Being Used In The Collection Of Refuse, Solid
Waste Or Recyclables
15-501: CHANGING LANES, MARKING LANES, MAIN STREET:
   A.   Whenever any roadway has been divided into two (2) or more clearly
marked lanes for traffic, in addition to all other rules consistent with this
subsection, a vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practical entirely within a
single lane and shall not be moved from the lane until the driver has first
ascertained that the movement can be made with safety and has signalled for a
change of course.
   B.   Where streets or roadways do not have marked traffic lanes, vehicles
shall nevertheless keep in line or follow a straight course as nearly as
practical and shall not weave in and out or turn from side to side
unnecessarily. Vehicles shall move to the right or left only as necessary in
slowing or stopping adjacent to the curb, in passing slow moving vehicles or
making a proper approach for a turn, and this only after the driver has first
ascertained that such movement can be made safely and has signalled for a
change of course.
   C.   Upon a roadway which has been divided into three (3) lanes, a vehicle
shall not be driven in the center lane except when overtaking and passing
another vehicle where the roadway is clearly visible and such center lane is
clear of traffic within a safe distance, or in preparation for a left turn, or
where such center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving
in the direction the vehicle is proceeding and is signposted to give notice of
such allocation.
   D.   Official signs may be erected directing slow-moving traffic to use a
designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a
particular direction regardless of the center of the roadway. Drivers of
vehicles shall obey the directions of every such sign. (Prior Code ch. 20)
15-502: DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS 1 :
   A.   Upon all roadways of sufficient width a vehicle shall be driven to the
right of the center of the roadway, except as follows:
      1.   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction under the rules governing such movement;
      2.   When the right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under
construction or repair;
      3.   Upon a roadway divided into three (3) marked lanes for traffic under
the rules applicable thereon; and
      4.   Upon a roadway designated and signposted for one-way traffic.
   B.   All vehicles shall keep to the right roadway on all streets or highways
which are divided into two (2) roadways.
   C.   Upon all roadways, any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal speed
of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then existing shall
be driven in the right hand lane then available for traffic, or as close as
practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway, except when
overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction or when
preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or
driveway. (Prior Code ch. 20)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 11-301.
15-503: WHEN OVERTAKING ON THE RIGHT IS PERMITTED:
   A.   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of another
vehicle only under the following conditions:
      1.   When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn;
      2.   Upon a street or highway with unobstructed pavement not occupied by
parked vehicles of sufficient width for two (2) or more lines of moving
vehicles in each direction; or
      3.   Upon a one-way street or upon any roadway on which traffic is
restricted to one (1) direction of movement, where the roadway is free from
obstructions and of sufficient width for two (2) or more lines of moving
vehicles.
   B.   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon the
right only under conditions permitting such movement in safety. In no event
shall such movement be made by driving off the pavement or main travelled
portion of the roadway. (Prior Code ch. 20)
15-504: OVERTAKING A VEHICLE ON THE LEFT:
   A.   The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not
again drive to the right side of the street or roadway until safely clear of
the overtaken vehicle.
   B.   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his
vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle. (Prior Code ch. 20)
15-505: LIMITATIONS ON OVERTAKING ON THE LEFT; EXCEPTION:
   A.   No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the street
or roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming
traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit the completion of the
overtaking and passing without interfering with the safe operation of any
vehicle approaching from the opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken. In
every instance the overtaking vehicle must return to the right-hand side of the
roadway before coming within one hundred feet (100') of any vehicle approaching
from the opposite direction.
   B.   No vehicle at any time shall be driven to the left side of the roadway
under the following conditions:
      1.   When approaching the crest of a grade, or upon a curve in the street
or highway where the driver's view along the street or highway is obstructed;
or
      2.   When approaching within one hundred feet (100') of any bridge,
viaduct or tunnel or when approaching within fifty feet (50') of or traversing
any intersection or railroad grade crossing. (Prior Code ch. 20)
15-506: PASSING VEHICLES PROCEEDING IN OPPOSITE DIRECTIONS:
Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other to
the right. Upon roadways having a width for not more than one (1) line of
traffic in each direction each driver shall give to the other at least one-half
(1/2) the main-traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible. (Prior
Code ch. 20)
15-507: ONE-WAY ROADWAYS AND ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS 1 :
   A.   The City may designate any road, street, alley, or highway, or any
separate roadway under its jurisdiction for one-way traffic and shall cause
appropriate signs giving notice thereof, to be erected.
   B.   Whenever the City designates any street or alley or part thereof as a
one-way street or alley, the City Manager or his designee shall have placed and
maintained signs giving notice thereof; and no such regulation shall be
effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of
lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of
traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited.
   C.   Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys and parts
of alleys so designated as one-way streets and alleys, vehicular traffic shall
move only in the direction indicated when signs indicating the direction of
traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the
opposite direction is prohibited.
   D.   Upon roadways designated and sign posted for one-way traffic a vehicle
shall be driven only in the direction designated.
   E.   A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only
to the right of such island. (Prior Code ch. 20)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 11-308.
15-508: FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY 1 :
The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely
than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such
vehicles and the traffic upon and the condition of the highway. (Prior Code ch.
20)
 
Notes
1 2. 47 OS § 11-310.
15-509: NO PASSING ZONES:
   A.   The State Department of Transportation, as regards state and federal
highways, and the city as regards all other streets, are hereby authorized to
determine those portions of any highway where overtaking and passing to the
left would be especially hazardous, and may, by appropriate signs or markings
on the roadway, indicate the beginning and end of such zones. When such signs
or markings are in place and clearly visible to an ordinarily observant person,
every driver shall obey the directions thereof.
   B.   Where signs or markings are in place to define a no-passing zone as set
forth in Subsection A of this section, no driver shall at any time drive to the
left side of the roadway within the no-passing zone or on the left side of any
pavement striping designed to mark the no-passing zone throughout its length.
(Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-510: DRIVING THROUGH FUNERAL OR OTHER PROCESSION PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS:
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or
other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are
conspicuously designated as required in this chapter. This provision shall not
apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic control signals
or police officers. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
State Law Reference: Local powers to regulate processions, 47 O.S. Section
15-102.
15-511: DRIVERS IN A PROCESSION:
Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right-
hand edge of the roadway as practical and shall follow the vehicle ahead as
close as is practical and safe. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-512: FUNERAL PROCESSIONS TO BE IDENTIFIED:
A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such by
the display upon the outside of each vehicle of such identifying insignia as
may be determined and designated by the police department. (Prior Code, Chapter
20)
15-513: OVERTAKING AND PASSING IN SCHOOL ZONES:
   A.   No driver of a vehicle shall pass any other vehicle which is in motion
and being driven in the same direction in any school zone between the hours of
8:00 A.M. and 4:00 P.M. on all days when schools are in session.
   B.   Wherever a school zone is located on a multiple lane street which is
divided into three (3) or more clearly marked lanes for traffic or where the
right half of the roadway has been divided into two (2) or more lanes, or on
one-way streets, vehicles shall be allowed to pass slower moving vehicles being
driven in the same direction where passing does not involve a change of lane
movement. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-514: OVERTAKING AND PASSING SCHOOL BUS:
   A.   The driver of a vehicle meeting or overtaking a school bus that has
stopped to take on or discharge school children and on which red loading
signals are in operation is to stop his vehicle before it reaches the school
bus and not proceed until the loading signals are deactivated, and then to
proceed to pass such school bus at a speed which is reasonable and with due
caution for the safety of such school children and other occupants.
   B.   Every school bus used for the transportation of school children shall
bear upon the front and rear thereof plainly visible signs containing the words
"SCHOOL BUS" in letters not less than eight (8) inches in height, and in
addition shall be equipped with visible signals which shall be actuated by the
driver of the school bus but only whenever such vehicle is stopped for the
purpose of receiving or discharging passengers. (Ord. No. 223, 3/6/19)
State Law Reference: Similar provisions, 47 O.S. Section 11-705.
15-515: SCHOOL BUS REQUIREMENTS; LIGHTS; SIGNS; PAINTING:
   A.   The provisions of Section
15-514 of this code shall be applicable only if the school bus is painted
yellow and bears upon the front and rear thereon a plainly visible sign
containing the words "SCHOOL BUS" in letters not less than eight (8) inches in
height which can be removed or covered when the vehicle is not in use as a
school bus.
   B.   The school bus shall be equipped with four (4) red alternately flashing
warning signal lights, two (2) of which shall be located high on the front and
two (2) high on the rear of the vehicle. The lights shall be a minimum of four
(4) inches in diameter and shall be widely separated. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
State Law Reference: Similar provisions, 41 O.S. Section
11-307.
15-516: DRIVING OF VEHICLES ON SIDEWALK PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION:
No person shall drive any vehicle within or upon any sidewalk area except at a
permanent or temporary driveway. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-517: LIMITATIONS ON BACKING VEHICLE:
The driver of a vehicle shall not back the vehicle unless such movement can be
made with reasonable safety and without interfering with any other traffic. No
vehicle shall be backed into an intersection. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-518: LIMITATION ON USE OF MOTORCYCLES, BICYCLES AND MOTOR SCOOTERS:
   A.   No driver of a two-wheel or three-wheel motor vehicle or bicycle shall
carry any other person upon or within such vehicle on any street or highway,
except as provided in this section:
      1.   If any two-wheel or three-wheel motor vehicle with a wheel diameter
of twelve (12) inches or greater or any bicycle shall have either a double
seating device with double foot rests or a side car attachment providing a
separate seat space within such sidecar attachment for each person riding
therein so that such person shall be seated entirely within the body of the
side car, then it shall be permissible for an operator who has attained the age
of sixteen (16) or older to carry a passenger; and
      2.   A demonstration ride by a licensed dealer or his employee is
permissible.
   B.   No motorcycle or motor scooter shall be ridden upon any sidewalk of the
city.
   C.   No rider of a motorcycle, bicycle, or motor scooter shall hold on to
any moving vehicle for the purpose of being propelled.
   D.   A person operating a motor scooter, motorcycle, motor-driven cycle, or
motor bicycle, shall ride only on the permanent and regular seat attached
thereto.
   E.   No driver of a motorcycle or motor scooter shall pass other vehicles in
between lanes of traffic traveling in the same direction. Authorized emergency
vehicles are excepted from the provisions of this subsection.
   F.   No person under the age of sixteen (16) shall operate any motorcycle,
motor bicycle, or motor scooter within the city between and during the hours of
10:00 P.M. of one day and 4:00 A.M. of the next day. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-519: REQUIRED MOTORCYCLE EQUIPMENT, HEADGEAR:
   A.   In addition to all other requirements motorcycles and motor scooters
shall be equipped with the following:
      1.   Handle bars which do not exceed twelve (12) inches in height,
measured from the crown or point of attachment;
      2.   Two (2) mirrors, containing a reflection surface of not less than
three (3) inches in diameter, mounted one on each side of the vehicle and
positioned so as to enable the operator to clearly view the roadway for a
distance of two hundred (200) feet to the rear of his vehicle;
      3.   Brakes adequate to control the movement of the vehicle, to stop and
hold the vehicle, including two (2) separate means of applying the brakes. One
means for applying the brakes shall be to effectively apply the brakes to the
front wheel, and one means shall be to effectively apply the brakes to the rear
wheels. All such vehicles shall be equipped with a stop lamp on the rear of the
vehicle which shall display a red or amber light, or any shade of color between
red and amber, visible from a distance of not less than one hundred (100) feet
to the rear in normal sunlight, and which shall be activated upon application
of the service brake;
      4.   A properly operating speedometer capable of registering at least the
maximum legal speed limit for that vehicle shall be provided;
      5.   A fender over each wheel. All fenders shall be of the type provided
by the manufacturer;
      6.   One lighted headlamp capable of showing a white light visible at
least three hundred (300) feet in the direction in which the vehicle is
proceeding, and one tail lamp mounted on the rear which, when lighted, shall
emit a red light plainly visible from at least three hundred (300) feet to the
rear. The lights required by this paragraph shall be burning whenever the
vehicle is in motion during the period from one-half (1/2) hour after sunset to
one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise and at any other time when, due to
insufficient light or unfavorable atmospheric conditions, persons and vehicles
on the streets are not clearly discernible at a distance of at least five
hundred (500) feet ahead; and
      7.   A windshield of sufficient quality, size and thickness to protect
the operator from foreign objects. In lieu of the windshield, the operator
shall wear goggles or face shield of material and design to protect him from
foreign objects.
   B.   No person under twenty-one (21) years of age shall operate or ride upon
any vehicle covered under this section unless the person is equipped with and
wearing on the head a crash helmet of the type and design manufactured for use
by the operators of such vehicles. All crash helmets shall consist of lining,
padding and chin straps and be of the type as not to distort the view of the
driver. While operating or riding on a vehicle covered hereunder, the
chinstraps shall be fastened.
   C.   No person may operate a motorcycle or motor scooter with the exhaust
system modified so that motor noise is increased greater than that of the
original muffler equipment provided by the manufacturers of the vehicle. (Prior
Code, Chapter 20)
15-520: SPECIAL SPEED LIMITATION ON MOTORCYCLES AND MOTOR SCOOTERS:
No person shall operate any motorcycle or any motor scooter at a speed greater
than the speed limit legally posted. In no event nor at any time may an
operator under the age of sixteen (16) years operate a motorcycle or motor
scooter, including a motor- driven bicycle, at a speed greater than thirty-five
(35) miles per hour, or at any time or any speed when prohibited by state law.
(Prior Code, Chapter 20)
State Law Reference: Similar provisions, 47 O.S. Section 11-805.
15-521: CLINGING TO VEHICLES PROHIBITED:
No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled, or toy vehicle
shall attach the same or himself to any moving vehicle upon a roadway. (Prior
Code, Chapter 20)
15-522: ENTERING AND LEAVING CONTROLLED ACCESS HIGHWAYS:
No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled- access highway
except at entrances and exits established by public authority. (Prior Code,
Chapter 20)
15-523: RECKLESS DRIVING:
Any person who drives any vehicle in a wanton manner without regard for the
safety of persons or property is guilty of reckless driving, and upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined in the sum not to exceed One Hundred Dollars
($100.00) including costs. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
State Law Reference: Similar provisions, 47 O.S. Section 11-901.
15-524: CARELESS OR NEGLIGENT DRIVING, STOPPING, OR PARKING:
It is unlawful for any person to drive, use, operate, park, cause to be parked,
or stop any vehicle in a careless or negligent manner, or in such a manner as
to endanger life, limb, person, or property, or as to interfere with the lawful
movement of traffic or use of the streets. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-525: REQUIREMENT OF ANY PERSON DRIVING A VEHICLE ON A PUBLIC WAY TO OPERATE
SAME IN A CAREFUL AND PRUDENT MANNER:
Any person driving a vehicle on a public road or way shall drive the same in a
careful and prudent manner and at a careful and prudent speed not greater than
nor less than is reasonable and proper, having due regard to the traffic,
surface, and width of the public way and any other conditions then existing.
(Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-526: DRIVING WHILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF DRUGS:
   A.   No person shall drive, operate, or be in actual physical control of any
motor vehicle upon any highway within the city limits who is under the
influence of any controlled dangerous substance included in the Uniform
Controlled Dangerous Substance Act. The fact that any person charged with a
violation of this provision is or has been lawfully entitled to use such
controlled substance shall not constitute a defense.
   B.   A "controlled, dangerous substance," means any drug or substance
included in Schedule I through V of the Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances
Act found in Sections
2-101 et seq., of Title 63 of the Oklahoma Statutes, but not limited to:
      1.   Cocaine and its derivatives;
      2.   Opiates and Opium derivatives, such as heroin, codeine, pethidine
and morphine;
      3.   Hallucinogenic substances including lysergic acid diethylamide,
marijuana (cannabis sativa L.), including seed of mature plants, mescaline,
psilocybin, and various types of methoxyamphetamines;
      4.   Stimulants such as amphetamines and methamphetamines; and
      5.   Barbiturates and other depressants such as amobarbital,
secobarbital, pentobarbital, phenobarbital, methaqualone, phencyclidine, and
diazepam.
   C.   Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of an offense and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be fined as provided in Section
1-108 of this code, (Prior Code, Chapter 20; Ord. No. 266, 5/4/82)
State Law Reference:, Driving under influence of liquor, drugs, 47 O.S. Section
11-902.
15-527: DRIVING WHILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOL:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person who is under the influence of
intoxicating drugs or liquor to drive, operate or be in actual physical control
of any motor vehicle in the city.
   B.   Any person who operates a motor vehicle while his ability to operate
such motor vehicle is impaired by the consumption of alcohol is subject to a
fine as provided in Section
1-108 of this code.
   C.   Upon the trial of any criminal action or proceeding arising out of acts
alleged to have been committed by any person while driving or in actual
physical control of a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol or
intoxicating liquor, or operating a motor vehicle while his ability is impaired
by the consumption of alcohol, evidence of the amount of alcohol in the
person's blood as shown by a chemical analysis of his blood or breath is
admissible. For the purpose of this section:
      1.   Evidence that there was five-hundredths of one percent (5/100 of 1%)
or less by weight of alcohol in his blood is prima facie evidence that the
person was not under the influence of alcohol or intoxicating liquor;
      2.   Evidence that there was more than five-hundredths of one percent (5/
100 of 1%) by weight of alcohol in the person's blood is relevant evidence of
operating a motor vehicle while his ability to operate such motor vehicle is
impaired by the consumption of alcohol or intoxicating liquor; however, no
person shall be convicted while his ability to operate such vehicle is impaired
by consumption of alcohol or intoxicating liquor solely because there was more
than five-hundredths of one percent (5/100 of 1%) by weight of alcohol in the
person's blood in the absence of additional evidence that such person's driving
was affected by the consumption of alcohol to the extent that the public health
and safety was threatened or that the person had violated a state statute or
local ordinance in the operation of a motor vehicle;
      3.   Evidence that there was ten-hundredths of one percent (10/100 of 1%)
or more by weight of alcohol in his blood shall be admitted as prima facie
evidence that the person was under the influence of alcohol or intoxicating
liquor;
The percent by weight of alcohol in the blood shall be based upon grams of
alcohol per one hundred (100) milliliters of blood. The provisions of this
subsection do not limit the introduction of any other competent evidence
bearing on the question of whether the person was under the influence of
alcohol or intoxicating liquor.
State Law Reference: Mandatory revocation of license for DUI, 47 O.S. Section
6-205; testing, procedures for DUI, 47 O.S. Sections 751 et seq.; Controlled
Dangerous Substances Act, 63 O.S. Section
2-101.
15-528: OPERATING UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF ANY CONTROLLED, DANGEROUS SUBSTANCE
PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle while under the
influence of any controlled, dangerous substance, or be in the actual physical
control of any motor vehicle while under the influence of any controlled,
dangerous substance within the city limits of the City of Grove, Oklahoma.
15-529: UNLAWFUL TRANSPORTATION OF INTOXICATING BEVERAGE; PENALTY:
It is unlawful for any person to knowingly transport in any vehicle upon a
public highway, street, or alley within the city any alcoholic beverage except
in the original container which shall not have been opened and the seal upon
which shall not have been broken and from which the original cap or cork shall
not have been removed, unless the opened container be in the rear trunk or rear
compartment, which shall include the spare tire compartment in a vehicle
commonly known as a station wagon or panel truck, or any outside compartment
which is not accessible to the driver or any person in the vehicle while it is
motion. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-530: ATTENTION TO DRIVING REQUIRED:
The operator of every vehicle while driving shall devote his full time and
attention to such driving. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-531: SPEED CONTEST PROHIBITED:
   A.   No person shall engage in, aid or abet any motor vehicle speed contest
or exhibition of speed on any street or highway.
   B.   No person shall for the purpose of facilitating or aiding or as an
incident to any motor vehicle speed contest upon any street or highway, in any
manner obstruct or place any barricade or obstruction upon any street or
highway.
   C.   When three (3) or more persons assemble to witness or participate in an
unlawful speed contest such assembly is unlawful assembly and any person who
participates in such unlawful assembly is guilty of an offense. (Prior Code,
Chapter 20)
15-532: PERMITS REQUIRED FOR PARADES AND PROCESSIONS:
No funeral, procession, or parade containing two hundred (200) or more persons
or fifty (50) or more vehicles except the military forces of the United States
and the military forces of this state, shall occupy, march, or proceed along
any street except in accordance with a permit issued by the chief of police and
such other regulations as are set forth herein which may apply. (Prior Code,
Chapter 20)
State Law Reference: Local power to regulate provisions, 47 O.S. Section
15-102.
15-533: DRIVING THROUGH SAFETY ZONE:
No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety zone or
island. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-534: STARTING PARKED VEHICLE:
No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing, or parked unless
and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. (Prior Code,
Chapter 20)
15-535: OPENING AND CLOSING VEHICLE DOORS:
No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available to
moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so nor shall any
person leave a door open on the side of a motor vehicle available to moving
traffic for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload
passengers. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
State Law Reference: Similar provisions 47 O.S. Section 11-1105.
15-536: OBSTRUCTIONS TO DRIVER'S VIEW OR DRIVING MECHANISM:
   A.   No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there are
in the front seat such a number of persons, exceeding three (3), as to obstruct
the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or as to interfere
with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   B.   No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in such position as to interfere
with the driver's view ahead or to the sides or to interfere with his control
over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-537: BOARDING OR ALIGHTING FROM VEHICLES:
No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in
motion. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-538: UNLAWFUL RIDING:
No person shall ride on any such vehicle upon any portion thereof not designed
or intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to an
employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to persons riding
within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-539: RAILROAD TRAINS NOT TO BLOCK STREETS:
It is unlawful for the directing officer or the operator of any railroad train
to direct the operation of or to operate the same in such a manner as to
prevent the use of any street for purposes of travel for a period of time
longer than five (5) minutes, except that this provision shall not apply to
trains or cars in motion other than those engaged in switching. This section
shall not apply in case of engine failure or train accidents within the city
limits. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-540: PRIVATE SERVICE DRIVES:
No vehicle or animal shall be driven through any private service driveway or
private service area except for the purpose of obtaining service or
merchandise. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-541: TRUCK DRIVING AND ROUTE RESTRICTIONS:
The city council may prescribe routes through the city for the use of trucks in
general, trucks of particular kinds and/or other vehicles which are not
ordinary private passenger vehicles, passing through the city. Appropriate and
adequate signs shall be placed along such routes so that drivers of such
vehicles may follow the routes. When such signs are so erected and in place,
the driver of a truck or other vehicle for which a route has been prescribed,
as provided above, while passing through the city, shall keep on such route and
shall not deviate therefrom except in case of emergency. Drivers of such
vehicles shall follow such routes so far as practicable also when driving
within the city and not merely through the city. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-542: LOADS ON VEHICLES:
   A.   No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any highway unless the vehicle
is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any of its load from dropping,
shifting, leaking, blowing or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that sand
may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or water or other
substances may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or maintaining the
roadway.
   B.   No person shall operate on any highway any vehicle with any load unless
the load and any covering thereon is securely fastened so as to prevent the
covering or load from becoming loose, detached or in any manner a hazard to
other users of the highway. Any vehicle loaded with sand, cinders, or other
loose material susceptible to blowing or escaping by reason of wind shall have
the load covered or dampened so as to prevent the blowing or escaping of the
load from the vehicle.
   C.   This section shall apply to trucks loaded with livestock, poultry or
agricultural products only except baled agricultural products, provided that
any such truck shall be so constructed or loaded as to prevent such livestock
or poultry from escaping therefrom. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-543: VEHICLE APPROACHING OR ENTERING INTERSECTION:
   A.   When two (2) vehicles enter or approach an uncontrolled intersection
from different highways at approximately the same time, the driver of the
vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right as
otherwise stated in this chapter; however, the driver of vehicle on a street
which is not a state or federal highway approaching an intersection with a
state or federal highway shall stop and yield the right-of-way to a vehicle
which has entered the intersection or which is so close thereto as to
constitute an immediate hazard.
   B.   The right-of-way rule declared in Subsection A of this section is
modified at through highways as otherwise stated in this chapter. (Prior Code,
Chapter 20)
State Law Reference: Right of way at intersections, 47 O.S. Section 11-401.
15-544: VEHICLE TURNING LEFT AT INTERSECTION:
The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the left
shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite
direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute
an immediate hazard. After so yielding and having given signal when and as
required by this code, the driver may make the left turn and the drivers of all
other vehicles approaching the intersection from the opposite direction shall
yield the right-of-way to the vehicle making the left turn. (Prior Code,
Chapter 20)
State Law Reference: Similar provisions, 47 O.S. Section 11-402.
15-545: VEHICLE APPROACHING A "YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY" SIGN:
The driver of a vehicle approaching a "Yield Right-of-way" sign shall slow to a
reasonable speed for existing conditions of traffic and visibility, yielding
the right-of-way to all vehicles on the intersecting street or highway which
have entered the intersection or which are so close as to constitute an
immediate hazard. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
State Law Reference: Similar provisions, 47 O.S. Section 11-403.
15-546: VEHICLE ENTERING THROUGH HIGHWAY:
Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or a traffic control
signal, every driver of a vehicle shall stop as required by this code at the
entrance to a through highway and shall yield the right-of-way to other
vehicles which have entered the intersection from the through highway, or which
are approaching so closely on the through highway as to constitute an immediate
hazard. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-547: VEHICLES FACING STOP, SLOW, WARNING OR CAUTION SIGNAL:
If two (2) or more vehicles face stop, slow, warning or caution signs or
signals at an intersection and are approaching as to enter the intersection at
the same time, the following rules shall apply: If each vehicle is required to
stop, the vehicle coming from the right shall have the right-of-way. If each
vehicle is required to slow, the vehicle coming from the right shall have the
right-of-way. If each vehicle is required to take caution, the vehicle coming
from the right shall have the right- of-way. If one vehicle is required to slow
and the other to take caution, the one required to take caution shall have the
right- of-way. In any event, a vehicle which has already entered the
intersection shall have the right-of-way over one which has not entered the
intersection. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-548: THROUGH STREETS:
   A.   The city council may designate any street or part of a street a through
street.
   B.   Whenever the city council designates and describes a through street,
the stop sign, or yield sign if deemed more appropriate, shall be placed and
maintained on every street intersecting a through street, or intersecting that
portion thereof, unless traffic at such intersection is controlled at all times
by traffic control signals.
   C.   At the intersection of two (2) such through streets or at the
intersection of a through street and a heavy traffic street not so designated,
stop signs shall be erected at the approaches of either of the streets as may
be determined by the city manager if deemed desirable. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-549: INTERSECTIONS WHERE STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED:
The city manager, subject to any directions given by the council by motion or
resolution, is hereby authorized to determine and designate intersections upon
other than through streets where particular hazards exist and to determine
whether:
      1.   Vehicles shall stop at one or more entrances to any such stop
intersection, in which event it shall cause to be erected a stop sign at every
such place a stop is required; or
      2.   Vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles on a different
street as provided in this part, of this code, in which event it shall cause to
be erected a yield sign at every place where yield is required.
(Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-550: STOP OR YIELD SIGN CONSTRUCTION AND PLACEMENT:
Every stop or yield sign erected pursuant to this chapter shall bear the word
"Stop" or "Yield" in letters not less than eight (8) inches in height for a
stop sign and not less than seven (7) inches in height for a yield sign. Every
stop or yield sign shall at night be rendered luminous by steady or flashing
internal illumination, by a fixed floodlight projected on the face of the sign,
or by efficient reflecting elements on the face of the sign. Every stop or
yield sign shall be located as close as practicable to the nearest line of the
crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or if there is no crosswalk,
then the sign shall be located at the nearest line of the intersecting roadway.
(Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-551: VEHICLE ENTERING STOP INTERSECTION:
Except when directed by a police officer or traffic control signal, every
driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection, indicated by a stop sign,
shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection.
In the event there is no crosswalk, the driver shall stop at a clearly marked
stop line before entering the intersection. If there is no marked stop line,
then the driver shall stop at the point nearest the intersecting road where the
driver has a view of approaching traffic on an intersecting roadway before
entering the intersection. A driver after having stopped shall yield the right-
of-way to any vehicle which has entered the intersection from another highway
or road, or which is approaching so close as to constitute immediate hazard;
but the driver having so yielded may then proceed and the driver of all other
vehicles approaching the intersection shall yield the right-of-way to the
vehicle so proceeding. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-552: VEHICLE ENTERING YIELD INTERSECTION:
The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall, in observance to such
sign, slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing condition or shall stop
if necessary and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian legally
crossing the roadway on which he is driving and to any vehicle in the
intersection or approaching on another road so closely as to constitute an
immediate hazard. The driver having so yielded may then proceed and drivers of
all other vehicles approaching the intersection shall yield to the vehicle so
proceeding. A driver who enters a yield intersection without stopping and has
or causes a collision with a pedestrian at a crosswalk or a vehicle in the
intersection shall prima facie be considered not to have yielded as required
herein. The provisions of this section shall not release the drivers of other
vehicles approaching the intersection at such a distance as not to constitute
immediate hazard from the duty to drive with due care to avoid a collision. The
driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign if required for safety to stop
shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection
before entering the intersection; if there is no crosswalk, the driver shall
stop at a clearly marked stop line, or if there is no stop line, then at the
point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-553: VEHICLE ENTERING HIGHWAY FROM PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY:
The driver of a vehicle about to enter, leave or cross a highway from or into a
private road or driveway shall yield the right-of- way to all vehicles
approaching on the highway. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
State Law Reference: Similar provisions, 47 O.S. Section
11-404.
15-554: VEHICLES ENTERING TRAFFIC FROM PARKING:
Any vehicle attempting to re-enter traffic while parked at the curb shall yield
the right-of-way to oncoming traffic in the street approaching from the rear.
The parked vehicle shall proceed into the line of traffic only after the driver
has given the appropriate signal which indicates his intention of turning from
the curb and into the line of traffic. The vehicle shall in no event enter the
line of traffic until the driver has ascertained that no hazard exists. (Prior
Code, Chapter 20)
15-555: EMERGING FROM THE ALLEY, DRIVEWAY, OR BUILDING:
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway, or building shall
stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the
sidewalk area extending across any alley way or driveway, and shall yield the
right-of-way to any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision, and upon
entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching
on the roadway. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
State Law Reference: Similar provisions, 47 O.S. Section 11-704.
15-556: STOP WHEN TRAFFIC OBSTRUCTED:
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked cross walk unless there is
sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or cross walk to
accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of
other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal
indication to proceed. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-557: OBEDIENCE TO SIGNAL INDICATING APPROACH OF TRAIN:
   A.   Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade
crossing under any of the circumstances stated in this section, the driver of
such vehicle shall stop within fifty (50) feet but not less than fifteen (15)
feet from the nearest rail of such railroad, and shall not proceed until he can
do so safely. The foregoing requirements shall apply when:
      1.   A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives warning
of the immediate approach of a railroad train;
      2.   A crossing gate is lowered or when a human flagman gives or
continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad train;
      3.   A railroad train approaching within approximately one thousand five
hundred (1,500) feet of the highway crossing emits a signal audible from such
distance and such railroad train, by reason of its speed or nearness to such
crossing, is an immediate hazard; or
      4.   An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in hazardous
proximity to such crossing.
   B.   No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any crossing
gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or
is being opened or closed. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-558: CERTAIN VEHICLES TO STOP AT ALL RAILROAD GRADE CROSSINGS:
   A.   The driver of any motor vehicle carrying passengers for hire, or of any
school bus carrying any school child, or of any vehicle carrying explosive
substances or flammable liquids as a cargo or part of a cargo, before crossing
at grade any track or tracks of a railroad, shall stop such vehicle within
fifty feet (50') but not less than fifteen feet (15') from the nearest rail of
such railroad, and while so stopped, shall listen and look in both directions
along such track for any approaching train and for signals indicating the
approach of a train, except as hereinafter provided, and shall not proceed
until he can do so safely. After stopping as required herein and upon
proceeding when it is safe to do so, the driver of any such vehicle shall cross
only in such gear of the vehicle that there will be no necessity for changing
gears while traversing such crossing, and the driver shall not shift gears
while crossing the track or tracks.
   B.   No stop need be made at any such crossing where a police officer or
traffic control signal directs traffic to proceed. (Prior Code ch. 20)
15-559: CHILD PASSENGER RESTRAINTS REQUIRED:
   A.   Every driver when transporting a child under four (4) years of age in a
motor vehicle operated on the roadways, streets, or highways of this City shall
provide for the protection of the child by properly using a child passenger
restraint system or a properly secured seat belt in the rear seat of the motor
vehicle. For purposes of this section "child passenger restraint system" means
an infant or child passenger restraint system that meets the Federal standards
for crash-tested restraint systems as set by the United States Department of
Transportation.
   B.   Children four (4) or five (5) years of age shall be protected by use of
a child passenger restraint system or a seat belt.
   C.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
      1.   A nonresident driver transporting a child in this City;
      2.   The driver of a school bus, taxicab, moped, motorcycle, or other
motor vehicle not required to be equipped with safety belts pursuant to State
or Federal laws;
      3.   The driver of an ambulance or emergency vehicle;
      4.   A driver of a vehicle if all of the seat belts in the vehicle are in
use; and
      5.   The transportation of children who for medical reasons are unable to
be placed in such devices.
   D.   A law enforcement officer is hereby authorized to stop a vehicle if it
appears that the driver of the vehicle has violated the provisions of this
section and to give an oral warning to the driver. The warning shall advise the
driver of the possible danger to children resulting from the failure to install
or use a child passenger restraint system or seat belts in the motor vehicle.
   E.   Any person convicted of violating subsections A and B of this section
shall be punished by a fine of ten dollars ($10.00) and shall pay a maximum of
fifteen dollars ($15.00) court costs thereof. This fine shall be suspended in
the case of the first offense upon proof of purchase or acquisition by the loan
of a child passenger restraint system. (Ord. 330, 11-3-1987)
15-560: APPROACHING A VEHICLE BEING USED IN THE COLLECTION OF REFUSE, SOLID
WASTE OR RECYCLABLES 1 :
   A.   The driver of a motor vehicle, upon approaching a vehicle being used in
the collection of refuse, solid waste or recyclables displaying side marker
lamps with flash in conjunction with turn signal lamps or vehicle hazard
warning lamps shall:
      1.   If traveling on a highway that consists of two (2) or more lanes
that carry traffic in the same direction of travel as that of the driver,
proceed with due caution and shall, if possible and with due regard to the
road, weather and traffic conditions, change lanes into a lane that is not
adjacent to the vehicle being used in the collection of refuse, solid waste or
recyclables; or if the driver is not able to change lanes or if to do so would
be unsafe, the driver shall proceed with due caution and reduce the speed of
the motor vehicle to a safe speed for the existing road, weather and traffic
conditions; and
      2.   If traveling on a highway other than a highway described in
subsection A1 of this section, proceed with due caution and reduce the speed of
the motor vehicle to a safe speed for the existing road, weather and traffic
conditions. (Ord. 729, 11-1-2016)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 11-315.1.
CHAPTER 6
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
SECTION:
15-601: Authority to install traffic-control devices.
15-602: Traffic control devices; uniform requirements.
15-603: Obedience to official traffic control devices.
15-604: When official traffic control devices required for enforcement
purposes.
15-605: Traffic control signal legend.
15-606: Pedestrians; signal indicators; regulations.
15-607: Flashing signals.
15-608: Pedestrian-activated school crossing signals.
15-609: Unauthorized traffic control devices prohibited.
15-610: Defacement of traffic control devices.
15-611: Play streets, authority to establish.
15-612: Play streets, restriction on use.
15-613: Designation of crosswalks and safety zones.
15-614: Traffic lanes.
15-601: AUTHORITY TO INSTALL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES:
The city manager, subject to any directions given by the council by motion or
resolution, shall have placed and maintained traffic-control signs, signals,
and devices when and as required under the traffic ordinances of this city to
make effective the provisions of such ordinances, and may have placed and
maintained such additional traffic-control signs, signals, and devices as he
may deem necessary to regulate traffic under the traffic ordinances of this
city or under state law or to guide or warn traffic. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
State Law Reference: For state law relating to traffic-control devices, see 47
O.S. Sections 11-201 et seq.; drivers to obey traffic devices, 47 O.S. Section
11-201.
15-602: TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES; UNIFORM REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   All traffic control signs, signals, and devices shall conform to the
Manual of uniform traffic control devices approved by the State Department of
Public Safety.
      3.   All signs, signals, and devices required hereunder for a particular
purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and relative location
throughout the city. All traffic control devices erected and not inconsistent
with the provisions of state law or this chapter shall be official traffic
control devices. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-603: OBEDIENCE TO OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic
control device applicable thereto, placed in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter, unless otherwise directed by a traffic or police officer, subject
to the exemptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in this
part. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-604: WHEN OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES REQUIRED FOR ENFORCEMENT PURPOSE:
No provision of this chapter for which official traffic control devices are
required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place
of the alleged violation an official device is not in proper position and
sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. If a
particular section does not state that official traffic control devices are
required, such section shall be effective even though no devices are erected or
in place. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-605: TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND:
The display of signal lights, arrows and words shall be deemed to have the
following meanings and requires the appropriate response on the part of
vehicular traffic and pedestrians:
      1.   Green alone, "Go":
         a.   Vehicular traffic facing the signal, except when prohibited, may
proceed straight through or turn right or left unless an official sign at such
place prohibits such turn, but any vehicle and any pedestrian lawfully within
the intersection or adjacent crosswalk at the time the signal displays green
shall have the right-of-way over such vehicular traffic; and
         b.   Pedestrian traffic, facing a green signal may proceed across the
roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk unless a "walk" signal
indicator is operating;
      2.   Steady yellow or amber alone, "Caution":
         a.   The showing of such signal color following green shall constitute
a warning that the "Red" or "Stop" signal will be exhibited immediately
thereafter; and
         b.   Vehicles facing the signal shall stop before entering the near
side crosswalk or at the limit line, if it is marked, unless the vehicle is so
near the limit line when the "caution" signal first flashes that a stop cannot
be made in safety, in which event vehicles may proceed cautiously through the
intersection and clear the same before the "red" signal flashes;
      3.   Red alone, "Stop":
         a.   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering
the crosswalk and shall remain standing until green or "go" is shown alone.
Except where official signs are erected prohibiting such turns, vehicles in the
right traffic lane, after making a full stop as required, may enter the
intersection cautiously and make a right turn, but such vehicles shall yield
the right-of-way to any pedestrians or other traffic in the intersection and
the turn shall be made so as not to interfere in any way with traffic
proceeding on a green signal indication on the cross street; and
         b.   Pedestrians facing the signal shall not enter or cross the
roadway when such movement interferes with traffic proceeding on a green signal
indication on the cross street, or when the movement cannot be made in safety.
No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until the green or
"go" is shown alone unless authorized to do so, by a pedestrian "walk" signal;
      4.   Steady red with green arrow:
         a.   Vehicular traffic facing such signal when in the proper traffic
lane may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated
by the arrow, but shall yield the right- of-way to pedestrians lawfully within
a crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection. If the
movement indicated by the green arrow is a left turn, the left turn shall be
made only on the red with green arrow signal; and
         b.   No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until
the green or "go" is shown alone unless authorized so to do by a pedestrian
"walk" signal; and
      5.   Green arrows alone. Whenever vehicular traffic movements are
controlled by green arrows alone and not displayed with any other signal
indication, vehicles facing such signals may make the movements indicated by
the green arrows and the movements shall be made only when the green arrows are
displayed.
(Prior Code, Chapter 20)
State Law Reference: Similar provisions, 47 O.S. Section 11-202.
15-606: PEDESTRIANS; SIGNAL INDICATORS; REGULATIONS:
Special pedestrian control signals exhibiting the words "Walk," "Wait" or
"Don't Walk" shall regulate pedestrian movement as follows:
      1.   "Walk." Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the
roadway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by
the drivers of all vehicles; and
      2.   "Wait" or "Don't Walk." No pedestrian shall start to cross the
roadway in the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially
completed his crossing on the "Walk" signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or
safety zone while the "Wait" signal is showing.
(Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-607: FLASHING SIGNALS:
   A.   Whenever a flashing red or yellow signal is illuminated, it shall
require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows:
      1.   "Flashing Red." When a red light is illuminated with rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the
nearest crosswalk at an intersection and the right to proceed shall be subject
to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign; and
      2.   "Flashing Yellow." When a yellow light is illuminated with rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersection,
or pass such signal only with caution.
   B.   This section shall not apply at railroad grade crossings. (Prior Code,
Chapter 20)
State Law Reference: Similar provisions, 47 O.S. Section 11-204.
15-608: PEDESTRIAN-ACTIVATED SCHOOL CROSSING SIGNALS:
Whenever a pedestrian-activated school crossing signal is provided, it requires
obedience by vehicular traffic and pedestrians as follows:
      1.   "Flashing yellow":
         a.   When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent
flashes, drivers or operators of vehicles may proceed through the intersection
or pass such signal only with caution; and
         b.   Pedestrians shall not proceed in conflict with traffic, but may
activate the signal control switch, and shall wait until steady red alone is
shown before entering the roadway or intersection controlled by the signal;
      2.   "Steady yellow alone":
         a.   Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the
red of "Stop" signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter, and such
vehicular traffic shall not enter or be crossing the intersection or pass the
signal when the red or "Stop" signal is exhibited; and
         b.   No pedestrian shall enter the roadway or intersection on which
the signal controls vehicular traffic until steady red alone is shown;
      3.   "Steady red":
         a.   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering
the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, and shall remain standing
until flashing yellow is shown alone;
         b.   Pedestrians may proceed across the road controlled by the signal,
and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles; and
      4.   "Steady red and steady yellow combined":
         a.   Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the
flashing yellow signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter, and that such
vehicular traffic shall remain standing until the flashing yellow is shown
alone; and
         b.   Pedestrians are thereby warned that the flashing yellow signal is
about to be shown, and shall not enter the signal-controlled roadway or
intersection, or in a direction which conflicts with the movement of vehicular
traffic; but any pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing shall
proceed to the nearest sidewalk or safety island, and shall be given the right-
of-way by the drivers of all vehicles.
(Prior Code, Chapter 20)
State Law Reference: Similar provisions, 47 O.S. Section 11-203.
15-609: UNAUTHORIZED TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES PROHIBITED:
   A.   No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of any
highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device which purports to be
or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic control device or
railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic,
or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official
traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal.
   B.   No person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit
upon any highway any traffic sign, signal, or device bearing thereon any
commercial advertising.
   C.   This section shall not prohibit the erection upon private property
adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional information which are
of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs.
   D.   Every prohibited sign, signal, marking or device may be removed without
notice. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
State Law Reference: Similar provisions, 47 O.S. Section 11-206.
15-610: DEFACEMENT OF TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
   A.   No person shall without lawful authority attempt to or in fact alter,
destroy, deface, molest, interfere, tamper, injure, knock down, remove or have
in his possession any traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal or
an inscription, shield or insignia thereon, or any part thereof.
   B.   This chapter shall not apply to any of the following persons when
acting within the scope and duty of their employment:
      1.   Any officer, agent, independent contractor, employee, servant or
trustee of any governmental agency; or
      2.   Any officer, agent, independent contractor, employee, servant or
trustee of any contractor, public utility or railroad company.
(Prior Code, Chapter 20)
State Law Reference:, Similar provisions, 47 O.S. Section 11-207.
15-611: PLAY STREETS, AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH:
The city manager, subject to any directions given by the council, shall have
authority to declare any street or part thereof a play street and to have
placed appropriate signs or devices in the roadway indicating and helping to
protect the same. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-612: PLAY STREETS, RESTRICTION ON USE:
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof as
a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street or portion
thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences are
within such closed area; and then any such driver shall exercise the greatest
care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof. (Prior Code, Chapter
20)
15-613: DESIGNATION OF CROSSWALKS AND SAFETY ZONES:
The city manager, subject to any directions given by the council, may:
      1.   Designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon
the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where in his opinion
there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such
other places as it may deem necessary; and
      2.   Establish safety zones or islands of such kind and character and at
such places as it may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians.
(Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-614: TRAFFIC LANES:
   A.   The city manager, subject to any directions given by the council, may
be authorized to have traffic lanes marked upon the roadway of any street where
a regular alignment of traffic is necessary.
   B.   Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it is unlawful for the
operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the
boundaries of any such lane except when lawfully passing another vehicle or
preparatory to making a lawful turning movement or otherwise authorized by
ordinance. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
State Law Reference: Similar provisions, 47 O.S. Section 11-309.
CHAPTER 7
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING GENERALLY
SECTION:
15-701: Illegal Parking Declared Public Nuisance
15-702: Application Of Standing Or Parking Regulations
15-703: Parking Time Limits May Be Established, Signs
15-704: Time Limit For Parking
15-705: Brakes; Motor Not To Be Left Running
15-706: Signs Or Markings Indicating Angle Parking
15-707: Obedience To Angle-Parking Signs Or Markings
15-708: Parking In Spaces Marked Off
15-709: Permits For Loading Or Unloading At An Angle To The Curb
15-710: Hazardous Or Congested Places; Stopping, Standing, Parking
15-711: Stopping, Standing Or Parking Prohibited In Specified Places
15-712: Blocking Of Intersection Or Crosswalk Prohibited
15-713: Standing Or Parking On One-Way Roadway
15-714: Standing Or Parking On Left Side Of One-Way Streets
15-715: Parking Adjacent To Schools
15-716: Parking Prohibited At Intersections
15-717: Parking In Alleys, Blocking Driveways
15-718: Entry On Private Property; Trespass; Evidence; Burden Of Proof
15-719: Truck Parking Prohibited
15-720: Double Parking
15-721: Parking Prohibited For Trucks Transporting Hazardous Materials
15-722: Parking For Certain Purposes Prohibited
15-723: Method Of Parking, Standing Or Parking Close To Curb
15-724: Negligent Parking
15-725: Right Of Way To Parallel Parking Space
15-726: Handicapped Parking, Enforcement On Public Or Private Property
15-701: ILLEGAL PARKING DECLARED PUBLIC NUISANCE:
Any vehicle in violation of any regulation contained in this Chapter governing,
limiting or prohibiting the parking or standing of a vehicle on any street or
public thoroughfare is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance, and
each separate traffic citation issued as authorized herein for such violation
shall constitute a separate notice thereof to the owner or operator of such
vehicle. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-702: APPLICATION OF STANDING OR PARKING REGULATIONS:
The provisions of this Chapter shall not be applicable when it is necessary for
a vehicle to stop to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with
the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control device. (Prior
Code, Chapter 20)
15-703: PARKING TIME LIMITS MAY BE ESTABLISHED, SIGNS:
The City may establish parking time limits or prohibit parking on designated
streets or parts of streets and have appropriate signs placed on the streets.
When the signs are in place, it is unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in
violation of the sign. No such time limits shall be effective unless a sign is
erected and in place at the time of the alleged violation. (Prior Code, Chapter
20)
15-704: TIME LIMIT FOR PARKING:
   A.   It shall be an offense for any person to park any type of vehicle
between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. to three o'clock (3:00) P.M.,
Monday through Friday for a period in excess of two (2) hours on any streets in
the City limits wherein a limited parking sign is located.
   B.   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Section
shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable
by a fine not less than ten dollars ($10.00) and no more than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) plus court costs. (Ord. 375, 6-7-1994)
15-705: BRAKES; MOTOR NOT TO BE LEFT RUNNING:
Adequate brakes shall be set on all parked vehicles. No driver of a motor
vehicle shall leave the vehicle with the motor running while parked. (Prior
Code, Chapter 20)
15-706: SIGNS OR MARKINGS INDICATING ANGLE PARKING 1 :
The City Manager, subject to any directions given by the City Council by motion
or resolution, shall determine upon what streets and parts of streets angle
parking shall be permitted, and shall have such streets marked or signed.
(Prior Code, Chapter 20)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 11-1004(c).
15-707: OBEDIENCE TO ANGLE-PARKING SIGNS OR MARKINGS:
On those streets which have been so signed or marked for angle parking, no
person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or
edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings. (Prior Code, Chapter
20)
15-708: PARKING IN SPACES MARKED OFF:
In an area where parking spaces have been marked off on the surface of the
street, a driver parking a vehicle shall park it within a parking space as thus
marked off, and not on or over a line delimiting a space. (Prior Code, Chapter
20)
15-709: PERMITS FOR LOADING OR UNLOADING AT AN ANGLE TO THE CURB:
   A.   The City Manager may issue special permits to permit the backing of a
vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or
materials subject to the terms and conditions of such permit. Such permits may
be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property or to the owner of the
vehicle and shall grant to such person the privilege as therein stated and
authorized herein. The City Manager may revoke such permits at any time.
   B.   It is unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of the
special terms or conditions of any such permit. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-710: HAZARDOUS OR CONGESTED PLACES; STOPPING, STANDING, PARKING:
   A.   The City may determine and regulate by proper signs the stopping,
standing, or parking of vehicles when such stopping, standing or parking would
create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to
traffic.
   B.   When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places, as
authorized in subsection A of this Section, no person shall violate such signs.
(Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-711: STOPPING STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES:
   A.   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle, except in emergencies
or when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with
law or the directions of a police officer or traffic control device in any of
the following places:
      1.   On a sidewalk, sidewalk area, or between the sidewalk and the
street;
      2.   In front of a public or private driveway;
      3.   Within an intersection;
      4.   Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant except in a parking space
officially marked;
      5.   On a crosswalk;
      6.   Within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
      7.   Within thirty (30) feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon,
stop sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway;
      8.   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty (30)
feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone,
unless a different length has been indicated by signs or markings;
      9.   Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
      10.   Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire
station, and on the side of street opposite the entrance to any fire station
within seventy-five (75) feet of the entrance when properly signposted;
      11.   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or construction when
stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic;
      12.   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of a street;
      13.   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway tunnel; or
      14.   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
   B.   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any
prohibited area or an unlawful distance away from a curb. (Prior Code, Chapter
20)
State Law Reference:, Similar provisions, 47 O.S. Section 11-1003.
15-712: BLOCKING OF INTERSECTION OR CROSSWALK PROHIBITED:
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is
sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control
signal indication to proceed.
15-713: STANDING OR PARKING ON ONE-WAY ROADWAY:
   A.   If a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways and traffic is
restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or
park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of the one-way roadway unless signs are
erected to permit such standing or parking.
   B.   The city council may determine when standing or parking may be
permitted upon the left-hand side of any such one-way roadway and to erect
signs giving notice thereof. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-714: STANDING OR PARKING ON LEFT SIDE OF ONE-WAY STREETS:
The city manager may have signs erected upon the left-hand side of any one-way
street to prohibit the standing or parking of vehicles. When the signs are in
place, no person shall stand or park a vehicle in violation of any such signs.
(Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-715: PARKING ADJACENT TO SCHOOLS:
   A.   The city may have signs erected indicating no parking upon either or
both sides of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking
would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation.
   B.   No person shall park a vehicle in violation of any such signs. (Prior
Code, Chapter 20)
15-716: PARKING PROHIBITED AT INTERSECTIONS:
The parking of vehicles at the curb where streets intersect shall be prohibited
fifteen (15) feet in advance of the crosswalk on the near side of such
intersection. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-717: PARKING IN ALLEYS, BLOCKING DRIVEWAYS:
No person shall park a vehicle within a street or alley in such a manner or
under such conditions as to leave available less than ten (10) feet of the
width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic. No person
shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within a street or alley in such position
as to block a driveway entrance to any abutting property. No person shall park
a vehicle in any alley except for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in
loading or unloading merchandise or other materials. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-718: ENTRY ON PRIVATE PROPERTY TRESPASS EVIDENCE BURDEN OF PROOF:
   A.   No person shall make an entry with any vehicle upon real property owned
or legally occupied by another without the owner's or occupant's consent except
where such private property is provided as public parking and the general use
of the property is not restricted by signs or proper markings.
   B.   Where entry is made upon real property owned or legally occupied by
another without the owner's or occupant's consent, except on unrestricted
public parking, and is complained of by the owner or legal occupant of the
premises, the burden is put upon the person making the entry to show that
permission for such entry was given. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
Cross Reference: See Section
15-1309 of this code for impoundment of trespassing vehicles.
15-719: TRUCK PARKING PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful and an offense for any person, firm or corporation to park any
of the following vehicles which exceed a weight limit of one ton on any street
or alley in the city except as may be permitted by and in accordance with the
city's zoning regulations, Sections
12-201 et seq. of this code:
      1.   Truck;
      2.   Bus;
      3.   Tractor;
      4.   Trailer;
      5.   Truck-trailer, semi-trailer, or combination of any of the above; or
      6.   Any other commercial vehicle.
15-720: DOUBLE PARKING:
   A.   No driver shall double park or double stop a vehicle under the
following conditions:
      1.   Within fifty (50) feet of an intersection except alley
intersections, or within ten (10) feet of an alley intersection;
      2.   Opposite a double parked or double stopped vehicle across the
street;
      3.   When such double parking or double stopping would or does block or
interfere materially with the normal movement of traffic;
      4.   When parking space adjacent to the curb is available;
      5.   When directed by a police officer to move on; or
      6.   In any position other than parallel to the curb and within two (2)
feet of the adjacent vehicle parked next to the curb.
   B.   A driver may double park or double stop a vehicle only as authorized in
this section. There must be a licensed driver in any vehicle while it is double
parked or double stopped.
   C.   A driver may double stop for the purpose of, but only while actually
engaged in, the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers, subject,
however, to all the general conditions hereinabove set out.
   D.   A driver may double park for the purpose of, but only while actually
engaged in, the expeditious loading or unloading of merchandise, subject,
however, to all the general conditions hereinabove set out. No such vehicle
shall be double parked longer than ten (10) minutes.
15-721: PARKING PROHIBITED FOR TRUCKS TRANSPORTING HAZARDOUS MATERIALS:
It is unlawful to park, store or otherwise let stand a truck or other vehicle
which is used for the purpose of transporting or delivering flammable and
combustible liquids as defined by the fire prevention code of the American
Insurance Association and trucks or other vehicles which are used for the
transportation and delivery of liquefied petroleum gases in any area within the
city, except areas which are zoned Industrial 3 and Industrial 4. However, the
trucks and vehicles restricted in this section may be temporarily parked at
locations otherwise zoned for the purpose of loading and unloading flammable
and combustible liquids and liquefied petroleum gases for a period not to
exceed one and one-half (11/2) hours during any twenty-four (24) hour period.
15-722: PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES PROHIBITED:
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the purpose of:
      1.   Displaying the vehicle for sale; or
      2.   Washing, cleaning, or repairing the vehicle, except for repairs
necessitated by an emergency.
(Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-723: METHOD OF PARKING, STANDING OR PARKING CLOSE TO CURB:
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, every vehicle stopped or parked
upon a roadway where there are adjacent curbs, shall be so stopped or parked
with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle parallel to and within eighteen (18)
inches of the right-hand curb. Any vehicle stopped or parked upon the left-hand
side of a one-way street where there are adjacent curbs shall be parked or
stopped with the left-hand wheels parallel to and within eighteen (18) inches
of the left-hand curb. (Prior Code, Chapter 17)
State Law Reference: Parking rules, 47 O.S. Section 11-1004.
15-724: NEGLIGENT PARKING:
No person shall park, cause to be parked, stop or eave unattended any vehicle
as follows:
      1.   In a careless or negligent manner;
      2.   In such a manner as to endanger life, limb, person, or property, or
      3.   In such manner as to endanger or interfere with the lawful traffic
or use of the streets.
(Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-725: RIGHT-OF-WAY TO PARALLEL PARKING SPACE:
   A.   The driver of any vehicle intending to occupy a parallel parking space
where a backing movement is necessary and which is being vacated by another
vehicle shall stop his vehicle to the rear of the parking space until the
vacating vehicle has cleared and entered normal traffic. He then shall be
deemed to have the right-of-way to such parking space over any other vehicle
attempting to park therein.
   B.   The first of two (2) or more vehicles to reach the rear boundary of an
unoccupied parallel parking space where a backing movement is necessary to
occupy, shall be deemed to have the right-of-way to such parking space. (Prior
Code, Chapter 20)
15-726: HANDICAPPED PARKING, ENFORCEMENT ON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to place or park a motor vehicle in any
parking space on private property accessible to the public and where the public
is invited or public property that is designated and posted as a reserved area
for parking of motor vehicles of a physically disabled person unless such
person has a physical disability insignia as under the provisions of Section
15-112 of Title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes, and such insignias are displayed
as provided in Section 15-112 of Title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes or
regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
   B.   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section
shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable
by a fine as provided in Section
1-108 of this code. (Ord. No. 282, 4/19/83)
State Law Reference: Handicapped insignia, application and display on vehicles,
47 O.S. Section 15-112.
CHAPTER 8
LOADING
SECTION:
15-801: Definitions.
15-802: Curb loading zones, designation.
15-803: Loading zones to be used only for designated purpose.
15-804: Stopping, standing or parking in passenger curb loading zone.
15-805: Stopping, standing or parking in freight curb loading zone.
15-806: Designation of public carrier stops and stands.
15-807: Use of bus and taxicab stands restricted.
15-808: Stopping, standing and parking of buses and taxis.
15-801: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
      1.   "Freight loading zones" means all curb loading zones authorized and
regularly used exclusively for the loading and unloading of merchandise for
storage, trade, shipment or re-sale;
      2.   "Commercial vehicle" means:
         a.   A truck designated for delivery purposes with the name of the
owner or his business painted on both sides of the vehicle, regularly used
during normal business hours for the delivery and handling of merchandise or
freight and which bears a regular state commercial license tag; and
         b.   A passenger vehicle used regularly and actually engaged during
normal business hours in the delivery and handling of merchandise or freight,
and which bears a special numbered license plate issued by the city at the rear
of the vehicle attached to the state license plate together with an identically
numbered decal, issued vehicle; and
      3.   "Passenger loading zones" means all loading zones authorized and
used regularly and exclusively for the loading and unloading of passengers
except bus stops, taxicab stands, and stands for other passenger common carrier
vehicles.
(Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-802: CURB LOADING ZONES, DESIGNATION:
   A.   The city manager, subject to any directions given by the council by
motion or resolution, may determine the location of passenger and freight curb
loading zones and shall have placed and maintained appropriate signs indicating
the zones and stating the hours during which the provisions of this section are
applicable.
   B.   No person shall stand or park a vehicle in violation of signs erected
in accordance with this section.
   C.   If any loading zone is established on request of any person, the signs
shall not be placed until the applicant pays to the city an amount of money
estimated by the city council to be adequate to reimburse the city for all
costs of establishing and signing the same. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-803: LOADING ZONES TO BE USED ONLY FOR DESIGNATED PURPOSE:
No curb loading zone authorized and established as a passenger loading zone
shall be used as a freight loading zone, and no freight loading zone shall be
used as a passenger loading zone except as may be specifically provided by law.
(Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-804: STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING IN PASSENGER CURB LOADING ZONE:
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in a passenger curb loading zone
for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or
unloading of passengers, during the hours when the regulations applicable to
such curb loading zones are effective, and then only for a period not to exceed
three (3) minutes. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-805: STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING IN FREIGHT CURB LOADING ZONE:
   A.   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in a commercial curb
loading zone for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious
unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials during hours when the
provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case shall the stop
for loading and unloading of materials exceed thirty (30) minutes. Vehicles
using any commercial loading zone shall be subject to the licensing
requirements and regulations provided by this chapter.
   B.   The driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily at a place
marked as a freight curb loading zone for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not
interfere with any commercial vehicle which is waiting to enter the zone.
(Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-806: DESIGNATION OF PUBLIC CARRIER STOPS AND STANDS:
The city manager may establish loading zones for common carriers, including but
not limited to bus stops, bus stands, taxicab stands and stands for other
passenger common carrier motor vehicles, on such public streets in such places
and in such number as he shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and
convenience to the public. Every such loading zone shall be designated by
appropriate signs. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-807: USE OF BUS AND TAXICAB STANDS RESTRICTED:
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop,
or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when any such stop or stand has been
officially designated and the appropriate signs are in place. The driver of a
passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while
actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not
interfere with any bus, or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter the zone.
(Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-808: STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING OF BUSES AND TAXIS:
   A.   The operator of a bus shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any
street at any place other than a bus stand so designated as provided herein.
   B.   The operator of a bus shall not stop such vehicle upon any street at
any place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their baggage
except in a bus stop, stand or loading zone designated as provided herein,
except in case of an emergency.
   C.   The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop, bus stand, or passenger
loading zone on a public street in such a manner that the bus, when stopped to
load or unload passengers or baggage, shall be in a position with the right
front wheel of such vehicle not further than eighteen (18) inches from the curb
and the bus approximately parallel to the curb so as not to unduly impede the
movement of other vehicular traffic.
   D.   The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any
street at any place other than in a taxicab stand so designated as provided
herein. This provision shall not prevent the operator of a taxicab from
temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations
at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the expeditious
loading or unloading of passengers. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
CHAPTER 9
TURNING MOVEMENTS
SECTION:
15-901: Turning markers or indicators.
15-902: Designation of restricted turns.
15-903: Obedience to no-turn signs.
15-904: U-turns.
15-905: Position and method of turning.
15-906: Turning movements and required signals.
15-907: Means of giving turn signals.
15-908: Method of giving hand and arm signals.
15-909: Turns into or from alleys.
15-901: TURNING MARKERS OR INDICATORS:
   A.   The city manager, subject to any directions given by the council by
motion or resolution, is authorized to place markers, buttons or signs within
or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles
turning at such intersections. The course to be traveled, as so indicated, may
conform to or be other than as prescribed by law.
   B.   When authorized markers, buttons, or other indications are placed
within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning
thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such
indications. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-902: DESIGNATION OF RESTRICTED TURNS:
The city manager is hereby authorized to determine those street intersections
at which drivers of vehicles shall not make right, left or U-turns, and shall
have proper signs placed at the intersections. The making of the turns may be
prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours. Where
turns are restricted during certain hours pursuant to this section, the same
shall be plainly indicated on the signs, or they may be removed when turns are
permitted. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-903: OBEDIENCE TO NO-TURN SIGNS:
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right, left or U-turn
is permitted, the driver of a vehicle shall not disobey the directions of any
such sign. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-904: U-TURNS:
The driver of a vehicle shall not turn the vehicle so as to proceed or park in
the opposite direction upon any street in the city. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-905: POSITION AND METHOD OF TURNING:
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do as
follows:
      1.   Right turns. Both the approach for a right turn and the execution of
a right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or
edge of the roadway;
      2.   Left turns on two-way roadways. At any intersection where traffic is
permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the intersection,
the approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of
the street nearest the center thereof by passing to the right of the center
line where it enters the intersection. After entering the intersection, the
left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the
center of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable, the left turn shall
be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the
intersection; and
      3.   Left turns, on other than two-way roadways. At any intersection
where traffic is restricted to one direction on one or more of the roadways the
driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any such intersection shall
approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to
traffic moving in the direction of travel of the vehicle. After entering the
intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as
nearly as practicable, in the left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic
moving in such direction upon roadway being entered.
(Prior Code, Chapter 20)
State Law Reference: Similar provisions, 47 O.S. Section 11-601.
15-906: TURNING MOVEMENTS AND REQUIRED SIGNALS:
   A.   No person shall turn a vehicle at an intersection unless the vehicle is
in proper position upon the roadway as required in Section
15-905 of this code, or turn a vehicle to enter a private road or driveway, or
otherwise turn a vehicle from a direct course or move right or left upon a
roadway unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. No
person shall so turn any vehicle without giving an appropriate signal in the
manner hereinafter provided.
   B.   A signal of intention to turn right or left, slow or stop when
required, shall be given continuously during not less than the last one hundred
(100) feet traveled by the vehicle before turning or stopping.
   C.   No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle
without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein to the
driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is opportunity to give
the signal. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
State Law Reference: Similar provisions, 47 O.S. Section 11-604.
15-907: MEANS OF GIVING TURN SIGNALS:
   A.   Any stop or turn signal when required herein shall be given either by
means of hand or arm, or by a signal lamp or lamps, or mechanical device of a
type approved by the Oklahoma Department of Public Safety, except as provided
in Subsection B of this section.
   B.   A vehicle shall be equipped with, and the required signal given by,
signal lamps or devices when:
      1.   The body or cab of a vehicle or the load of any vehicle projects
twenty-four (24) inches or more to the left of the center of the steering
wheel;
      2.   Under any condition where a hand and arm signal would not be visible
both to the front and rear of the vehicle; or
      3.   The rear limit of the body of a vehicle or the load of any vehicle
projects fourteen (14) feet or more beyond the center top of the steering post.
(Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-908: METHOD OF GIVING HAND AND ARM SIGNALS:
All signals herein required given by hand and arm shall be given from the left
side of the vehicle in the following manner and such signals shall indicate as
follows:
      1.   Left turn - hand and arm extended horizontally;
      2.   Right turn - hand and arm extended upward; and
      3.   Stop or decrease speed - hand and arm extended downward with palm to
the rear.
(Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-909: TURNS INTO OR FROM ALLEYS:
   A.   No vehicles shall turn left when proceeding into or proceeding out of
an alley except when necessary to enter a one-way street, and no vehicle shall
cross any street or highway when proceeding into or proceeding out of any alley
except as provided in Subsection a of this section.
   B.   Left turns may be made when proceeding out of an alley if a traffic
survey conducted by the traffic engineer shows that such turn may be made
safely and official signs are erected authorizing such turns.
   C.   The foregoing provisions of this section shall not apply to bus
terminals used by licensed and authorized bus lines. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
CHAPTER 10
PEDESTRIANS
SECTION:
15-1001: Pedestrians subject to traffic control signals.
15-1002: Pedestrians' right-of-way at crosswalks.
15-1003: Pedestrians to use right half of crosswalk.
15-1004: Crossing at right angles.
15-1005: When pedestrians shall yield.
15-1006: Pedestrians walking along roadways.
15-1007: Pedestrians prohibited from soliciting rides, business or donations
from vehicle occupants.
15-1008: Drivers to exercise due care.
15-1009: Crossing prohibited.
15-1010: Obedience of pedestrians to railroad signals.
15-1001: PEDESTRIANS SUBJECT TO TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNALS:
Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic control signals as provided for in this
code of ordinances, but at all other places pedestrians shall be granted those
rights and be subject to the restrictions stated in this chapter. (Prior Code,
Chapter 20)
State Law Reference:. Pedestrian rights and duties, 47 O.S. Sections 11-501 to
11-507.
15-1002: PEDESTRIANS' RIGHT-OF-WAY AT CROSSWALKS:
   A.   When traffic control signals are not in place or not in operation, the
driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way slowing down or stopping, if
need be, to so yield to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk
when:
      1.   The pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the
vehicle is traveling; or
      2.   The pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite edge of
the roadway as to be in danger.
The provisions of this subsection are not applicable under conditions where
pedestrians are required to yield pursuant to this chapter.
   B.   No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety or
walk or run into the path of the vehicle which is so close that it is
impossible for the driver to yield.
   C.   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk, or any unmarked
crosswalk, or at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross a roadway, the
driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not overtake to
pass such stopped vehicle. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-1003: PEDESTRIANS TO USE RIGHT HALF OF CROSSWALK:
Pedestrians, when crossing the street at a crosswalk, shall move, whenever
practicable, upon the right half of the crosswalk. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-1004: CROSSING AT RIGHT ANGLES:
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at right
angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb, except in a
crosswalk. (Prior Code, Chapter 10)
15-1005: WHEN PEDESTRIANS SHALL YIELD:
   A.   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked or unmarked crosswalk at any intersection shall yield the right-of-way
to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   B.   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel
or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right of way
to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   C.   The provisions of this section are not applicable where pedestrian
crossings are prohibited. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-1006: PEDESTRIANS WALKING ALONG ROADWAYS:
   A.   Where sidewalks are provided, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian
to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
   B.   Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and upon
a highway shall, when practical, walk only on the left side of the roadway, or
its shoulder, facing traffic which may approach from the opposite direction,
and shall yield to approaching vehicles. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-1007: PEDESTRIANS PROHIBITED FROM SOLICITING RIDES, BUSINESS OR DONATIONS
FROM VEHICLE OCCUPANTS:
   A.   No person shall stand in a roadway for purpose of soliciting a ride,
donations, employment or business from the occupant of any vehicle.
   B.   No person shall:
      1.   Stand in any street, roadway or park and stop or attempt to stop and
engage any person in any vehicle for the purpose of soliciting contributions or
the watching or guarding of any vehicle while parked or about to be parked on a
street;
      2.   Sell or attempt to sell anything to any person in any vehicle;
      3.   Hand or attempt to hand to any person in any vehicle any circular,
advertisement, handbill or any political campaign literature, or any sample,
souvenir or gift; or
      4.   In any other manner, while standing in the street or roadway,
attempt to interfere with the normal flow of traffic for any other similar
purpose.
(Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-1008: DRIVERS TO EXERCISE DUE CARE:
Not withstanding the foregoing provisions of this chapter, every driver shall
exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway, and
shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary and shall exercise
proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or incapacitated
person on the roadway. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-1009: CROSSING PROHIBITED:
Between adjacent intersections, at which traffic control signals are in
operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a crosswalk.
Pedestrians shall not cross any divided highway having a median in the center
thereof, except in a crosswalk. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-1010: OBEDIENCE OF PEDESTRIANS TO RAILROAD SIGNALS:
No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over, or under any crossing gate or
barrier at a railroad grade crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or is
being opened or closed. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
CHAPTER 11
BICYCLES
SECTION:
15-1101: Application Of Bicycle Regulations
15-1102: Application Of Traffic Laws To Bicycles
15-1103: Obedience To Traffic-Control Devices
15-1104: Riding On Bicycles
15-1105: Riding On Roadways And Bicycle Paths
15-1106: Speed Of Bicycle
15-1107: Emerging From Alley Or Driveway
15-1108: Carrying Articles
15-1109: Parking
15-1110: Riding On Sidewalks
15-1111: Lamps And Equipment On Bicycles
15-1101: APPLICATION OF BICYCLE REGULATIONS 1 :
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon
any street or upon any public way; or upon any path set aside for the exclusive
use of bicycles, subject to those exceptions stated in this Chapter. (Prior
Code, Chapter 20)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 11-1201 et seq.
15-1102: APPLICATION OF TRAFFIC LAWS TO BICYCLES:
Every person riding a bicycle or skateboard upon a roadway shall be granted all
the rights and shall be subject to all the duties applicable to the driver of a
vehicle by the laws of this State and the traffic provisions of this Code
applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except as to special regulations in this
Chapter and except as to those provisions of laws and ordinances which by their
nature are inapplicable to such persons. (Ord. 349, 8-6-1991)
15-1103: OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES:
   A.   Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official
traffic-control signals, signs and other control devices applicable to vehicles
unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
   B.   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating no right or left or U-
turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey the directions
of such sign, except where such person dismounts from the bicycle to make any
such turn, in which event, such person shall then obey the regulations
applicable to the pedestrians. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-1104: RIDING ON BICYCLES:
   A.   No person operating a bicycle shall ride other than astride a permanent
and regular seat attached thereto.
   B.   No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the
number for which it is designed and equipped. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-1105: RIDING ON ROADWAYS AND BICYCLE PATHS:
   A.   Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to
the right-hand side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when
passing a standing vehicle or a vehicle proceeding in the same direction.
   B.   Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two (2)
abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of
bicycles.
   C.   If usable paths for bicycles are provided adjacent to a roadway,
bicycle riders shall use such paths and shall not use the roadway. (Prior Code,
Chapter 20)
15-1106: SPEED OF BICYCLE:
No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and
prudent under the conditions then existing. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-1107: EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY:
The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley or driveway shall, upon
approaching a sidewalk or sidewalk area extending across the alley or driveway,
yield the right of way to all pedestrians approaching on the sidewalk or
sidewalk area. Upon entering the roadway, the bicycle operator shall yield the
right of way to all vehicles approaching on the roadways. (Prior Code, Chapter
20)
15-1108: CARRYING ARTICLES:
No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle, or article which
prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand on the handle bars. (Prior
Code, Chapter 20)
15-1109: PARKING:
No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway
against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or
against the building or at the curb in such a manner as to afford the least
obstruction to pedestrian traffic. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-1110: RIDING ON SIDEWALKS:
   A.   No person shall ride a bicycle or skateboard upon a sidewalk within a
business district. (Ord. 349, 8-6-1991)
   B.   The City Council, by motion or resolution, is authorized to have
erected signs on any sidewalk or roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles
thereon by any person; and when such signs are in place, no person shall
disobey the same. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
   C.   Whenever any person is riding a bicycle or skateboard upon a sidewalk,
such person shall yield the right of way to any pedestrian and shall give
audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian. (Ord. 349, 8-6-
1991)
15-1111: LAMPS AND EQUIPMENT ON BICYCLES:
   A.   Bicycles in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp on the front
which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least five hundred
feet (500') to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type which
shall be visible from fifty feet (50') to three hundred feet (300') to the rear
when directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A
lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of five hundred feet (500')
to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector.
   B.   No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a bell or
other device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least one
hundred feet (100').
   C.   A bicycle shall not be equipped with, nor shall any person use, any
siren or whistle.
   D.   Bicycles shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the operator
to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement. (Prior Code,
Chapter 20)
CHAPTER 12
(RESERVED)
CHAPTER 13
IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES
SECTION:
15-1301: Purpose and effect of impoundment provisions.
15-1302: Place of impoundment.
15-1303: Duration of impoundment.
15-1304: Police granted authority to impound vehicles.
15-1305: Disabled vehicles.
15-1306: Vehicles on bridge.
15-1307: Arrest and detention of driver of vehicle.
15-1308: Vehicle constitutes traffic hazard.
15-1309: Illegal trespass by vehicle.
15-1310: Vehicles parked overtime.
15-1311: Vehicles blocking fire exits or hydrants.
15-1312: Vehicles parked in intersection.
15-1313: Stolen vehicles; recovery by police.
15-1314: Vehicles with outstanding traffic citations.
15-1301: PURPOSE AND EFFECT OF IMPOUNDMENT PROVISIONS:
The impoundment of vehicles under authority of the provisions of this chapter
shall be construed as an enforcement procedure for protection of the public
peace, safety and welfare, and the safeguarding of property, and shall be used
generally for the prevention and removal of traffic hazards, prevention and
abatement of public nuisances arising from traffic law violations, protection
of the public rights in the use of streets and thoroughfares from obstructions
placed and left in derogation of those rights, and for safeguarding and
protecting recovered stolen vehicles. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
State Law Reference: Grounds for removal of vehicles on highways by state, 47
O.S. Section 955; removal of abandoned vehicles on private property, 47 O.S.
Section 954A.
15-1302: PLACE OF IMPOUNDMENT:
Every vehicle that is impounded under the provisions of this chapter shall be
removed to the nearest garage or place of safekeeping that is approved by the
state and designated by the city manager, and to no other place. (Prior Code,
Chapter 20)
15-1303: DURATION OF IMPOUNDMENT:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided, any vehicle impounded under the authority
of this chapter shall be stored and held safely until an order for its release
is received from an officer of the traffic violations bureau or other proper
police officer.
   B.   The order of release of an impounded vehicle shall be conditioned upon
the payment by the person to whom the release is issued of all impoundment
costs and accrued storage charges assessed against the vehicle.
   C.   No order of release of an impounded vehicle shall be issued until all
fines and costs due the city because of traffic law or other law violations
involving the vehicle have been paid. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-1304: POLICE GRANTED AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND VEHICLES:
Members of the police department are hereby authorized within the limits set
forth in this chapter to impound vehicles under the circumstances hereinafter
enumerated. No impoundment shall be valid unless made under order of an
authorized police officer and in strict adherence with the procedures required
in this chapter. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-1305: DISABLED VEHICLES:
A disabled vehicle upon a street or highway may be impounded under the
following circumstances:
      1.   If left unattended and improperly parked on street or highway and
constitutes a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic;
or
      2.   If the person in charge of the vehicle is physically incapacitated
to such extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal and the
vehicle is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic or a hazard.
(Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-1306: VEHICLES ON BRIDGE:
An unattended vehicle left upon any bridge, viaduct or causeway or in any tube
or tunnel, where the vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic or hazard,
may be impounded. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-1307: ARREST AND DETENTION OF DRIVER OF VEHICLE:
Whenever the driver or person in charge of any vehicle is placed under arrest
and taken into custody and detained by police under circumstances which leaves
or will leave a vehicle unattended on any street or highway, the vehicle may be
impounded. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-1308: VEHICLE CONSTITUTES TRAFFIC HAZARD:
A vehicle left unattended upon any street, alley or thoroughfare and so parked
illegally as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal
movement of traffic shall be impounded. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-1309: ILLEGAL TRESPASS BY VEHICLE:
   A.   An unattended vehicle found to be in violation of Section
15-718 of this code may be impounded when the required complaint has been
properly made and filed as provided in this section.
   B.   If a violation of the provisions of Section
15-718 of this code occurs, the owner or legal occupant who complains shall
sign a complaint against the person parking the vehicle on the owner's or legal
occupant's property, or if the identity of the person parking the vehicle is
unknown, then the complaint may be filed against the registered owner of the
vehicle. The complaint shall be verified and shall allege that the complaining
party is the owner or legal occupant of the property upon which the vehicle is
parked or standing.
   C.   Upon filing of the complaint by the property owner or legal occupant,
and if there appears to be proper cause to believe the provisions of Section
15-718 of this code have been violated, the police department shall cause the
vehicle to be impounded from the property and placed in storage. (Prior Code,
Chapter 20)
15-1310: VEHICLES PARKED OVERTIME:
Any unattended vehicle which has been parked for more than one hour in excess
of the time allowed for parking in any place shall be impounded, and any
vehicle parked in violation of Section
15-704, regarding more than twenty-four (24) hours, shall be impounded. (Prior
Code, Chapter 20)
15-1311: VEHICLES BLOCKING FIRE EXITS OR HYDRANTS:
Any vehicle illegally parked in such a manner that it blocks a fire escape
ladder, device or exit or blocks ready access to a fire hydrant shall be
impounded. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-1312: VEHICLES PARKED IN INTERSECTION:
Any unattended vehicle illegally parked in any street intersection shall be
impounded. A disabled vehicle in an intersection with the person in charge of
the vehicle being present, shall be moved out of the intersection and to the
nearest available legal parking space at the street curbing. (Prior Code,
Chapter 20)
15-1313: STOLEN VEHICLES; RECOVERY BY POLICE:
   A.   Whenever a stolen vehicle is located by police and the registered owner
cannot be found within a reasonable time not exceeding one hour, or cannot be
determined from the registration papers or other identifying media in the
vehicle or from records or information available from reports of stolen cars,
the vehicle may be removed to the nearest authorized place to impoundment and
the registered owner of the vehicle shall be notified of the location of the
place of impoundment as soon as possible by the police department.
   B.   If the registered owner is identified, located and notified of the
recovery of the stolen vehicle, the owner shall be given the right to make his
own arrangement for the removal of the vehicle within the period of one hour
from the time he is actually notified of its recovery, and if the owner is
unable or unwilling to effect the removal within the time specified the vehicle
may be impounded. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-1314: VEHICLES WITH OUTSTANDING TRAFFIC CITATIONS:
Any vehicle for which two (2) or more citations have been issued, for violation
of an ordinance, and have not been presented as required, may be impounded if
parked in violation of any provision of this part. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
CHAPTER 14
PENALTIES
SECTION:
15-1401: Obedience To Traffic Code
15-1402: Penalty
15-1401: OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC CODE:
   A.   It is an offense against the city for any person to do any act
forbidden or to fail to perform any act required by this chapter.
   B.   It is an offense against the city for the parent of any child or for
the guardian of any ward to authorize or knowingly permit any such child or
ward to violate any of the provisions of this chapter.
   C.   It is an offense for any person to authorize or knowingly to permit any
vehicle registered in his or her name to be driven or to stand or to be parked
in violation of any of the provisions of this part. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
15-1402: PENALTY:
   A.   Except as provided in subsection B of this section, every person
violating any of the provisions of this part containing the traffic laws of the
city shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be fined
the sum of not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00), plus court costs and
penalties.
   B.   Any person violating any of the following sections of this part shall,
upon conviction, be punished as provided in section
1-108 of this code: (Ord. 454, 5-16-2000)
Section Of Code Description
Section Of Code Description
1.  Repealed.    
2.  15-219      Any driver involved in an accident is required to stop;
3.  15-227      No person operating a motor vehicle who has received either a
                visual or audible signal shall elude the police;
4.  Repealed.    
5.  15-403      No person shall exceed speed which is reasonable and prudent
                for existing conditions;
6.  15-513      No driver shall overtake or pass another vehicle traveling in
                the same direction while in school zones;
7.  15-514      No driver shall overtake or pass a school bus when the red
                loading signals are in operation;
8.  15-515      School bus requirements; lights; signs and painting;
9.  15-523      No person shall drive in a wanton manner without regard for the
                safety of others;
10. 15-524      No person shall drive, stop or park a vehicle in a careless and
                negligent manner;
11. 15-525      Any person shall drive in a careful and prudent manner on a
                public way;
12. 15-526      No person shall drive while under the influence of drugs;
13. 15-527      No person shall drive while under the influence of alcohol;
14. 15-528      No person shall operate a motor vehicle while under the
                influence of any controlled, dangerous substance;
15. 15-531      Speeding contest prohibited;
16. 15-608      Pedestrian-activated school crossing signals require obedience
                by traffic and pedestrians;
17. 15-611      Authorized play streets with appropriate signs or devices;
18. Repealed.    
19. 15-613      Designated crosswalks and safety zones.
 
(Prior Code, Chapter 20; amd. Ord. 290, 2-21-1984; Ord. 454, 5-16-2000)
PART 16
TRANSPORTATION
CHAPTER 1
AIRPORT AND AVIATION
SECTION:
16-101: Rules of the Airport Managing Authority.
16-102: Specific rules, adopted; penalty.
16-103: License required.
16-104: Grant of exclusive rights prohibited.
16-105: Fixed base operator's license.
16-106: Licensees subject to laws and regulations.
16-107: Lease Agreements.
16-108: Construction.
16-109: Privileges, uses, rights and interests.
16-110: Fixed base operator's services.
16-111: Fixed base operator's standards.
16-112: Lease of airport facilities.
16-101: RULES OF THE AIRPORT MANAGING AUTHORITY:
The Grove Municipal Airport Managing Authority shall adopt such rules and
regulations as they may deem necessary and expedient for the proper operation
and management of the municipal airport, its related property and facilities
and shall have authority to alter, change, or amend such rules and regulations
at their discretion. The authority shall comply or cause to be complied with
all civil air regulations of the federal and state government with respect to
air worthiness of aircraft, certification of aircraft, and operation of
aircraft. They shall protect all the aerial approaches to the airport insofar
as it comes within their jurisdiction. Further, they shall insure that all
developments of facilities on the municipal airport are in accordance with the
Federal Aviation Administration, the airport master plan, and other city,
county, state, and federal agencies that may be associated with the development
of the airport and shall cooperate with the city in the enforcement, within
guidelines of the various city, county, state and federal agencies, of all
ordinances relating to or regulating the use of the municipal airport. (Ord.
No. 205, 9/9/75)
Cross Reference: See Appendix 4 for Airport Authority Trust Indenture.
16-102: SPECIFIC RULES ADOPTED; PENALTY:
   A.   The following rules are adopted by the Airport Management Authority to
provide guidelines for the safe operation of aircraft at the municipal airport.
These rules are not in conflict with any Federal Aviation Regulations, but are
a supplement to the regulations to provide an acceptable level of safety and to
provide protection to the aviation public and public in general:
      1.   No model airplanes will be operated at the airport without the
approval of the air port management. Aircraft that have not been certificated
by the Federal Aviation Administration will not be operated at the Grove
Municipal Airport without the approval of the airport management;
      2.   Only FAA certificated pilots or student pilots under the supervision
of an FAA Certificated Flight Instructor will be permitted to operate aircraft
from the Grove Municipal Airport;
      3.   All pilots operating in the Grove Municipal Airport traffic pattern
shall observe and use a left hand traffic pattern;
      4.   Since the Grove Municipal Airport does not have a parallel taxiway
and the ends of the runway are not visible from either end, aircraft must use
the active runway for taxiing, take-offs and landings. To achieve an acceptable
level of safety, all radio equipped aircraft will utilize UNICOM Frequency
122.8 Mhz during taxi, take-off and landing operations to report position and
intentions;
      5.   No aircraft will be started and operated inside the Tee Hangars
located on the west side of the airport; and
      6.   No person will be permitted to operate an aircraft from the Grove
Municipal Airport while under the influence of alcohol or drugs.
   B.   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction, shall be fined as
provided in Section 12-108 of this code. (Ord. No. 269, 5/18/82)
16-103: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No commercial aeronautical service, or aeronautically associated service,
operation or activity shall be offered or performed at the municipal airport
without a fixed base operator's license for such service, operation or activity
having first been approved and issued by the airport managing authority of the
city. Aeronautical activity of municipal, state and federal agencies shall be
exempt from this provision. (Ord. No. 205, 9/9/75)
16-104: GRANT OF EXCLUSIVE RIGHTS PROHIBITED:
No license for exclusive right to provide commercial aeronautical service,
operation or activity at the municipal airport shall be issued. (Ord. No. 205,
9/9/75)
16-105: FIXED BASE OPERATOR'S LICENSE:
   A.   A fixed base operator's license shall be issued subject to the
condition that such licensee shall comply with all conditions hereinafter
imposed. The fee for each fixed base operator's license will be according to
the following schedule:
1.  Aircraft sales                     $ 500.00 per year;
2.  Airframe and/or power plant repair 500.00   per year;
3.  Aircraft rental                    1,200.00 per year;
4.  Flight training and instruction    1,200.00 per year;
                                                per year and .03 per gallon for
5.  Aircraft fuels and oil service     1,200.00 each gallon of aviation fuel
                                                pumped;
6.  Radio, instrument or propeller     500.00   per year;
    repair service
7.  Air taxi service                   1,200.00 per year;
8.  Aerial applications                200.00   per year;
9.  Specialized commercial flight      500.00   per year; or
    Services
10. Any combination thereof, or total  4,200.00 per year.
    not to exceed
 
   B.   Each operator shall renew his license prior to July 1, of each year,
and such fees shall be in addition to municipal airport property rental,
landing and any other fees which may be fixed by agreement with the Grove
airport managing authority. Any operator(s) failing to renew his license prior
to the above date shall suspend operations from the municipal airport until
such time as he shall have obtained a new license. (Ord. No. 205, 9/9/75)
16-106: LICENSEES SUBJECT TO LAWS AND REGULATIONS:
Each licensee and his officers, agents and employees shall carry on their
activities and operations at the municipal airport in compliance with federal
laws and Federal Aviation Administration regulations, state statutes, rules and
regulations governing the use of the airport, and all applicable city
ordinances. Each licensee shall be responsible for the action of his officers,
agents and employees. (Ord. No. 205, 9/9/75)
16-107: LEASE AGREEMENTS:
Licensees for aeronautical activity at the municipal airport providing ground
space and structures for such activities shall enter into lease agreements with
the airport managing authority for the rental of such space. Each lease
agreement with the authority for the lease of airport property under which
aeronautical services are provided to the public shall incorporate the
following language:
      1.   Lessee agrees that in furnishing any aeronautical services to the
public it will:
         a.   Furnish the services on a fair, equal and not unjustly
discriminatory basis to all users thereof; and
         b.   Charge fair, reasonable, and not unjustly discriminatory prices
for each unit or service; provided, that the lessee may make reasonable and
nondiscriminatory discounts, rebates, or other similar types of price
reductions to volume purchasers;
      2.   Lessee further agrees that in its operation and the operation of all
facilities on the leased premises, neither it nor any person or organization
occupying space or facilities thereon will discriminate against any person or
class of persons by reason of race, color, creed, or national origin, and
lessor reserves the right to take whatever action the Federal Aviation
Administration directs to enforce this covenant.
(Ord. No. 205, 9/9/75)
16-108: CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   All buildings and structures constructed within the municipal airport
shall be constructed in compliance with the ordinances pertaining to such
construction within the city limits of the municipality.
   B.   Licensees for commercial aeronautical activity at the municipal airport
shall follow the following procedure for approval of construction plans:
      1.   Preparation of plans: All plans and specifications for buildings or
structures to occupy space obtained through the airport managing authority
shall be prepared by a qualified person or persons deemed competent to insure
structural safety and esthetic value;
      2.   Submission: The licensee shall submit to the authority an
application for the preliminary approval of plans and specifications for any
proposed building or structure to occupy space obtained through the authority
and three copies of the plans and specifications of any proposed building or
structure to the chairman of the authority at least fifteen (15) days prior to
a meeting of the authority at which consideration is requested. The authority
will in writing advise the licensee as promptly as possible of the extent to
which the proposed building or structure conforms to the requirements of the
airport master plan, the Federal Aviation Agency, and other city, county, state
and federal agencies that may be associated with the development of the
airport, and will discuss possible modifications if necessary to secure
conformance; and
      3.   Airport authority action: Within ninety (90) days after acceptance
for review of the preliminary plans and specifications by the airport
authority, it shall indicate in writing its approval, disapproval or approval
with condition. Failure of the authority to act on the preliminary plans and
specifications within ninety (90) days of its acceptance will be deemed
approval of the plans and specifications by the authority. Approval, approval
with conditions or disapproval of the preliminary plans and specifications by
the authority shall be noted, both upon the preliminary plans and the airport
commission records.
(Ord. No. 205, 9/9/75)
16-109: PRIVILEGES, USES, RIGHTS AND INTERESTS:
In addition to the privileges, uses, rights and interests granted to a licensee
under the terms of a license or lease agreement, the following particular
privileges, uses, rights and interests are granted to the licensee:
      1.   The loading and unloading of aircraft in areas and locations
designated in the license or lease agreement;
      2.   The non-exclusive use of the public airport facilities and
navigational aids and facilities relating thereto for the purpose of commercial
or noncommercial landings, take-offs, and taxiing of aircraft;
      3.   The rights of ingress to and egress from the lease premises without
charge therefor, except the consideration set out herein or provided by
agreement; and
      4.   The non-exclusive use of common use areas. (Ord. No. 205, 9/9/75)
16-110: FIXED BASE OPERATOR'S SERVICES:
A fixed base operator's services may include aerobatics, agricultural chemical
services, aircraft airframe and engine maintenance, flight training including
instrument and instructor schools, charter and taxi service, ground to air
communications service, and aircraft rental and sales services. Any fixed base
operator undertaking any of these activities shall conform to license or lease
requirements for each such activity and shall undertake no activities not
specifically approved in the license or lease agreement. (Ord. No. 205, 919175)
16-111: FIXED BASE OPERATOR'S STANDARDS:
A fixed base operator undertaking the performance of any of the activities
enumerated in Appendix B, "Fixed Base Commercial Aeronautical Activities," as
appended to Ordinance Number 205 and incorporated herein by reference, shall
conform to the minimum requirements for that activity as specified in Appendix
B. Any question as to whether the minimum requirements of Appendix B are
applicable to a specific activity shall be resolved in favor of the
applicability of those requirements; the determination of the applicability
shall be made by the municipal airport managing authority. A copy of Appendix
B, "Fixed Base Commercial Aeronautical Activities," is available in the office
of the city clerk. (Ord. No. 205, 9/9/75)
16-112: LEASE OF AIRPORT FACILITIES:
The city hereby consents and agrees to the leasing of all the city's municipal
airport properties and facilities and all of the municipal airport properties
and facilities hereinafter acquired by the city, including but not limited to
the following described real property located in Delaware County, State of
Oklahoma, described herein, a tract of land described as follows, to-wit:
Beginning at the SE corner of the SE1/4 of SW1/4 for a place of beginning;
thence West 429 feet; thence North 1320 feet; thence East 214.5 feet; thence
North to the North Section line; thence East 500 feet; thence South to the
South Section line; thence West to the place of beginning; and
Starting at a point 285.5 feet East and 275 feet North of the SW corner of the
SE1/4 for a point of beginning; thence East a distance of 250 feet; thence
North and parallel to the West line of the E1/2 of Section 33 a distance of 900
feet; thence West a distance of 250 feet; thence South and parallel to the West
line of the E1/2 of Section 33 a distance of 900 feet to the point of
beginning, located in Section 33, Township 25 N. Range 24 E.
together with all and singular appurtenances and hereditaments thereto
appertaining and belonging, including (without limitation by reason of express
mention) all buildings and improvements now or hereafter located thereon and
all fixtures now or hereafter existing thereto, together with any and all,
extensions and improvements thereto acquired by the life of the lease for a
primary term of fifty (50) years, renewable for successive like terms, to the
trustees of the Municipal Airport Managing Authority (a public trust of which
the city is the beneficiary), with such lease to become effective as of 12:01
A.M. on the day following the date this section shall become effective (March
2, 1976). The president of the board of trustees of the town (now mayor of the
city) hereby is authorized and directed to execute the aforesaid lease upon
behalf of the city as lessor, in several multiple originals, and after the same
shall have been attested by the city clerk, to deliver such lease to the
trustees of the aforesaid authority. (Ord. No. 210, 3/2/76)
PART 17
UTILITIES
CHAPTER 1
UTILITY SERVICES IN GENERAL
SECTION:
17-101: Utility Department; Authorized Inspections
17-102: Utility Fees And Billings In General
17-103: Failure To Pay Utility Bills; Penalty And Disconnection Of Service
17-104: Utility Taps And Connections; Utility Deposits; Fees
17-105: Other Utility Fees Or Charges
17-106: Mandatory Connection To City Water
17-107: Abandoned Utility Services
17-108: Street Lighting Fee
17-109: Duty To Consent To Voluntary Annexation In Accordance With The City Of
Grove Annexation Plan
17-101: UTILITY DEPARTMENT; AUTHORIZED INSPECTIONS:
   A.   A Utility Department is established for the City with responsibility
for the management, maintenance, care and operation of the City's utilities.
   B.   The personnel in the service of any Municipal utility may enter any
private premises served by the Municipal utility system at any reasonable
times, and inspect the pipes and fixtures on the premises. The consumer must
answer fully, to the extent of his knowledge, all reasonable questions relating
to the service on his premises. (Ord. 345, 8-21-1990)
17-102: UTILITY FEES AND BILLINGS IN GENERAL:
All fees and charges in connection with any customer's use of the City's
sanitary sewer system, the City's water system or the operation of the City's
collection and disposal of refuse and garbage are billed in accordance with
applicable rates set by the City Council. All fees and charges owing for any of
these utility services shall be billed on one (1) monthly bill submitted to the
customer each month. The utility bills submitted under the terms of this
section shall be payable on or before the tenth day of the month following
submission of the bill to the customer. (Ord. 345, 8-21-1990)
17-103: FAILURE TO PAY UTILITY BILLS; PENALTY AND DISCONNECTION OF SERVICE:
   A.   Upon failure of any customer to pay any part of a utility bill
submitted by the City for any utility services pursuant to section
17-102 of this chapter by the tenth day of the month following submission of
the bill to the customer, the following actions and penalties may result:
      1.   A ten percent (10%) penalty of all amounts owing on a utility bill
is added to any utility bill which is not paid by the tenth day of the month
following submission of the bill to the customer;
      2.   The authorized agents of the City may disconnect or discontinue any
or all utility services to the customer after providing written notice to the
customer of the intent of the City to disconnect or discontinue any or all of
the utility services; and
      3.   The authorized agents of the City, upon direction of the City
Council, may discontinue to furnish water to any customer refusing or
neglecting to pay all or any part of a utility bill submitted after providing
written notice to the customer of the intent of the City to disconnect the
water service.
If any utility service is discontinued or disconnected pursuant to this
section, the City or its agents, shall not reconnect or reestablish the service
until the full amount of any outstanding utility service bill is paid, plus the
penalty provided in this section, plus any applicable charges or expenses in
reconnecting or reestablishing the service. (Ord. 345, 8-21-1990)
17-104: UTILITY TAPS AND CONNECTIONS; UTILITY DEPOSITS; FEES:
   A.   The City shall approve any request for a water tap and connection, a
sewer tap on an existing line, or a sewer tap on a new line made into the City
sewage or water systems. Prior to the approval by the City the customer shall
have paid the charge as applicable for the tap or connection according to the
latest schedule of rates set by the City Council.
   B.   A deposit shall be required for consumers of the City's utility
services in such amounts as the Council may determine by resolution or
ordinance. The deposit shall serve as a guarantee for the payment of charges
for water service and other amounts owed to the City in connection with the
water service. When a customer's water service is disconnected, the deposit or
any part of such amount deposited which remains after all such charges and
amounts due the City have been satisfied, shall be returned to the customer.
   C.   A penalty fee for reconnection of water service where the service has
been turned off or the water meter has been disconnected by the City for reason
of delinquent payment of a utility bill shall be charged in an amount set by
the Council by resolution or ordinance. (Ord. 345, 8-21-1990)
17-105: OTHER UTILITY FEES OR CHARGES:
The City Council from time to time by ordinance or resolution shall have the
power to establish rates and charges governing all aspects of the City utility
services, including monthly service fees, connection fees and charges, and
deposits. (Ord. 345, 8-21-1990)
17-106: MANDATORY CONNECTION TO CITY WATER:
   A.   Each occupied residence and each occupied business or commercial
building in the City shall connect to the City's water system within sixty (60)
days after the adoption of this section; provided, however, that such service
shall be brought within at least one hundred feet (100') or less of the
residence or business property line to be served or three hundred feet (300')
of the improvement to be served.
   B.   Any person, firm, corporation or entity violating any provision of this
section shall upon conviction thereof, be liable for a fine of not to exceed
twenty dollars ($20.00) and each day that any violation of any provision of
this section is allowed to exist shall be and constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 345, 8-21-1990)
17-107: ABANDONED UTILITY SERVICES:
   A.   An abandoned service is any water, sewer or natural gas service that
has not been used for a period of five (5) years or longer except for services
installed as part of a main extension and not put into service, which will not
be considered abandoned. Services deemed abandoned shall not be eligible for
reconnection after construction or repair to main infrastructure.
   B.   A new water, sewer or natural gas service for a premise where an
abandoned service exists may use the existing abandoned water, sewer or natural
gas service if it is determined to be in satisfactory condition by the Director
of Public Works or his designee. If the abandoned service is reactivated
without modification, the applicant shall be refunded that portion of the fees
and charges expressly stated for service installation. All other fees and
charges shall be the same as for a new service.
   C.   Abandonment under this section shall not relieve the property owner or
other responsible party of any financial responsibility for charges incurred at
the premises for water, sewer or natural gas services. (Ord. 611, 1-18-2011;
amd. Ord. 615, 5-3-2011; Ord. 811, 5-17-2022)
17-108: STREET LIGHTING FEE:
   A.   Each utility account shall be charged the sum of one dollar seventy
five cents ($1.75) per month per dwelling unit or commercial unit. Revenue
derived shall be for the purpose of Municipal Street Lighting Program.
   B.   This charge shall only apply to accounts within the corporate limits of
the City of Grove except this charge shall not apply to accounts established
solely for the purpose of providing water for irrigation or fire protection.
(Ord. 634, 11-15-2011)
17-109: DUTY TO CONSENT TO VOLUNTARY ANNEXATION IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE CITY OF
GROVE ANNEXATION PLAN:
   A.   Owners requesting utility connection to property located in an
unincorporated portion of Delaware County, Oklahoma and outside the corporate
limits of the City of Grove shall hereby consent to Voluntary Annexation in
accordance with the City of Grove Annexation Plan. (Ord. 731, 11-15-2016; amd.
Ord. 821, 10-18-2022)
CHAPTER 2
LEASE OF UTILITY SYSTEMS
SECTION:
17-201: Beneficial interest in trust accepted.
17-202: Lease of facilities approved.
17-203: City accepts beneficial interest of trust as amended.
Note: The city has leased its water and sewer systems to the Grove Municipal
Services Authority, a public trust. The trust has power to recommend to the
council for its adoption water and sewer rates and otherwise to regulate the
water and sewer systems.
17-201: BENEFICIAL INTEREST IN TRUST ACCEPTED:
The governing body of the city hereby does accept, for the city, the beneficial
interest in a certain public trust, designated as "The Grove Municipal Services
Authority" dated the 2nd day of October, 1956, for the comprehensive purpose of
supplying water and sanitary sewerage services and facilities to the city, and
for purposes collateral with the Declaration of Trust of the authority as filed
on this date in the office of the city clerk; and the mayor is hereby directed
to endorse the acceptance of the beneficial interest on the Declaration of
Trust. (Prior Code, Sec. 18-1)
Note: Grove was an incorporated town at the time of execution of the lease.
17-202: LEASE OF FACILITIES APPROVED:
The city hereby does consent and agree to the lease of the entire assets of the
city's water and sanitary sewerage systems and facilities, and all future
additions thereto, to the Grove Municipal Services Authority as authorized by
statute, to be effective at the time and upon the terms and conditions
specified in a certain "lease", prepared under the direction of the city
council and filed in the office of the city clerk on this date; and the mayor
hereby is authorized and directed, on behalf of the city, to execute and
deliver the lease to the Grove Municipal Services Authority. (Prior Code, Sec.
18-1.1)
17-203: CITY ACCEPTS BENEFICIAL INTEREST OF TRUST AS AMENDED:
   A.   The city hereby accepts the proposal of the city council of The Grove
Municipal Services Trust of the Grove Municipal Services Authority dated the
16th day of November, 1965 as filed with the city clerk. The mayor of the city
hereby is authorized and directed to execute an instrument of amendment to the
Declaration of Trust of the Grove Municipal Services Authority for and on
behalf of the city.
   B.   The governing body of the city hereby accepts for the city the
beneficial interest in the trust created by the Declaration of Trust of The
Grove Municipal Services Authority dated October 2, 1956, as amended by the
amendment to the Declaration of Trust of the Grove Municipal Services Authority
dated the 16th day of November, 1965. The mayor of the city hereby is
authorized and directed, for and on behalf of the governing body of the city,
to endorse upon the instrument of amendment to the Declaration of Trust of The
Grove Municipal Services Authority the acceptance of beneficial interest under
the trust. (Prior Code, Sec. 18-1.2)
CHAPTER 3
WATER SHORTAGES
SECTION:
17-301: Water Shortages, Declaration Of Emergency
17-302: Restriction On Water Use In Emergency
17-303: Proclamation And Notice Of Emergency
17-304: Grievances With Water Restrictions
17-305: Penalty
17-301: WATER SHORTAGES, DECLARATION OF EMERGENCY:
   A.   Whenever an emergency exists by reason of a shortage of water due to
inadequate supply, limited treatment or distribution capacity or failure of
equipment or material, the mayor is hereby authorized to restrict or prohibit
the use of water from the city's water system.
   B.   An emergency exists whenever the city manager reasonably determines
that the city's water system is unable or will within sixty (60) days become
unable to supply the full commercial and domestic needs of the users thereof,
including adequate fire protection. (Ord. 238, 8-5-1980)
17-302: RESTRICTION ON WATER USE IN EMERGENCY:
   A.   Upon the determination that such an emergency exists, the city manager
shall issue a proclamation declaring the emergency and setting out with
particularity an order restricting use of water from the city system. The order
may:
      1.   Restrict water usage during certain periods of the day or week or
according to any orderly and nondiscriminatory scheme; and
      2.   Prohibit usages not essential to public health and safety.
The order may be revised from time to time as the city manager deems necessary.
   B.   A duly proclaimed emergency shall continue and the terms of the
proclamation shall be in force for thirty (30) days or until such time as the
city manager causes to be published a proclamation that the emergency has
ended, whichever is shorter, unless the council by resolution approved by a
majority of all its members votes to terminate the emergency and proclamation
upon a different date. (Ord. 238, 8-5-1980)
17-303: PROCLAMATION AND NOTICE OF EMERGENCY:
   A.   The proclamation required by the preceding section shall be published
in a newspaper of general circulation in the city or, if there is no such
newspaper in which the proclamation may be published within twenty four (24)
hours after the emergency arises, publication shall be by posting a copy of the
proclamation in ten (10) prominent places in the city. The emergency shall be
in full force and effect upon publication. Substantial compliance with this
section is sufficient to effect the emergency.
   B.   Whenever a sudden or unexpected event so reduces the availability of
water or water pressure as to create an immediate threat to public health or
safety the notice of the proclamation may be given by any reasonable means,
including electronic means. The emergency shall be in full force and effect
upon such notice. However, if any means other than that required in subsection
A of this section is used, the proclamation shall be republished in accordance
with said subsection A within twenty four (24) hours of the first notice. (Ord.
238, 8-5-1980)
17-304: GRIEVANCES WITH WATER RESTRICTIONS:
Any person feeling aggrieved by a proclamation of the city manager shall have
the right to present the matter to the next regular or special meeting of the
city council or to any emergency session called to discuss the water emergency.
The council may exempt such aggrieved person, wholly or in part, from
compliance with the proclamation order upon a showing that compliance creates
an immediate threat to the person's health or safety. The ruling of the council
by a majority vote of all its members shall be final and binding as to the
continuance of any terms of the proclamation. Until and unless the action of
the mayor is modified or revoked by action of the council all water users shall
be bound by the proclamation. (Ord. 238, 8-5-1980)
17-305: PENALTY:
Any person who in any manner directly or indirectly violates or permits others
under his supervision, custody or control to violate any term of a duly
published proclamation shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any violation of the
provisions of the city manager's proclamation or action of the council shall be
punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) plus costs
and penalties. (Ord. 454, 5-16-2000)
CHAPTER 4
SEWER SYSTEM AND USE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
17-401: Definitions
17-402: Use Of Public Sewers Required, Unauthorized Disposal
17-403: Private Sewage Disposal
17-404: Building Sewers And Connections
17-405: Stormwater Discharge Into Sanitary Sewer Prohibited
17-406: Other Discharges Prohibited
17-407: Unlawful Discharges, Actions Of City
17-408: Interceptors Required For Greases And Oil
17-409: Damage To Sewer System
17-410: Powers And Authority Of Inspectors
17-411: Rates And Charges
17-412: Defective Customer Sewer Service Lines
17-413: Penalty
17-401: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used
in this chapter shall be as follows:
BOD (Denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand): The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure
in five (5) days at twenty degrees centigrade (20°C), expressed in milligrams
per liter.
BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system
which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside
the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five
(5) feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal.
CITY: Refers to the geographical area within the corporate limits of the city
of Grove.
COMBINED SEWER: A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
GARBAGE: Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking,
and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce.
HEALTH OFFICER: The county health officer for the county.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES: The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes,
trade, or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.
MAY: Is permissive.
NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet in watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of
surface or ground water.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation, or
group.
pH: The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per
liter of solutions.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE: The wastes from the preparation, cooking, and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") (1.27 centimeters)
in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER: A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal
rights, and is controlled by public authority.
SANITARY SEWER: A sewer into which storm, surface, and ground waters are not
intentionally admitted.
SEWAGE: A combination of the water carried wastes from residences, business
buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such
ground, surface and storm waters as may be present.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT: Any arrangement of devices and structures used for
treating sewage.
SEWAGE WORKS: All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing
sewage.
SEWER: A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SHALL: Is mandatory.
SLUG: Any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times
the average twenty four (24) hour concentration or flows during normal
operation.
STORM DRAIN (Sometimes Termed "Storm Sewer"): A sewer which carries storm and
surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other
than unpolluted cooling water.
SUPERINTENDENT: The Superintendent of Sewage Works of the City, or his
authorized deputy, agent or representative.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS: Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
WATERCOURSE: A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or
intermittently. (Prior Code § 18-2)
17-402: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED, UNAUTHORIZED DISPOSAL:
   A.   Unlawful Disposal: It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or
permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property
within the City or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City, any human or
animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste.
   B.   Unlawful Discharge: It is unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet
within the City or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City any sewage or
other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
   C.   Unlawful Construction Or Maintenance: Except as hereinafter provided,
it is unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, vault, septic tank,
cesspool, or other facility intended or used for disposal of sewage.
   D.   Installation and Connection Required: The owner of any house, building,
or property used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other
purposes, situated within the City and abutting on any street, alley or right-
of-way in which there is located or may in the future be located a public
sanitary or combined sewer of the City, is hereby required at his expense to
install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities
directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter within sixty (60) days after date of official notice to do so, provided
that the public sewer is within one hundred feet (100') of the property line or
within three hundred feet (300') of the structure to be served.
   Failure to connect to the public sewer in accordance to the provisions of
this chapter shall result in the owner being charged for sewer service as set
forth in the GMSA Utility Rates.
   E.   Connection Conformity: The connection of the building sewer into the
public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the City's Building Code and
other applicable rules and regulations of the City.
   F.   New Designs And Construction: All new sanitary sewage works shall be
designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements of the State
Health Department and its regulations. (Prior Code §§ 18-3 to 18-6; amd. Ord.
271, 6-1-1982)
   G.   Sanitary Sewage Backflow Prevention Device Required Under The Following
Conditions:
      1.   New Construction: All residence or business service lines connected
to GMSA sanitary sewer system after the effective date of this policy shall
have a sewer clean-out and a backflow prevention device installed. Said device
shall be determined by GMSA and shall be of sufficient size and quality to
prevent backflow to individual residences or businesses. All backflow
prevention devices shall be installed by a licensed plumber at the expense of
the property owner and must be inspected by GMSA. The backflow prevention
device shall be properly maintained and secured by said property owner.
      2.   Existing Residences And Businesses: Any residence or business
existing prior to the effective date of this policy that has experienced a
sanitary sewer backflow caused by blockage in the GMSA maintained sewer lines
shall have a backflow prevention device installed by a licensed plumber at the
property owner's expense within thirty (30) days of the backup. Said device
shall be of sufficient size and quality to prevent backflow to individual
residences or businesses. The backflow prevention device shall be properly
maintained and secured by said property owner.
      3.   Areas With History Of Backflows: Any residences or businesses
located in an area of the City of Grove that has a history of sanitary sewer
backflows, as determined by GMSA caused by blockage in the GMSA maintained
sewer lines shall have a backflow prevention device installed by a licensed
plumber at the property owner's expense within thirty (30) days of written
notice from GMSA. Said device shall be of sufficient size and quality to
prevent backflow to individual residences or businesses. The backflow
prevention device shall be properly maintained and secured by said property
owners.
      4.   Voluntary Installation Of Backflow Prevention Device: Existing
residence or business owners who have not previously experienced a sanitary
sewer backflow or are not located in any area that has a history of sanitary
sewer overflows may install a backflow prevention device. Said device shall be
installed by a licensed plumber and shall be of sufficient size and quality to
prevent backflow to individual residences or businesses. The backflow
prevention device shall be properly maintained and secured by said property
owner.
      5.   One-Time Fifty Dollar Utility Credit/Reimbursement: Upon inspection
by GMSA, proof of payment to a licensed plumber for installation of the device,
and property owner signing a Sewer Inspection Reimbursement Form, a one-time
fifty dollar ($50.00) utility credit will be applied to the property owner's
bill. If a sewer clean-out is not readily available on the service line, the
property owner shall be required to install the clean-out, at the property
owner's expense, prior to a one-time credit being assessed.
If the residence or business is rented/leased to a tenant, the one-time credit
will be applied to the property owner's GMSA bill. If the property owner is not
a GMSA customer, a one-time fifty dollar ($50.00) reimbursement will be issued
to the property owner.
      6.   Failure To Comply: Failure by property owners to comply with this
policy shall:
         a.   Result in water and sewer services being withheld; and
         b.   Exempt the City of Grove and Grove Municipal Services Authority
from all liability in the event of a sanitary sewer overflow.
      7.   Exemptions: Any residence or business that has a "grinder pump
system" shall be exempt from installing a sewer clean-out and backflow
prevention device. (Ord. 734, 5-16-2017; amd. Ord. 797, 2-16-2021)
17-403: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
   A.   Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the
provisions of section
17-402 of this chapter, the building sewer shall be connected to a private
sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in section
17-402 of this chapter, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer
in compliance with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar
private sewage facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material.
   C.   The owner shall operate and maintain any private sewage disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the City.
   D.   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Health Officer.
(Prior Code §§ 18-7 to 18-10)
17-404: BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS:
   A.   All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of a
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the City
from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the
installation of the building sewer.
   B.   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be guarded with
barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the
work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the City Council.
   C.   All house sewers shall be constructed of either vitrified glazed clay
sewer pipe conforming to the ASTM standard specifications for clay sewer pipe
(Designation C-13); extra heavy cast iron soil pipe conforming to ASTM standard
specifications for cast iron soil pipe and fittings (Designation A-74); or
asbestos-cement sewer pipe conforming to Federal Specifications SSP-331a.
   D.   Regulations applicable to joints and connections are as follows:
      1.   Hot Poured Joints: Pipe joints shall be carefully centered and
firmly packed with oakum or jute in such a manner as not to disturb the
alignment of the pipe, and in such a way as to permit the compound to have the
greatest unobstructed surface for good pouring and adhesion. After the pipe
joint has been thoroughly cleaned, a suitable runner shall then be placed and
the compound, heated to flowing consistency, shall be filled. Hot poured
compound shall consist of mineral filled plastic or bitumastic coat tar
containing an inert filler which shall have high tensile and compressive
forces. It is permissible to make alternate joints before lowering the pipe
into the trench;
      2.   Cold Troweled Mastic Joint: Cold applied mastic joints shall consist
of two (2) components: one, a dry powder composed of mineral bitumen,
pulverized to the proper fineness and blended with a mineral filler and second,
a liquid bituminous fluxing agent, which when combined with the powdered
component, shall form a homogeneous plastic compound. The compound shall be of
the internal set up mastic type and shall not be such as to depend upon
oxidation or evaporation to obtain its set. It shall be self-hardening and
shall set up if submerged in water. It shall be mixed on the job at the time
used, and be of such consistency that it may be placed in the bells of the pipe
and remain there without slumping. After each joint has been thoroughly
cleaned, mastic compound shall be troweled into the bottom one-third (1/3) of
the bell of the first pipe laid. A closely twisted gasket of jute or oakum
shall be used to center the spigot of the next pipe inserted in the bell. After
the pipe has been bedded to line and grade, the entire remaining annular space
shall be troweled full with bituminous mastic;
      3.   Die Cast Joint: Vitrified clay sewer pipe shall be fitted with an
approved factory made precast joint attached to the pipe. Factory made joints
shall be fitted with a ring, die cast into the socket of the pipe and the
spigot shall be fitted with a collar of suitable material. The collar of the
spigot shall be a tight fit between the interfaces. When putting die cast
joints together only the solvents and lubricants recommended by the pipe
manufacturer shall be used;
      4.   Extra Heavy Cast Iron Joints: Joints for extra heavy cast iron soil
pipe shall be made by inserting a roll of hemp or jute and thoroughly caulking
it into place and then following with pure molten lead well caulked, not less
than one inch (1") deep. No paint, varnish or putty will be allowed in the
joints until they have been tested; and
      5.   Compliance To Federal Specifications: Joints for asbestos- cement
sewer pipe shall be made in accordance with the manufacturers' recommendations
to comply with applicable federal specifications. (Prior Code, Secs. 18-11 to
18-14)
   E.   The city shall require the owners of the property for new or renovation
construction to construct a sewer cleanout as follows or in the case in which a
defective building sewer cleanout is identified by the city to repair the sewer
cleanout, at the owner's expense, within ninety (90) days after notice by the
city.
      1.   The sewer cleanout must be constructed as follows:
         a.   Sewer cleanout must be constructed with a four inch (4")
adjustable cleanout riser located at grade level and readily accessible.
         b.   Sewer cleanout must be constructed with a secured waterproof cast
iron or brass lead.
         c.   Sewer cleanout must be concrete increased with a minimum of an
eighteen inch (18") radius and a six inch (6") depth.
         d.   Sewer cleanout must be of a watertight nature. (Ord. 482, 10-16-
2001)
17-405: STORM WATER DISCHARGE INTO SANITARY SEWER PROHIBITED:
   A.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water,
surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated
cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
   B.   Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers,
or to a natural outlet approved by the city council. (Prior Code, Sec. 18-15)
17-406: OTHER DISCHARGES PROHIBITED:
   A.   No person may discharge to public sewers any waste which by itself or
by interaction with other wastes may:
      1.   Injure or interfere with wastewater treatment process or facilities;
      2.   Constitute a hazard to humans or animals; or
      3.   Create a hazard in receiving waters of the wastewater treatment
plant effluent.
   B.   All discharges shall be prohibited except those that meet the criteria
for "Domestic Wastewater". BOD concentration shall not exceed two hundred
twenty milligrams per liter (220 mg/l) which is the maximum limit for average
domestic wastewater.
   C.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall discharge
or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to
any public sewers:
      1.   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid, or gas;
      2.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous substance in
sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process,
constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create any hazard in the receiving
waters of the sewage treatment plant;
      3.   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than five point five (5.5),
or higher than nine point zero (9.0), or having any other corrosive property
capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of
the sewage treatment plant;
      4.   Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure, or any other solid or viscous
substances capable of causing obstruction to the flow of sewers or other
interference with the proper operation of the sewage works;
      5.   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred
fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F);
      6.   Any water or waste which may contain more than one hundred (100)
parts per million, by weight, of fat, oil or grease;
      7.   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded;
      8.   Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character
and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such
materials at the sewage treatment plant; and
      9.   Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a
public nuisance.
   D.   At the present time, there are no industrial users in the city. If
industrial users should desire to locate in the city and make use of the
sewerage system, each proposed connection shall be considered by the city on a
case by case basis. In no case shall any connection be allowed which would
violate this section.
   E.   Any new connections from inflow sources into the sanitary sewer
portions of the sewer system shall be prohibited. (Prior Code, Secs. 18-16;
amd. Ord. 271, 6-1-1982)
17-407: UNLAWFUL DISCHARGES, ACTIONS OF CITY:
   A.   If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess
the characteristics enumerated in section
17-406 of this chapter, and which in the judgment of the superintendent may
have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or
receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a
public nuisance, the superintendent may:
      1.   Reject the wastes;
      2.   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the
public sewers;
      3.   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; or
      4.   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the
wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of
this chapter. If the superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of
waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be
subject to the review and approval of the superintendent, and subject to the
requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws. (1983 Code)
17-408: INTERCEPTORS REQUIRED FOR GREASES AND OIL:
   A.   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the city council, they are necessary for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes,
sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be
required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall
be of a type and capacity approved by the Superintendent, and shall be located
as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
   B.   Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious
materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature.
They shall be of substantial construction, watertight, and equipped with easily
removable covers which when bolted in place shall be gastight and watertight.
(Prior Code § 18-17)
17-409: DAMAGE TO SEWAGE SYSTEM:
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully, or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or
equipment which is a part of the Municipal sewage works. Any person violating
this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly
conduct. (Prior Code § 18-19)
17-410: POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS:
The City Council and duly authorized employees of the City bearing proper
credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties
for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing,
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Prior Code § 18-20)
17-411: RATES AND CHARGES:
The City Council shall adopt from time to time applicable rates and charges for
use of the sewer system, including a user charge system of treating wastewater.
A copy of these rates and charges shall be kept on file with the City Clerk.
   A.   GMSA Water Service Customers:
      1.   The method of calculating the cost of sewer service for Grove
Municipal Service Authority water customers is based on the amount of water
delivered through the meter and the rates set by the City of Grove.
   B.   GMSA Sewer Customers Without Water Service - Normal Volume Usage:
      1.   The method of calculating the cost for Grove Municipal Service
Authority sewer customers who do not have water service will be determined on a
case by case basis. The cost will be calculated by using the normal monthly
volume use table. The normal monthly volume usage is estimated and is based on
the normal amount of water that would flow through the meter for a similar type
of residence, commercial or industrial facility and the rates set by the City
of Grove.
   NORMAL MONTHLY VOLUME USE TABLE
Type Of Customer Normal Monthly Water Usage
Type Of Customer     Normal Monthly Water Usage
Childcare            8,000 gallons
Church               14,000 gallons
Hotel/motel          83,000 gallons
Industrial           24,000 gallons
Office/professional  1,000 gallons
Residential          5,000 gallons
Restaurant/catering  48,000 gallons
Retail sales/service 2,200 gallons
 
GMSA shall have the authority to adjust the normal monthly usage if it is
determined a customer is using more water per month than what is estimated on
the normal monthly volume use table.
   C.   GMSA Sewer Customers Without Water Service - High Volume Usage
(150,000+ Gallons Per Month):
      1.   High volume usage customer: A commercial or industrial facility that
staff determines is using one hundred fifty thousand (150,000) gallons or more
of water per month; and has a constant sewage flow sufficient to operate a
sewer flow meter.
Staff shall determine if a customer is a high-volume user based on comparison
of the usage of a similar type of commercial or industrial customer.
      2.   High volume usage customers are required to install a sewer flow
meter at their cost. The cost for sewer service shall be calculated based on
the amount of sewage that flows through the flow meter and the rates set by the
City of Grove.
The owner of the sewer flow meter shall calibrate the meter on an annual basis,
and provide documentation to GMSA proving the meter is reading accurately.
(Ord. 741, 11-21-2017)
17-412: DEFECTIVE CUSTOMER SEWER SERVICE LINES:
The City shall require the owners of the property on which a defective customer
Sewer Service Line is located to repair service line, at the owner's expense,
within ninety days after notice by Grove Municipal Services Authority (GMSA)
that repairs shall be made. In the case such repairs will cause an economic
hardship to the property owners, the owner may apply for assistance.
Grove Municipal Services Authority (GMSA) will hire a plumber and the following
payment schedule will apply to property owners receiving assistance.
 
Cost of Repairs  Payment Schedule
$1,000 or less   1 year from completion of repairs
$1,001 to $2,000 2 years from completion of repairs
$2,001 to $3,000 3 years from completion of repairs
$3,001 to $4,000 4 years from completion of repairs
$4,001 to $5,000 5 years from completion of repairs
$5,001 +         6 years from completion of repairs
 
Assistance shall only be granted to residential users (excluding rental
property) and shall not apply to commercial and industrial users. Assistance
shall not be in effect until approved in writing by the City Manager or his/her
designee.
Any connections to the sewer under this Ordinance shall be made only if GMSA
determines that there is capacity, including BOD and ISS capacity available in
all downstream sewer lift stations and sewer lines and in the treatment plant.
(Ord. 320, 8-19-1986; amd. Ord. 331, 2-2-1988; Ord. 826, 2-7-2023)
17-413: PENALTY:
   A.   Any person found to be violating any provisions of this chapter, except
section
17-410 of this chapter, shall be served by the City with written notice stating
the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the
satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time
stated in the notice, permanently cease all violation.
   B.   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined not to exceed five hundred dollars
($500.00), plus costs and penalties.
   C.   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall also
become liable to the City for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the
City by reason of such violation. (Prior Code §§ 18-21 - 18-23; amd. Ord. 290,
2-21-1984; Ord. 320, 8-19-1986; Ord. 454, 5-16-2000)
CHAPTER 5
REFUSE COLLECTION
SECTION:
17-501: Definitions
17-502: Accumulation Of Garbage, Home Improvement Waste And Yard Debris, No
Open Burning
17-503: Collection Of Garbage And Rubbish
17-504: Disposal
17-505: Fees
17-506: Duty To Request Garbage Service; Duty To Use The City's Private
Contractor; Other Garbage/Refuse Collection Services Prohibited
17-507: Charges To Be On Utility Bill
17-508: Inspections
17-509: Penalty
17-501: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
BAGGED: Placement of a plastic trash bag inside a container to hold the waste
and keep the container clean.
CONTAINER: A water-tight, rodent and insect proof standard trash receptacle
with a tight-fitting lid up to thirty three (33) gallons or 45- to 96-gallon
poly carts.
CONTRACTOR: Any institution public or private, or corporation, individual,
partnership or other entity that which has a valid existing contract with the
City to furnish garbage and refuse collection and disposal services.
CURBSIDE: On the resident's property, within five feet (5') of the public
street or private road without blocking sidewalks, driveways or on-street
parking. If extraordinary circumstances preclude such a location, curbside
shall be considered a placement suitable to the resident, convenient to the
contractor's equipment, and approved by the City.
CUSTOMERS: All users of solid waste services within the corporate limits as
defined below:
Commercial: Non-residential customers including industry, businesses,
institutions, governmental agencies and other users of commercial-type garbage
collection.
Multi-Family Residences: Duplexes, triplexes, four-plexes or mobile homes that
are located on a public street or private road and where the attached or
unattached units are billed collectively.
Single-Family Residence: One-unit houses, duplexes, triplexes, four-plexes, and
mobile homes located on a public street or private road and where each
residential unit is billed separately.
Small Commercial: Non-residential customers identified by the contractor as a
commercial customer that does not generate an amount of solid waste that
requires a dumpster.
DUMPSTER: A watertight metal or plastic container equipped with a tight-fitting
cover, capable of being mechanically unloaded into a collection vehicle, and
that is not less than two (2) cubic yards or greater than eight (8) cubic yards
in capacity.
GARBAGE: Putrescible and non-putrescible solid and semi-solid wastes except
sewage and body wastes, including but not limited to meats, vegetables, and
fruit refuse, carcasses of small animals and fowls, ashes, commercial and
industrial wastes.
HAZARDOUS WASTE: All dangerous or extremely hazardous and regulated as
dangerous or extremely hazardous waste by the Oklahoma State Department of
Environmental Quality or any other Oklahoma State Statute or regulation
governing the treatment, storage, handling or disposal of wastes and imposing
special handling requirements.
HOME IMPROVEMENT WASTE: Waste resulting from a property owner's or resident's
home improvement projects including but not limited to lumber, plywood, siding,
drywall, concrete rubble, windows, etc.
HOUSEHOLD GARBAGE: Solid waste comprising of garbage and rubbish such as
bottles, cans, clothing, compost, disposables, food packaging, food scraps,
newspapers and magazines that originate from private homes or apartments.
PUBLIC RECEPTACLES: City owned and approved containers that are placed on City
facilities and parks to be used by the public for disposal of plastic, paper,
glass bottles, food containers, aluminum cans, and other similar items that are
used while at the facility.
REFUSE: All solid wastes including garbage, home improvement waste and yard
debris.
RESIDENCE: A living space individually rented, leased or owned.
ROLL-OFF CONTAINER: Containers larger than eight (8) cubic yards used to
dispose of waste.
YARD DEBRIS: Tree limbs, branches, leaves, grass, clippings of woody or fleshy
plants. (Ord. 750, 4-17-2018)
17-502: ACCUMULATION OF GARBAGE, HOME IMPROVEMENT WASTE AND YARD DEBRIS, NO
OPEN BURNING:
   A.   It is the duty of every person, firm or corporation owning, managing,
operating, leasing or renting any premises or any place where refuse or garbage
accumulates to provide portable container or containers for refuse.
      1.   Containers shall have tight-fitting lids, and lids shall not be
removed except when depositing or removing the contents of the container.
      2.   Containers shall be of sufficient capacity and in sufficient number
to accommodate and securely keep all the refuse that may accumulate between
collections.
      3.   All containers shall be kept clean and free from the accumulation of
any substance remaining attached to the inside of the container which would
attract flies, mosquitoes or any other insects.
      4.   Grounds immediately around the containers shall be kept in a safe
and sanitary condition at all times.
      5.   Each container shall be no more than thirty three (33) gallons or
45- to 96-gallon poly cart; container and contents shall not exceed seventy
(70) pounds, except where dumpsters are in use.
   B.   There shall be no open burning on premises. (Ord. 750, 4-17-2018)
17-503: COLLECTION OF GARBAGE AND RUBBISH:
   A.   The City or its authorized representative shall collect garbage and
rubbish from the residential areas of the City, from the designated business
routes and all food establishments in the City on schedule as the Council may
adopt or in accordance with the schedule of any private contractor. It is the
duty of any person in possession or control of any premises to place all
refuse, garbage or rubbish in a location easily accessible to the collector as
directed by the Health Officer, and where collectors can obtain the same
without going into buildings, garages, locked gates or fenced yards with dogs.
   B.   The places having rubble and excessive accumulations of garbage and
rubbish, such as, but not limited to, killing and dressing plants for fowl,
shall be included for minimum or nominal service, the option resting with the
private contractors, and such accumulations shall then be removed and disposed
of at the expense of the owner or person having same in charge.
   C.   Carcasses of animals such as cows, horses and mules, shall be removed
and disposed of at the expense of the owner or person having same in charge and
by the method directed by the City Health Officer.
   D.   Heavy accumulations such as brush, broken concrete, ashes, sand or
gravel, automobile frames, dead trees and other bulky, heavy materials shall be
disposed of at the expense of the owner or person controlling same under the
direction of the City Health Officer.
   E.   Manure from cow lots, horse stables, poultry yards, pigeon lofts, and
other animal or fowl pens, and waste oils from garages or filling stations or
materials considered hazardous or dangerous, shall be removed and disposed of
at the expense of the person controlling same in the manner and by the method
directed by the City Health Officer.
   F.   The placing of garbage or rubbish or any refuse material in any street
or alley within the City limits or the disposal of such refuse at any place
within the City limits, except at the City disposal ground, or at such other
place as may be directed by the City Health Officer, is prohibited.
   G.   The meddling with refuse containers or in any way pilfering, scattering
contents, or junking in any alley or street within the City limits is
prohibited.
   H.   All ordinary accumulations of rubbish such as tree limbs, paper boxes
and scrap lumber which cannot be conveniently placed in the containers required
under this chapter shall be gathered together and baled, tied or sacked in
compact bundles, weighing no more than fifty (50) pounds, and placed in a
location easily accessible to the collector. (Prior Code §§ 9-2, 9-3)
17-504: DISPOSAL:
   A.   Household garbage shall be bagged and placed by residents in approved
containers for curbside collection, unless otherwise allowed for in this
chapter. The City of Grove or their private contractor shall deliver all solid
waste collected to a licensed solid waste facility or recycling facility.
   B.   Grass clippings and leaves shall be bagged, other yard debris and home
improvement waste too large to conveniently place in containers shall be
bundled and tied with degradable string or twine and shall not exceed four
inches (4") in diameter and four feet (4') in length and shall not weigh more
than fifty (50) pounds.
   C.   A combination of household garbage, yard debris and home improvement
waste shall not exceed one hundred ninety (190) gallons per household per week.
   D.   The City of Grove shall provide trash can receptacles for public use at
City owned facilities and parks. The trash can receptacles may be used by the
public for the disposal of waste materials such as paper, plastic, food
containers, glass bottles and aluminum cans.
   E.   Disposing or dumping of waste material, garbage, refuse, rubbish and/or
rubble into dumpsters located on City property shall be prohibited; dumpsters
shall be used for the City of Grove by City employees only. (Ord. 750, 4-17-
2018)
17-505: FEES:
   There shall be charged, assessed, and collected from each residential unit
and commercial unit within the City limits a monthly amount as set by the City
Council by ordinance or resolution. A copy of the current fees in effect shall
be kept in the City Clerk's office.
   However, this charge shall not apply to residential units where the
occupant's rent includes payment for the services covered by this fee, as
verified by a lease agreement or other documentation acceptable to the City.
This exemption is intended to prevent double charging for services already paid
for through rent. Persons aggrieved pursuant to this section may appeal to the
City Council.
(Ord. 352, 9-17-1991; amd. Ord. 865, 7-1-2025)
17-506: DUTY TO REQUEST GARBAGE SERVICE; DUTY TO USE THE CITY'S PRIVATE
CONTRACTOR; OTHER GARBAGE/REFUSE COLLECTION SERVICES PROHIBITED:
   A.   To assist in maintaining the general sanitation of the City, every
person occupying or having control of the occupancy of any premises located on
a regularly established garbage route shall notify the City Garbage Department
at the beginning of such occupancy and shall request, accept and use the City
or its private contractor's garbage pick up and collection service.
The failure of any owner, rental agent or occupant of such premises to make
such request shall not prevent nor in any manner impair or impede the City from
adding that person's name to the garbage collection records and providing such
service and otherwise enforcing by appropriate action the regulatory measures
herein prescribed and causing the fees or charges therefor to be paid.
   B.   Vendors or contractors that do not have a contract with the City for
garbage and refuse collection services are prohibited from providing such
services within the corporate limits. (Ord. 721, 5-3-2016)
17-507: CHARGES TO BE ON UTILITY BILL:
All bills for garbage or sanitation service charges shall be included on Grove
Municipal Services Authority (GMSA) Utility bills and no payment shall be
accepted by the GMSA Utility Department, except for the full amount billed for
all services, and delinquent refuse bills shall carry the due dates, grace
periods and penalties as other Utility Bills. (Prior Code § 9-8; amd. Ord. 860,
4-1-2025)
17-508: INSPECTIONS:
It is the duty of the City Health Officer or his authorized agent to make all
necessary inspections and investigations of any and all premises to see that
the terms of this chapter are complied with. (Prior Code § 9-5)
17-509: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter, or
who violates, refuses or neglects to carry out any reasonable order made by
City police, pursuant to this chapter, shall upon conviction thereof, be
punished by fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day, plus
court costs. Each day or any portion of a day during which a violation of this
chapter shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 662, 4-2-
2013)
PART 18
MEDICAL MARIJUANA
CHAPTER 1
MEDICAL MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION:
18-101: Definition
18-102: Occupation Tax Levied; License To Be Issued
18-103: Location Restrictions
18-104: Conditions Of Operation
18-105: Disposal Of Medical Marijuana Waste
18-106: Smoking Of Marijuana In Public Is prohibited; Public Nuisance
18-107: Penalty
18-108: Revocation Of License
18-101: DEFINITION:
                                       A business license issued by the
                                       Oklahoma Medical Marijuana Authority,
                                       which shall include the following
                                       categories:
                                       Commercial Grower: An entity licensed to
                                       cultivate, prepare and package medical
                                       marijuana and transfer or contract for
                                       transfer medical marijuana to a medical
                                       marijuana dispensary, medical marijuana
                                       processor, any other medical marijuana
                                       commercial grower, medical marijuana
                                       research facility, medical marijuana
                                       education facility and pesticide
                                       manufacturers. A commercial grower may
                                       sell seeds, flower or clones to
                                       commercial growers. Growers shall not
                                       sell directly to consumers.
                                       Dispensary: A person or entity that has
                                       been licensed to purchase medical
                                       marijuana or medical marijuana products
BUSINESS LICENSE, MEDICAL MARIJUANA:   from a Licensed Medical Marijuana
                                       Commercial Grower or Processor and sell
                                       medical marijuana or medical marijuana
                                       products to licensed patients and
                                       caregivers as defined herein, or to sell
                                       or transfer products to another
                                       dispensary.
                                       Processor: A person or entity that has
                                       been licensed to operate a business
                                       including the production, manufacture,
                                       extraction, processing, packaging or
                                       creation of concentrate, medical
                                       marijuana infused products or medical
                                       marijuana products.
                                       Testing Laboratory: A public or private
                                       laboratory licensed to conduct testing
                                       and research on medical marijuana and
                                       medical marijuana product.
                                       Transporter: A person or entity that is
                                       licensed to transport, distribute and
                                       store medical marijuana.
                                       A person who has been issued a
CAREGIVER:                             Caregivers Medical Marijuana License by
                                       the Oklahoma Medical Marijuana
                                       Authority.
GROWING FACILITY FOR PERSONAL USE,     The residence of a licensed patient as
MEDICAL MARIJUANA:                     defined herein where marijuana is grown
                                       for personal use.
                                       A person who has been issued a Medical
LICENSED PATIENT:                      Marijuana License by the Oklahoma
                                       Medical Marijuana Authority.
                                       A person or entity that has been
                                       licensed by the Oklahoma Medical
                                       Marijuana Authority to operate a
                                       facility providing training and
                                       education to individuals involving the
EDUCATION FACILITY, MEDICAL MARIJUANA: cultivation, growing, harvesting,
                                       curing, preparing, packaging or testing
                                       of medical marijuana, or the production,
                                       manufacture, extraction, processing,
                                       packaging or creation of medical-
                                       marijuana-infused products or medical
                                       marijuana products.
                                       A person or entity approved by the
RESEARCH FACILITY, MEDICAL MARIJUANA:  Oklahoma Medical Marijuana Authority to
                                       conduct medical marijuana research.
                                       Unused, surplus, returned, or out-of-
                                       date marijuana and plant debris of the
WASTE, MEDICAL MARIJUANA:              plant of the genus Cannabis, including
                                       dead plants and all used plant parts,
                                       shall not include roots, stems, stalks
                                       and fan leaves.
                                       The final disposition of medical
                                       marijuana waste by either a process
WASTE DISPOSAL, MEDICAL MARIJUANA:     which renders the waste unusable through
                                       physical destruction or a recycling
                                       process.
                                       A site and facility determined by the
                                       Oklahoma Medical Marijuana Authority to
                                       be physically and technically suitable
WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY, MEDICAL       for disposing of medical marijuana
MARIJUANA:                             waste. Said facility must be operated by
                                       a person or entity that has been issued
                                       a Waste Disposal License from the
                                       Oklahoma Medical Marijuana Authority.
                                       A license issued by the Oklahoma Medical
WASTE DISPOSAL LICENSE, MEDICAL        Marijuana Authority authorizing a person
MARIJUANA:                             or entity to possess, transport and
                                       dispose of medical marijuana waste.
                                       (Ord. 773, 8-6-2019)
 
18-102: OCCUPATION TAX LEVIED; LICENSE TO BE ISSUED:
   A.   There is hereby levied and assessed an annual occupation tax on all
commercial Medical Marijuana Establishments as specifically enumerated herein
and the amount herein stated:
 
Medical Marijuana Dispensary              $600.00
Medical Marijuana Grower                  $600.00
Medical Marijuana Processor               $600.00
Medical Marijuana Testing Laboratory      $600.00
Medical Marijuana Transporter             $600.00
Medical Marijuana Education Facility      $600.00
Medical Marijuana Waste Disposal Facility $1,200.00
 
   The occupation tax subject to this chapter shall be prorated on a monthly
basis for the year in which an occupation begins operations. The amount of the
occupation tax is subject to change upon Council action.
   B.   Any state licensee originally entering upon any occupation herein
listed shall pay the tax therefor at the office of the city clerk on or before
the date upon which he enters upon such occupation. The licensee shall provide
a copy of his current state license before payment of an occupation tax will be
accepted. Thereafter, the licensee shall pay the tax annually on or before July
1.
   C.   All marijuana-licensed premises, Medical Marijuana Businesses or any
other premises where marijuana or its by-products are licensed to be
cultivated, grown, processed, stored or manufactured shall obtain a Certificate
of Compliance from the City Clerk certifying compliance with applicable
provisions as described in the most recent versions of the Oklahoma Uniform
Building Code, the International Building Code, the International Fire Code,
city zoning regulations and city codes. The Certificate of Compliance must be
sealed with the City of Grove embossed seal to be official.
   There is hereby established a Certificate of Occupancy Fee in the amount of
$100.00, and is subject to change upon Council action.
   D.   Upon payment of the occupation tax and finding the premise is compliant
with all applicable zoning ordinances building, fire, safety and health codes,
the city shall issue a receipt to the state licensee, which the licensee shall
post in a conspicuous place on the premises where he carries on his occupation.
   E.   Any person who engages in any of the occupations taxed by this chapter
without paying the occupation tax imposed and without having a valid license
issued by the city clerk prior to such operation, is guilty of an offense
against the city, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined the sum of not
more than five hundred dollars ($500) including costs and penalties, if any.
Each day of such violation shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 773, 8-6-
2019)
18-103: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Medical Marijuana Dispensary: Medical marijuana dispensary will be
allowed within C-3 Highway Commercial and Commercial Recreation Zoned Districts
and shall be prohibited from locating in any other zoning districts; and shall
be prohibited from locating within one thousand feet (1,000') of any entrance
of a private or public pre-school, elementary school, middle school or high
school.
   The distance requirements shall be computed by direct measurement in a
straight line from entrance to a school listed above to the nearest property
line on which the medical marijuana dispensary is located.
   B.   Marijuana Growing Facility for Personal Medical Use: All medical
marijuana for personal use will be allowed to be grown only on the primary
residence of the licensee, and shall be prohibited from all other locations. If
a primary residence is on rented real property, licensee must provide written
permission from the property owner authorizing the growth of medical marijuana
on said premise.
   C.   Medical Marijuana Commercial Grower: Medical marijuana commercial
grower will be allowed within Industrial Zoned Districts and shall be
prohibited from locating in any other zoning district.
   D.   Medical Marijuana Education Facility will be allowed in Industrial
Zoned Districts and shall be prohibited from locating in any other zoning
district.
   E.   Medical Marijuana Processor will be allowed in Industrial Zoned
Districts and shall be prohibited from locating in any other zoning districts.
   F.   Medical Marijuana Testing Laboratory will be allowed in Industrial
Zoned Districts and shall be prohibited from locating in any other zoning
district.
   G.   Medical Marijuana Transporter will be allowed in Industrial Zoned
Districts and shall be prohibited from locating in any other zoning districts.
   H.   Medical Marijuana Waste Facility will be allowed in Industrial Zoned
Districts and shall be prohibited from locating in any other zoning district;
AND shall be prohibited from locating within one thousand feet (1,000') of any
entrance of a private or public pre-school, elementary school, middle school,
or high school.
   The distance requirements shall be computed by direct measurement in a
straight line from entrance to a school listed above to the nearest property
line on which the medical marijuana disposal facility is located. (Ord. 773, 8-
6-2019; amd. Ord. 784, 1-21-2020)
18-104: CONDITIONS OF OPERATION:
   A.   Medical Marijuana Establishments shall comply with Oklahoma State law,
Oklahoma Medical Marijuana Authority and Oklahoma Department of Health rules
and regulations.
   B.   Medical Marijuana Establishments shall implement appropriate security
measure to deter and prevent unauthorized entrance and theft/diversion of
marijuana, including during transit. (OAC 310:6 81-6-1)
   C.   Buildings where marijuana is stored or dispensed must be equipped with
ventilation/air filtration systems so that no odors are detectable off
premises.
   D.   The Medical Marijuana Dispensary must collect the city sales tax of
three and fourth tenths (3.4) percent on all sales.
   E.   All marijuana grown for personal medical use must be grown so that the
marijuana is not accessible to a member of the general public and is only
accessible to the licensee or caregiver. If grown outdoors, it must be grown
behind an opaque fence that is at least six feet (6') in height. The marijuana
plants must be completely enclosed by the fence and the fence must be secured
with a lock and key. No marijuana plants may be visible from any street
adjacent to the property.
      1.   It shall be prohibited to process marijuana for personal medical use
in a residential district by operating extraction equipment or utilizing an
extraction process if the equipment or process utilizes butane, propane, carbon
dioxide or any potentially hazardous material. (Ord. 773, 8-6-2019)
18-105: DISPOSAL OF MEDICAL MARIJUANA WASTE:
   A.   Medical Marijuana businesses , research facilities and educational
facilities as defined herein shall be authorized to destroy the following
marijuana plant parts without being required to utilize the services of a
Medical Marijuana Waste Disposal Facility:
      1.   Root balls;
      2.   Stems;
      3.   Fan leaves, and
      4.   Seeds
   These listed marijuana plant parts shall be destroyed on-site by burying,
mulching, composting or any other technique approved by the Department of
Environmental Quality. It shall be prohibited to destroy the listed marijuana
plant parts by open burning or incineration. (Ord. 773, 8-6-2019)
18-106: SMOKING OF MARIJUANA IN PUBLIC IS PROHIBITED; PUBLIC NUISANCE:
   A.   Smoking of marijuana is prohibited in public. Restrictions on smokable
medical marijuana and medical marijuana products All smokable, vaporized,
vapable and e-cigarette medical marijuana and medical marijuana products smoked
by a patient license holder is subject to the same restrictions for tobacco
under Section 1-1521 et. seq. of Title 63 of Oklahoma statutes, commonly
referred to as the “Smoking in Public Places and Indoor Workplaces Act.”
   B.   Smoking or using marijuana shall be prohibited on all city property
including vehicles, buildings, parks and other facilities.
   C.   The smell or noxious odor emitted from smoking or consumption of
marijuana by a person possessing a valid state issued medical marijuana license
shall be treated as a public nuisance.
   D.   It is the intent of the City of Grove that nothing in the Medical
Marijuana Establishment Ordinance be construed to:
      1.   Allow persons to engage in conduct that endangers or causes a public
nuisances;
      2.   Allow the use of marijuana for non-medical purposes;
      3.   Allow any activity that is otherwise illegal and not permitted by
state law. (Ord. 773, 8-6-2019)
18-107: PENALTY:
   A.   Failure to Comply. Any person, firm or corporation who engages in any
business, profession, trade or occupation, or exercises any privilege, for
which a license or permit is required by this Ordinance without a valid license
or permit as hereby required, or who otherwise violates any provisions of this
Ordinance, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction, punished by a
fines not to exceed five-hundred dollars ($500.00), plus court costs and
penalties, if any. Each day of such violation shall constitute a separate
offense. (Ord. 773, 8-6-2019)
18-108: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   A.   Any violations of this section will result in the revocation of a
Medical Marijuana Establishment License. (Ord. 773, 8-6-2019)
GROVE ORDINANCE TABLE
Ord. No. Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.  Date           Subject          Disposition
                         Grove Municipal
         1-3-1960       Airport          App. 4
                         Authority.
         11-6-1974      Electric         App. 1
                         franchise.
          5-20-1975 & 9- Regulations for
186A      7-1976         cablevision      App. 2
                         company.
194       7-15-1975      Contractors'     5-1002–5-1003
                         licensing.
204                     Adoption of       
                         codification.
                         Regulate use of
205       9-7-1975       Municipal        16-101; 16-103–16-111
                         airport.
206       9-16-1975      Bird sanctuary.  4-201–4-204
207       10-7-1975      Emergency        15-211
                         vehicles.
208                     Cutting streets. Superseded
                         Flood hazard
209       1-6-1976       districts        Superseded
                         established and
                         maps adopted.
                         Leasing of
210       3-2-1976       Municipal        16-112
                         airport
                         properties.
                         Amends Chapter
211       5-4-1976       2, alcoholic     3-302; 3-305
                         beverages.
                         Amends Chapter
212                     5, occupation    Superseded
                         tax.
                         Vacate portion
213       9-21-1976      of Rogers        Special
                         Addition.
214                     Water            Special
                         regulation.
215       1-3-1978       Taxicab          App. 5
                         franchise.
216       8-2-1977       Annexation -     Special
                         Shangri-la.
217       1-3-1978       Alley vacation.  Special
218       5-16-1978      Close Mark       Special
                         Avenue.
                         Creation of
                         board of
220       10-3-1978      commissioners    11-201–11-211
                         for Grove
                         Springs Park.
                         Amends hours of
221       11-21-1978     operation of     3-304
                         private clubs.
                         Shoplifting -
222       3-6-1979       definitions;     10-216–10-218
                         arrest;
                         detention.
                         Meeting or
223       3-6-1979       overtaking       15-514
                         school buses.
                         Extend City
                         limits, Quail
224       3-20-1979      Run, Whispering  Special
                         Hills and Beacon
                         Point.
225       4-17-1979      Sales tax        7-201
                         increase.
                         Amends
226       5-15-1979      installation     App. 2
                         charges for
                         cable.
                         Amends cleaning
227       8-21-1979      and mowing of    8-102–8-106
                         property.
                         Prohibiting
                         trespass on
228       9-19-1979      premises or      10-213
                         property of
                         another.
                         Construction of
229       10-2-1979      buildings must   5-801
                         comply with BOCA
                         standards.
                         Permits for
230       10-16-1979     alteration or    Superseded
                         change of City
                         streets.
                         Authorizing
                         Grove Municipal
231       11-6-1979      Authority to     Special
                         incur an
                         indebtedness.
                         Amends rates
232       2-19-1980      charged by       App. 5
                         taxicabs.
                         Permits for
233                     alteration or    Superseded
                         change of City
                         streets.
                         Charges for
234       5-6-1980       water; sewer     Special
                         service; refuse.
                         Airport zoning;
235       6-17-1980      purpose of       12-201–12-205; 12-401
                         zoning
                         ordinance.
                         Defining local,
236       6-17-1980      collector and    14-201–14-204
                         arterial
                         streets.
                         Admission of
237       7-1-1980       persons to "X"   9-401–9-405
                         or "R" movies.
238       8-5-1980       Relating to      17-301–17-305
                         water shortages.
                         Tax on
                         businesses
239       8-5-1980       furnishing       7-302–7-305
                         power, light or
                         electricity.
                         Annexing
240       8-19-1980      Cherokee Grand   Special
                         Estates.
                         Provide equal
241       11-4-1980      access to        5-901–5-908
                         housing.
                         Amend permits
242       11-4-1980      issued for       5-103
                         construction.
                         Add to Flood
243       1-6-1981       Hazard           12-501–12-512; 12-514
                         Ordinance.
                         Regulations for
244       2-17-1981      subdivisions of  12-301–12-303
                         land.
                         Additional 1%
245       2-19-1981      sales tax for 2  7-201
                         months.
                         Election to
246       2-19-1981      approve or       Special
                         disapprove Ord.
                         245.
                         Authorize
                         Municipal
247       2-19-1981      Services         Special
                         Authority to
                         incur $60,000
                         indebtedness.
248       4-21-1981      Limitation of    13-111
                         open burning.
                         Qualifications
249       4-21-1981      for Board of     12-201
                         Adjustment
                         members.
                         Annexation -
                         Sections 5, 6,
                         7, 8 and 17,
250       5-19-1981      portions of      Special
                         Parkview and
                         Honey Creek
                         Terrace.
                         Traffic
251       6-2-1981       Violations       6-121
                         Bureau.
                         Restrictions of
                         commercial
252       6-2-1981       vehicles parked  15-719
                         in residential
                         districts.
                         Sanitation
253       7-21-1981      services fee to  Special
                         residents.
254       9-15-1981      Occupation tax.  9-101
                         Creation of
255       10-20-1981     Economic         12-601–12-604
                         Development
                         Commission.
256       11-3-1981      Assess sales     7-201–7-226
                         tax.
                         Election to
257       11-3-1981      approve or       Special
                         disapprove Ord.
                         256.
                         Authorize
                         Municipal
258       11-3-1981      Services         Special
                         Authority to
                         incur
                         indebtedness.
259       11-17-1981     Establishing     11-301–11-313
                         library service.
                         Fees for
260       12-1-1981      alterations to   14-301–14-303
                         City streets.
                         Amend Chapter 4,
261       1-5-1982       Article 11, Sec. 5-208
                         4-17 issuing
                         licenses.
                         Amend Chapter
262       2-16-1982      12, Article 1;   6-120
                         bail procedures.
263       2-16-1982      Annexing all of  Special
                         Lot 1, Sec. 5.
                         Amend running of
264       2-16-1982      childcare        Special
                         centers.
265       4-20-1982      Amending Ord.     
                         226.
                         Driving while
266       5-4-1982       under the        15-526
                         influence of
                         drugs.
                         Marijuana and
267 & 268 5-4-1982       controlled       10-404
                         dangerous drugs
                         prohibited.
                         Specific rules
                         adopted by
269       5-18-1982      Airport          16-102
                         Management
                         Authority;
                         penalty.
                         Drug
270       5-18-1982      paraphernalia    10-405
                         prohibited.
                         Use of public
271       6-1-1982       sewers required, 17-402
                         unauthorized
                         disposal.
272       6-1-1982       Sewer rates and  17-411
                         charges.
                         Providing
                         charges for
273       6-1-1982       water; sewer     Special
                         service; refuse
                         service.
                         Creation of
274       6-15-1982      board of         11-501–11-507
                         commission.
                         Providing
                         charges for
275       7-27-1982      water service;   Special
                         sewer service;
                         refuse service.
                         Annexation of
276                     territory to     Special
                         City.
                         Amendment to
277                     Zoning           Special
                         Ordinance.
                         Annexation of
278                     territory to     Special
                         City.
                         Vacating and
279                     closing an       Special
                         alley.
                         Annexation of
280                     territory to     Special
                         City.
                         Annexation of
281                     territory to     Special
                         City.
                         Handicapped
                         parking,
282       4-19-1983      enforcement on   15-726
                         public or
                         private
                         property.
                         Amend Sec. 4-
283                     7 of prior code  5-301
                         on building code
                         (delete 4-7b).
                         Insurance or
284       8-2-1983       certificate      15-228
                         required for
                         motor vehicle.
285       9-6-1983       Word number and  1-202
                         boundaries.
286       12-20-1983     Adopting code of Special
                         ordinances.
                         Authorizing
287       2-21-1984      Cable TV to use  App. 2
                         poles, wires and
                         cables.
288       2-21-1984      Vacating street. Special
                         Establishing law
289       2-21-1984      enforcement      6-136
                         officers
                         training fund.
                         Amending fines,  1-108, 3-213, 5-105, 5-212, 5-908,
290       2-21-1984      costs and        5-1101, 6-128, 6-134, 8-118, 9-204,
                         imprisonment.    9-405, 9-501, 11-103, 12-701, 15-
                                          308, 15-1402, 17-305, 17-413, 17-509
291       4-3-1984       Annexing.        Special
292       6-6-1989       Deleting Sec. 9- 9-601 et seq.
                         606.
                         Amending Part 9
292       4-3-1984       regarding        9-601 et seq.
                         peddlers.
                         Regional
293       6-5-1984       Planning         12-120–12-127
                         Commission
                         created.
294       7-17-1984      Annexing.        Special
                         Regulations for
295       7-17-1984      use of Grove     App. 4
                         Municipal
                         Airport.
296       8-7-1984       Annexing.        Special
297       9-18-1984      Weeds and trash. 8-118.1
298       11-6-1984      Vacating street  Special
                         and alley.
299       1-21-1985      Annexing.        Special
                         Amending Ord.
                         275 regulating
300       2-5-1985       charges for      Special
                         water, sewer,
                         refuse, natural
                         gas.
301       3-19-1985      Annexing.        Special
                         Creating         11-110–11-119; 11-203, 11-204, 11-
302       6-4-1985       Recreational     207
                         Commission.
303       6-4-1985       Term of judge.   6-105
                         Defining gross
                         receipts
304       6-18-1985      relating to      7-202
                         liquor by the
                         drink.
305       6-24-1985      Amending         3-101, 3-102, 3-104, 3-104.1, 3-301
                         occupation tax.  et seq.
306       9-3-1985       Vacating street. Special
307       9-27-1985      Annexing.        Special
                         Adopting
308       11-5-1985      Comprehensive    12-202
                         Plan.
                         Amending Ord.
                         275 regarding
309       11-5-1985      charges for      Special
                         water, sewer and
                         natural gas.
                         Revision of
                         zoning and
310       11-19-1985     Zoning Map and   12-201
                         creating Board
                         of Adjustment.
                         Adopting
311       11-19-1985     subdivision      12-301
                         regulations.
                         Endorsing
                         subdivision
                         regulations
312       11-19-1985     adopted by Grove 12-302
                         Regional
                         Planning
                         Commission.
313       1-21-1986      Annexing.        Special
314       2-18-1986      Annexing.        Special
315       3-18-1986      Vacating alley.  Special
316       4-1-1986       Annexing.        Special
--        4-1986         Restricting open 13-111
                         burning.
                         Adoption of Fire
317       6-3-1986       Prevention Code  13-101, 13-112
                         (BOCA Basic
                         National).
                         Amending Part 4,
318       6-1-1986       Chapter 1,       4-101, 4-107–4-121
                         regarding
                         animals.
319       8-19-1986      Annexing.        Special
                         Adding new
                         sections
320       8-19-1986      regarding        17-412, 17-413
                         defective
                         building sewers
                         and penalties.
321       8-19-1986      Annexing.        Special
                         Electrical
322       9-16-1986      wiring to be     5-502
                         enclosed in
                         conduit.
323       9-16-1986      Annexing.        Special
                         Request for
324       10-21-1986     annexation or    Special
                         rezoning fee.
                         (Chapter 10)
                         Regarding kennel
                         and pet shop
325       12-2-1986      license; public  4-107, 4-113, 4-114
                         nuisance and
                         injured animals.
                         Public nuisance
326       6-16-1987      regarding number 4-113
                         of animals.
                         Licensed
                         contractors'
327       6-16-1987      liability        5-210
                         insurance and
                         workers'
                         compensation.
                         Regarding signs;
                         adding
328       8-18-1987      subsection to    Special
                         Chapter 5, Sec.
                         5-8.
329                                      
                         Child passenger
330       11-3-1987      system in motor  15-559
                         vehicles.
331       2-2-1988       Defective        17-412
                         building sewers.
                         Deleting Sec. 5-
                         206, 5-207 and
                         5-209 regarding
332       6-7-1988       licensed         5-206, 5-207, 5-209, 5-210
                         contractors;
                         insurance for
                         contractors.
                         Flex-duct length
333       6-7-1988       and banning of   5-303
                         fiberglass duct
                         board.
                         New Sec. 6-120
334       7-5-1988       regarding arrest 6-120, 6-125, 6-134
                         and bail.
                         Amendment to
                         Declaration of
335       10-4-1988      Trust for Grove  App. 7
                         Municipal
                         Services
                         Authority.
                         Acceptance of
         10-4-1988      beneficial       App. 7
                         interest in
                         trust of GMSA.
                         Litter; reward
336       1-3-1989       for evidence or  14-106, 14-106.1
                         arrest and
                         conviction.
                         CATV system
337       --1989         permit to        App. 2
                         Mission Cable,
                         L.P.
338       5-16-1989      Garage sales.    9-701 et seq.
         6-6-1989       See Ord. 292.     
                         Fee for fire
339       7-5-1989       service outside  13-214
                         City limits.
                         Churches and
                         nonprofit
340       8-1-1989       organization     9-702
                         exempt from
                         license fee.
341       9-19-1989      Deannexing.      Special
                         Amending Ord.
                         309 regarding
342       10-17-1989     charges for      Special
                         water, sewer and
                         natural gas.
                         Regulations
343       11-21-1989     regarding        10-308
                         firearms.
                         Fingerprinting
344       8-21-1990      fee added to     6-136
                         court costs.
                         Required
345       8-21-1990      connection to    17-106
                         water system.
                         Police
                         Department
346       11-20-1990     assistance to    13-403–13-406
                         other
                         communities and
                         reimbursement.
                         Emergency
348       4-16-1991      telephone        Part 7, Ch. 6
                         service tax.
349       8-6-1991       Use of           15-207, 15-1102, 15-1110
                         skateboards.
351       9-3-1991       Cable franchise. App. 2
352       9-17-1991      Refuse           17-505
                         collection fees.
354       12-3-1991      Animal           Part 4, Chs. 1 and 2.
                         regulations.
355       1-7-1992       Water and gas    Special
                         fees.
                         Amendment to
356       5-19-1992      Zoning           Special
                         Ordinance.
                         Economic
357       6-16-1992      Development and  Part 12, Ch. 6
                         Tourism
                         Commission.
358       10-20-1992     Water, sewer and Special
                         gas fees.
375       6-7-1994       Time limit for   15-704
                         parking.
379       10-18-1994     Water and sewer  Special
                         fees.
380       11-1-1994      Building code    5-301
                         adoption.
381       3-21-1995      Building code    5-303
                         revisions.
384       6-6-1995       Excise tax.      Part 7, Ch. 5
390       10-17-1995     Unclaimed        Part 13, Ch. 5
                         property.
400       3-5-1996       Water and sewer  Special
                         fees.
402       10-1-1996      Building code    5-301
                         adoption.
                         Possession;
405       12-17-1996     transportation   10-402
                         of intoxicating
                         beverages.
406       12-17-1996     Prosecution of   Part 6, Ch. 2
                         minors.
                         Vehicle sound
415       7-1-1997       amplification    10-309
                         systems.
                         Amendment to
416       7-1-1997       zoning           Special
                         ordinance.
                         Amendment to
418       9-2-1997       zoning           Special
                         ordinance.
                         Amendment to
419       9-2-1997       zoning           Special
                         ordinance.
422       11-18-1997     Water and sewer  Special
                         fees.
                         Amendment to
428       5-5-1998       zoning           Special
                         ordinance.
                         Electric
430       9-16-1998      franchise,       App. 1
                         Public Service
                         Company.
432       10-6-1998      Library          Part 11, Ch. 3
                         services.
                         Peddlers,
438       4-6-1999       solicitors, and  Part 9, Ch. 6
                         outdoor sellers.
                         Amendment to
441       7-20-1999      zoning           Special
                         ordinance.
                         City owned all
443       8-17-1999      terrain          15-217
                         vehicles.
                         Amendment to
446       12-7-1999      zoning           Special
                         ordinance.
                         Unauthorized use
450       1-18-2000      of cable TV      10-219, 10-220
                         services.
                         Amendment to
451       2-22-2000      zoning           Special
                         ordinance.
                                        
452       5-16-2000      Occupation tax.  3-102A,B,G, 9-101
453       5-16-2000      Court costs,     1-108C
                         fines.
                                          1-108A, 3-213A, 4-111F, 4-122A, 5-
                         Amending penalty 908A, 6-128A, 6-134A, 8-118A, 9-
454       5-16-2000      provisions.      204A, 9-405A, 9-501A, 11-103A, 14-
                                          113A, 15-1402, 17-305A, 17-413B, 17-
                                          509A
                         Fee for fire
456       6-6-2000       service outside  13-214
                         city limits.
457       6-6-2000       Mechanical code. Part 5, Ch. 5A
459       6-6-2000       Building         5-104
                         permits.
                         Amendment to
460       6-20-2000      zoning           Special
                         ordinance.
                         Amendment to
461       6-20-2000      zoning           Special
                         ordinance.
463       7-5-2000       Trespassing      10-213C
                         prohibited.
467       8-15-2000      Water and sewer  Special
                         fees.
469       11-7-2000      Amendment to     5-301, 5-302
                         building code.
470       11-7-2000      Repeal           Part 5, Ch. 5A
                         mechanical code.
                         Plumbing and
471       11-7-2000      mechanical       Part 5, Ch. 4
                         codes.
472       11-7-2000      Residential      Part 5, Ch. 8
                         code.
473       11-21-2000     Annexation.      Special
474       12-5-2000      Sales tax        7-201B
                         amendments.
475       12-5-2000      Rezone.          Special
476       1-2-2001       Rezone.          Special
                         Readopt airport
477       3-20-2001      zoning           12-401
                         ordinance.
478       5-15-2001      Street vacation. Special
479       6-19-2001      Rezone.          Special
480       7-17-2001      Rezone.          Special
                         Amending zoning
481       9-18-2001      ordinance -      Special
                         signs.
                         Building sewers
482       10-16-2001     and connections, 17-404E
                         and cleanouts.
483       10-16-2001     Penalty          6-136E
                         assessment, fee.
                         Additions and
484       11-6-2001      changes to       5-302E
                         building code.
486       4-2-2002       Annexation.      Special
                         Amendment to
487       4-2-2002       zoning           Special
                         ordinance.
                         Amendment to
488       4-2-2002       zoning           Special
                         ordinance.
489       6-18-2002      Annexation.      Special
490       6-18-2002      Annexation.      Special
                         Amendment to
491       6-18-2002      zoning           Special
                         ordinance.
492       7-2-2002       Water, sewer and Special
                         gas fees.
493       8-8-2002       Rezone.          Special
494       8-20-2002      Vacating alley.  Special
496       10-1-2002      Destruction of   2-801
                         records.
497       11-5-2002      Annexation.      Special
                         Readopt airport
498       11-5-2002      zoning           12-401
                         ordinance.
499       12-17-2002     Rezone.          Special
500       12-17-2002     Rezone.          Special
501       12-17-2002     Vacating alley.  Special
                         Community
502       1-28-2003      development      Special
                         block grant.
503       4-15-2003      Flood damage     12-501–12-517
                         prevention.
504       9-2-2003       Rezone.          Special
505       9-2-2003       Health and       Part 8, Chs. 1–4
                         sanitation.
506       10-7-2003      Rezone.          Special
                         Sale of surplus
507       10-7-2003      or obsolete      Part 2, Ch. 9, 7-106, 7-107
                         items.
                         Hazardous
508       11-4-2003      materials and    Part 8, Ch. 5
                         waste.
                                        
                         Minors in
509       11-18-2003     possession of    10-308D–G
                         firearms.
                         Parents and
                         other people
510       11-18-2003     causing          10-103, 10-104
                         delinquent
                         minors.
                         Unclaimed
                         property in
511       11-18-2003     possession of of 13-501
                         police
                         department.
512       2-17-2004      Annexation.      Special
513       3-2-2004       Rezone.          Special
514       3-2-2004       Rezone.          Special
515       3-16-2004      Rezone.          Special
516       5-4-2004       Rezone.          Special
517       5-18-2004      City treasurer.  2-402
                         Hospitals and
518       6-1-2004       ambulatory       Part 2, Ch. 10
                         surgical care
                         facilities.
519       7-6-2004       Court cost       6-136F
                         increase.
520       7-20-2004      Rezone.          Special
521       7-20-2004      Annexation.      Special
522       7-20-2004      Rezone.          Special
523       9-21-2004      Taxicabs.        Part 9, Ch. 8, App. 5
524       11-2-2004      AFIS fee         Special
                         increase.
                         Additions and
525       4-19-2005      changes to       5-302A
                         building code.
                         Water, sewer,
526       5-17-2005      natural gas and  Special
                         refuse fees.
527       7-19-2005      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
528       8-16-2005      Airport zoning   12-401
                         ordinance.
529       10-18-2005     Agricultural     4-118
                         animals.
530       11-1-2005      Annexation.      Special
531       11-1-2005      International    13-101, 13-102A, 13-103, 13-104, 13-
                         fire code.       105, 13-106, 13-109A
                         Floodplain
532       11-1-2005      administrator    12-509A
                         designation.
533       11-15-2005     Rezone.          Special
534       11-15-2005     Rezone.          Special
535       1-17-2006      Rezone.          Special
536       3-7-2006       Closing a        Special
                         street.
537       4-18-2006      Lease agreement. Special
538       5-16-2006      Lease agreement. Special
539       5-16-2006      Annexation.      Special
                         Possession or
                         use of tobacco
540       6-6-2006       products by      10-419
                         minors
                         prohibited.
541       11-21-2006     Rezone.          Special
                         Brakes creating
542       3-6-2007       excessive noise  15-229
                         prohibited.
543       3-20-2007      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
                         Obstruction of
544       4-3-2007       sidewalks,       14-104B 14-105B
                         streets, and
                         alleys.
                         When competitive
545       4-17-2007      bidding is not   7-105A1
                         required.
546       4-20-2007      Rezone.          Special
                         Closing to the
547       4-20-2007      public use       Special
                         certain right of
                         way easements.
                         Postponement of
                         scheduled rate
548       5-23-2007      increases for    Special
                         water, sewer,
                         natural gas
                         service.
                         Time of regular
549       1-15-2008      meetings of the  2-202
                         council.
                         Police
550       1-15-2008      department and   13-401
                         chief.
551       3-4-2008       Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
552       3-4-2008       Rezone.           
553       4-15-2008      Rezone.           
554       5-6-2008       Golf carts not   15-217D
                         owned by city.
555       5-20-2008      Rezone.           
556       6-3-2008       Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
557       6-17-2008      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
                         Charges and
                         deposits for
558       6-17-2008      water, sewer and Special
                         natural gas
                         services.
560       7-15-2008      Open burning.     
561       7-15-2008      Rezone.           
563       9-2-2008       Trash and weeds  8-201B,C,D
                         prohibited.
                         Residential
                         service entrance
564       9-16-2008      conductors;      5-503
                         disconnecting
                         means.
566       10-21-2008     Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
567       10-21-2008     Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
                         Hotel tax. (Not
568       11-4-2008      passed by        --
                         voters)
569       11-18-2008     Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
570       12-16-2008     Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
571       12-16-2008     Cemeteries.       
572       12-16-2008     Rezone.           
                         Sale of surplus
573       1-20-2009      or obsolete      Part 2, Ch. 9, Part 7, Ch. 1
                         items, and
                         purchasing.
574       1-20-2009      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
                         Purchasing
575       2-17-2009      procedures and   7-113F
                         approval
                         authorizations.
576       3-3-2009       Annexation.      Special
577       4-21-2009      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
578       4-21-2009      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
579       6-16-2009      Rezone.          Special
580       7-21-2009      Subdivision      Special
                         regulations.
581       7-21-2009      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
582       8-4-2009       Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
583       7-7-2009       Existing         Part 5, Ch. 12
                         building code.
                         Surplus
584       11-3-2009      property; open   7-106E, 7-108
                         market
                         purchases.
                         Court costs,
585       11-3-2009      fines, recovery  1-108C, 1-109
                         of fines.
586       11-17-2009     Hay harvesting.  8-202
                         Nuisance
587       11-17-2009     exemption for    8-103F
                         agricultural
                         activities.
588       12-15-2009     Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
589       12-15-2009     Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
590       1-5-2010       Rezone.          Special
591       1-5-2010       Contractor       5-103A
                         insurance.
592       1-19-2010      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
593       2-16-2010      Rezone.          Special
594       3-2-2010       Hay harvesting.  8-202
595       3-16-2010      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
596       3-16-2010      Subdivision      Special
                         regulations.
597       4-20-2010      Rezone.          Special
598       4-20-2010      Rezone.          Special
599       6-1-2010       Flood damage     Part 12, Ch. 5
                         prevention.
600       7-20-2010      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
601       8-17-2010      Rezone.          Special
602       9-7-2010       Annexation.      Special
603       9-7-2010       Deer hunting.    Part 4, Ch. 3
604       9-21-2010      Deer hunting.    Part 4, Ch. 3
                         Permitting or
                         allowing
                         gatherings where
605       12-7-2010      minors are       10-420
                         consuming
                         alcoholic
                         beverages.
606       12-21-2010     Rezone.          Special
607       12-21-2010     Rezone.          Special
                         Granting permit
608       12-21-2010     to Allegiance    App. 2
                         Communications,
                         LLC.
609       1-4-2011       Cemetery         11-413
                         monuments.
                         Construction
610       1-4-2011       within right of  Part 14, Ch. 4
                         way.
                         Abandoned
611       1-18-2011      utility          17-107
                         services.
612       2-15-2011      Rezone.          Special
613       2-15-2011      Rezone.          Special
614       2-15-2011      Police           6-136G
                         technology fee.
                         Abandoned
615       5-3-2011       utility          17-107B
                         services.
616       5-17-2011      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
617       5-17-2011      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
                         Request for
                         proposals and
618       5-17-2011      request for      7-115
                         qualifications
                         procedures.
619       7-19-2011      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
                         Speed limits on
620       8-2-2011       specific         15-401C
                         streets.
                         Deer hunting
                         rules,
621       8-16-2011      regulations and  4-303
                         permitting
                         requirements.
                         Hotel tax.
622       9-6-2011       (Voters did not  --
                         pass)
                         Harbor Point
623       9-6-2011       economic         Special
                         development
                         plan.
624       9-6-2011       Barricades.      10-609
625       9-6-2011       Fireworks        10-304D,E
                         regulated.
                         Obstructing
                         sidewalks,
626       9-20-2011      parkways,        14-104, 14-105
                         streets and
                         alleys.
627       10-18-2011     Rezone.          Special
628       10-18-2011     Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
                         Closing of
629       11-1-2011      public ways and  Part 14, Ch. 5
                         easements.
                         Closing to the
630       11-1-2011      public use       Special
                         certain right of
                         way easements.
631       11-1-2011      Vacating         Special
                         easements.
                         Permit
                         possession or
632       11-1-2011      transportation   10-402G
                         of intoxicating
                         beverages by
                         minors.
633       11-15-2011     Naming of        14-205
                         streets.
634       11-15-2011     Street lighting  17-108
                         fee.
635       1-3-2012       Surplus          7-106E
                         property.
636       3-6-2012       Cemetery         11-413D
                         monuments.
637       3-6-2012       Golf cart route  Special
                         map amendment.
638       3-20-2012      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
639       3-20-2012      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
640       3-20-2012      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
641       4-17-2012      Rezone.          Special
642       4-17-2012      Rezone.          Special
643       5-15-2012      Animal           Part 4, Ch. 1
                         regulations.
                         Abatement
644       5-15-2012      procedures and   8-203A, 8-206
                         costs.
                         Peddlers and     9-616, 9-632, 9-641, 9-655, 9-671,
645       5-15-2012      solicitors;      9-681
                         outdoor sellers.
                         Amplified sound,
646       5-15-2012      loud noise or    10-309
                         music
                         prohibited.
647       6-12-2012      Local community  9-616, 9-620, 9-655, 9-658
                         organizations.
648       7-17-2012      Rezone.          Special
649       7-17-2012      Animal           4-101, 4-104 - 4-113
                         regulations.
650       7-17-2012      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
                         Amplified sound,
651       7-17-2012      loud noise or    10-309
                         music
                         prohibited.
                         Retail package
652       8-21-2012      stores;          3-105
                         location.
                         Alcoholic
653       8-21-2012      beverages        3-109B
                         regulations.
654       8-21-2012      Nonintoxicating  3-204A
                         beverages.
                         Commercial
                         service entrance
655       10-2-2012      conductors;      5-504
                         disconnecting
                         means.
656       10-2-2012      Collection of    8-203F
                         delinquency.
                         Building         Part 5, Chs. 3, 4, 7, 10, 11, 5-501,
657       10-16-2012     regulations and  5-602
                         codes.
658       10-16-2012     Dog parks.       4-101, 4-110 - 4-114
659       12-4-2012      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
660       12-4-2012      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
661       12-4-2012      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
662       4-2-2013       Refuse           17-501, 17-504, 17-509
                         collection.
663       5-7-2013       Animal           4-111 - 4-115
                         regulations.
664       5-21-2013      Fee for fire     13-214B,D
                         service.
665       5-21-2013      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
666       7-2-2013       Animal           4-103Q, 4-111 - 4-113
                         regulations.
667       7-2-2013       Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
668       7-16-2013      Outside burning. 13-111
669       7-16-2013      Animal           4-103L, 4-113
                         regulations.
670       7-16-2013      Naming of        Special
                         street.
671       10-15-2013     Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
672       10-15-2013     Fire training.   13-214E
673       11-5-2013      Dilapidated      Part 8, Ch. 6
                         buildings.
674       12-17-2013     Dilapidated      8-609, 8-610
                         buildings.
675       1-7-2014       Cemeteries.      Part 11, Ch. 4
676       1-7-2014       Outdoor sellers. 9-655, 9-656, 9-658D
                         Bidding
677       1-7-2014       requirements and 7-106C3,D, 7-107L
                         procedures.
                         Tobacco and
678       1-7-2014       electronic       Part 8, Ch. 7
                         cigarettes.
679       1-21-2014      Rezone.          Special
680       2-4-2014       Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
                         Parking of
681       2-4-2014       mobile or        5-1002
                         manufactured
                         homes.
682       2-4-2014       Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
683       3-18-2014      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
                         Trees and
684       4-1-2014       shrubbery to be  14-101
                         trimmed.
685       6-17-2014      Refuse           Special
                         collection fees.
686       8-5-2014       Animal           4-103L, 4-113
                         regulations.
687       8-19-2014      Hotel tax.       Part 7, Ch. 7
688       9-2-2014       Health and       Part 8, Ch. 8
                         sanitation.
                         Electronic
689       10-7-2014      smoking devices  10-419D
                         and vapor
                         products.
                         Sanitary sewer
690       10-7-2014      backflow         17-402G
                         prevention.
                         Sales and
691       11-4-2014      purchasing       7-106E, 7-108A3, 7-109A
                         requirements.
692       11-4-2014      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
693       1-20-2015      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
694       2-3-2015       Hotel tax.       Part 7, Ch. 7
695       2-17-2015      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
696       2-17-2015      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
697       2-17-2015      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
698       3-3-2015       Access           14-402
                         driveways.
                         Rates, fees, and
                         charges for
699       4-21-2015      water, sewer,    Special
                         natural gas, and
                         refuse services.
700       4-21-2015      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
701       5-5-2015       Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
702       5-5-2015       Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
703       5-19-2015      Permit granted.  Special
704       5-19-2015      Hay harvesting.  8-202
705       6-16-2015      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
706       6-16-2015      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
707       7-7-2015       Closing an       Special
                         alley.
708       8-4-2015       Closing of a     Special
                         public way.
709       8-18-2015      Exempt sprinkler Special
                         deposits.
710       9-15-2015      Annexation.      Special
711       10-6-2015      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
                         Animal
                         definitions;
                         keeping, care
712       10-20-2015     and control of   4-101, 4-103S, 4-113B3 intro, 4-
                         animals;         113B3a, 4-113B3b
                         licensing of
                         service and
                         therapy animals.
713       11-17-2015     Rezone.          Special
714       11-17-2015     Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
715       1-5-2016       Closing of a     Special
                         public way.
716       1-19-2016      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
717       2-16-2016      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
718       2-16-2016      Natural gas base Special
                         rate.
                         Failure to
719       3-15-2016      comply with      17-402G5
                         sewer line
                         conditions.
                         Peddlers,
                         solicitors,
720       4-5-2016       mobile outdoor   Part 9, Ch. 6, Arts. A,B,C
                         sellers, and
                         outdoor sellers.
                         Refuse
721       5-3-2016       collection       17-506
                         duties of
                         customer.
                         School
                         attendance
722       5-3-2016       requirements for 10-105
                         minors and
                         penalties for
                         violations.
723       5-3-2016       Confinement of   4-104C
                         animals.
                         Offenses against
724       5-17-2016      the public;      10-309, 10-310, 10-311, 10-312
                         operation of
                         shooting range.
                         Sewer system
725       6-21-2016      rates and        17-411
                         charges.
726       6-21-2016      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
727       7-19-2016      Sewer base rate. Special
728       10-4-2016      Permit granted.  Special
                         Approaching a
                         vehicle being
                         used in the
729       11-1-2016      collection of    15-560
                         refuse, solid
                         waste or
                         recyclables.
730       11-1-2016      Closing of a     Special
                         public way.
                         Consent to
731       11-15-2016     voluntary        17-109
                         annexation.
                         Mobile homes and
732       2-7-2017       manufactured     Part 5, Ch. 10
                         homes.
733       2-21-2017      Volunteer Fire   13-203A
                         Department.
                         Sanitary sewage
734       5-16-2017      backflow         17-402G
                         prevention
                         device.
735       7-5-2017       General penalty. 1-108
736       7-18-2017      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
737       7-18-2017      Capital          Special
                         improvement fee.
738       7-18-2017      Fire prevention  13-112, 13-113, 13-114
                         regulations.
739       11-7-2017      Annexation.      Special
740       11-21-2017     Rezone.          Special
                         Sewer system
741       11-21-2017     rates and        17-411
                         charges.
                         General penalty;
                         fines and costs;
                         nonpayment,
742       12-5-2017      installments,    1-108, 6-134, 6-136
                         imprisonment;
                         penalty
                         assessments.
                         Animal
743       12-19-2017     definitions;     4-101, 4-103B,C
                         keeping, care
                         and control.
744       1-16-2018      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
745       1-16-2018      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
                         Public right-of-
                         way
746       2-6-2018       accessibility    14-404, 14-405
                         guidelines
                         adopted;
                         penalty.
                         Construction
747       2-20-2018      within rights-   Part 14, Ch. 4
                         of-way.
748       3-6-2018       Subdivision      Special
                         regulations.
749       3-6-2018       Fee for service. 13-214A,B
                         Refuse
                         definitions;
                         accumulation of
                         garbage, home
750       4-17-2018      improvement      17-501, 17-502, 17-504
                         waste and yard
                         debris, no open
                         burning;
                         disposal.
751       5-15-2018      Sales Tax table. 7-201B
752       9-4-2018       Medical          Part 18
                         marijuana.
                         Alcoholic
753       9-4-2018       beverages and    Part 3, Ch. 1
                         tax.
                         Building
754       9-4-2018       regulations and  Part 5, Chs. 3, 8, 12
                         codes.
                         Plumbing and
755       9-4-2018       Mechanical       Part 5, Ch. 4
                         Codes.
756       9-4-2018       Electrical Code. Part 5, Ch. 5
757       9-4-2018       Fuel Gas Code.   Part 5, Ch. 6
758       9-4-2018       Swimming Pool    Part 5, Ch. 13
                         and Spa Code.
759       9-4-2018       Fire Code and    13-101
                         regulations.
760       9-18-2018      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
761       9-18-2018      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
762       10-2-2018      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
763       11-6-2018      Building         Part 5, Ch. 14
                         addresses.
764       11-20-2018     Fire hydrant     Special
                         utility rates.
                         Medical
765       1-2-2019       marijuana        Part 18, Ch. 1
                         establishments.
766       1-15-2019      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
                         Public rights-
767       2-19-2019      of-way           Part 14, Ch. 6
                         accessibility
                         guidelines.
                         Tobacco and
768       3-5-2019       electronic       8-702, 8-703, 8-704
                         cigarettes.
                         Unlawful to
769       3-5-2019       purchase, accept 10-419B
                         or possess
                         tobacco.
770       3-19-2019      Rezone.          Special
771       3-19-2019      Golf carts not   15-217D
                         owned by City.
772       3-19-2019      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment.
                         Medical
773       8-6-2019       marijuana        Part 18, Ch.1
                         establishment.
774       8-6-2019       Flood damage     12-504, 12-512, 12-516, 12-519, 12-
                         prevention.      521
775       8-20-2019      Flood damage     12-517
                         prevention.
776       8-20-2019      Utility fees and Special
                         charges.
777       10-1-2019      Trash and weeds. 8-201
                         Civic Center
778       10-1-2019      fees and         Special
                         charges.
779       11-5-2019      Closing a public Special
                         way.
780       11-5-2019      Wolf Creek Park  Special
                         Facility fees.
781       11-19-2019     Mobile food      Part 9, Ch. 9
                         units.
782       11-19-2019     Access driveway  14-403
                         standards.
783       1-21-2020      Street renaming. Special
                         Medical
784       1-21-2020      marijuana        18-103
                         establishment.
785       2-18-2020      Tobacco          10-419
                         products.
786       2-18-2020      Utility rates.   Special
                         Fence, retaining
787       3-3-2020       wall and         Part 5, Ch. 8
                         plantings code
788       3-17-2020      Animals.         4-103
789       3-24-2020      Contagious       Special
                         diseases
790       7-21-2020      Rezone.          Special
791       8-18-2020      Speed limits     15-401
792       8-18-2020      Street renaming. Special
793       9-15-2020      Deer hunting     4-303
                         regulations.
794       10-20-2020     Rezone           Special
795       11-20-2020     COVID-19 safety  Special
                         measures
796       2-2-2021       COVID-19 safety  Special
                         measures
797       2-16-2021      Public Sewers    17-402
798       3-16-2021      Speed limits     15-401
799       4-16-2021      Fees and charges Special
800       4-20-2021      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment
802       6-15-2021      Rezone           Special
803       8-3-2021       Annexation       Special
804       8-17-2021      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment
805       9-21-2021      Utility rates    Special
806       10-19-2021     Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment
807       10-19-2021     Finance and      7-101 - 7-115
                         taxation
                         Fences,
808       1-18-2022      retaining walls  5-803
                         and plantings
809       2-15-2022      Tobacco          10-419
                         regulations
810       4-19-2022      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment
811       5-17-2022      Utility          17-107
                         regulations
812       5-17-2022      Utility rates    Special
813       5-17-2022      Access driveway  14-403
                         standards
814       5-17-2022      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment
815       7-19-2022      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment
816       8-2-2022       Granting         Special
                         franchise
817       8-2-2022       Animal           4-103
                         regulations
818       8-2-2022       Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment
819       8-2-2022       Hotel tax        7-701 - 7-713
                         ordinance
820       10-18-2022     Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment
                         Voluntary
821       10-18-2022     annexation       17-109
                         agreement
822       10-18-2022     Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment
823       11-1-2022      Sale of tobacco  10-419
                         products
824       1-3-2023       Community center Special
                         fees
825       2-7-2023       Speed limit      15-401
                         regulations
                         Defective
826       2-7-2023       customer sewer   17-412
                         service lines
                         Defective
827       2-7-2023       customer sewer   3-106
                         service lines
828       2-21-2023      Speed limits     15-401
829       5-2-2023       Buildings permit 5-104
830       5-16-2023      Access driveway  14-403
                         standards
831       5-16-2023      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment
                         Compensation for
834       7-18-2023      elected          Special
                         officials
835       7-18-2023      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment
836       7-18-2023      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment
837       7-18-2023      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment
838       7-18-2023      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment
839       10-17-2023     Excise tax       Special
                         amdentment
840       11-21-2023     Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment
841       11-21-2023     Rezoning         Special
                         ordinance
842       12-5-2023      Building Permits 5-104, 5-105
843       12-5-2023      Septic hauler    Special
                         dumping fee
844       12-19-2023     Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment
845       2-13-2024      Amending use tax 7-501 - 7-522
846       2-20-2024      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment
847       5-7-2024       Establishing     Special
                         impact fee
848       7-2-2024       Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment
                         Amending
849       7-2-2024       building permit  5-104, 5-105
                         regulations
                         Mitigation rates
850       8-6-2024       for fire dept.   Special
                         services
851       8-20-2024      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment
852       8-20-2024      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment
853       8-20-2024      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment
                         Selling/
854       9-17-2024      furnishing       10-419
                         tobacco to
                         minors
855       12-17-2024     Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment
856       12-17-2024     Nicotine or      10-419
                         vapor products
                         Smoking, tobacco
857       2-7-2025       and vapor        8-701 - 8-706
                         products
                         Fences,
858       3-4-2025       retaining walls, 5-803
                         or plantings
859       3-4-2025       Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment
860       4-1-2025       Utility bill     17-507
861       4-15-2025      Zoning ordinance Special
                         amendment
862       6-3-2025       Purchasing       7-101 - 7-115
863       7-1-2025       Natural gas      Special
                         schedule fees
864       7-1-2025       Natural gas      Special
                         schedule fees
865       7-1-2025       Refuse           17-505
                         collection fees
866       7-1-2025       Offenses against 10-301
                         the public
                                        
 
 
